


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Right of Entry for Inspection

1.12    City Seal

1.16    General Penalty

1.20    Citation Procedure

1.24    Prisoners

1.26    Administrative Citations

1.28    Enforcement


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION1

Sections: 

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.


1.01.010 Adoption. 

Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the California Code Annotated, there is adopted the Covina Municipal Code as published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Covina Municipal Code. (Ord. 96-1808 § 2, 1996; Ord. 1247 § 1, 1974.) 


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Covina Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the Covina Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Covina Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Covina Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1974.)


1.01.030 Codification authority.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Covina, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the California Code Annotated. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 1974.)


1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

The last ordinance included in this code was adopted on July 16, 1973. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 1232, but prior to the adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 1233 adopted on August 6, 1973, 1237 adopted on September 17, 1973, and 1242 adopted on October 15, 1973. (Ord. 1247 § 4, 1974.)


1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Covina Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Covina, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 1247 § 5, 1974.)


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 1247 § 6, 1974.)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 1247 § 7, 1974.)


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any ordinance or part of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1247 § 8, 1974.)


1.01.090 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the Covina Municipal Code becomes effective. (Ord. 1247 § 9, 1974.)


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 1247 § 10, 1974.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt by reference a codification of its ordinances, see Government Code §§ 50022.1 – 50022.8 and 50022.10.  


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.030    Prohibited acts include causing, permitting and related acts.

1.04.040    Construction.

1.04.050    Repeal not to revive any ordinances.


1.04.010 Definitions.

A. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

1. “City” means the city of Covina, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Covina, California, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

2. “Computation of time” means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.

3. “Council” means the city council of the city of Covina, California. “All its members” or “all councilmen” means the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of the state of California.

4. “County” means the county of Los Angeles, California.

5. “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

6. “May” is permissive.

7. “Mean sea level” means the level the surface of the sea would assume if all disturbing influences of tide, current and wind are removed. “Mean sea level,” the United States Geological Survey datum plane, is adopted as the official datum plane for the city.

8. “Month” means a calendar month.

9. “Must” and “Shall.” Each is mandatory.

10. “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to “affirm” and “affirmed.”

11. “Official Time.” Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, whichever may be in current use in the city.

12. “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or” if the sense requires it.

13. “Ordinance” means a law of the city; provided, that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution.

14. “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.

15. “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

16. “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

17. “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

18. “Property” includes real and personal property.

19. “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

20. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

21. “State” means the state of California.

22. “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, walks or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

23. “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

24. “Title of Office.” Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city.

25. “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means.

26. “Year” means a calendar year.

B. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

C. When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 1973.)


1.04.020 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code:

A. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders;

B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;

C. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable;

D. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 1219 § 2, 1973.)


1.04.030 Prohibited acts include causing, permitting and related acts.

Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, abetting, aiding, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 1219 § 3, 1973.)


1.04.040 Construction.

The provisions of this code, and all proceedings under it, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 1219 § 4, 1973.)


1.04.050 Repeal not to revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 1219 § 5, 1973.)


Chapter 1.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION

Sections:

1.08.010    Right of entry.


1.08.010 Right of entry.

Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official or employee of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24 hours’ written notice of the authorized person’s intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official or employee is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 1218 § 1, 1973.)


Chapter 1.12 CITY SEAL1

Sections:

1.12.010    Adoption – Description.

1.12.020    Custodian.

1.12.030    Permission required when used for other than official city business.


1.12.010 Adoption – Description.

A seal consisting of a circular disc one and seven-eighths inches in diameter with a design cut thereon showing an orange spray containing fruit and leaves and having thereon the following inscription “City of Covina, California, Incorporated Aug. 14, 1901” is adopted as the seal of the city.
[IMAGE]


(1964 Code § 1.15.)


1.12.020 Custodian.

The city clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal adopted by CMC 1.12.010. (1964 Code § 1.16.)


1.12.030 Permission required when used for other than official city business.

It is unlawful for any person to use the official seal of the city as adopted by the city council or its design or any design so closely resembling the same as to be apt to deceive or be reasonably mistaken for, for any purpose other than for official city business, without having first obtained the permission of the city council therefor. (Ord. 94-1776 § 1, 1994.)1

For statutory provisions requiring the city clerk to be custodian of the city seal, see Government Code § 40811. 


Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY1

Sections:

1.16.010    General penalty.

1.16.015    Violations.


1.16.010 General penalty.

A. Misdemeanors. Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this municipal code may be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code shall be punished by a fine, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The maximum amount of fines assessed for misdemeanors shall not exceed the limits established in Title 4, Division 3, Chapter 2, Section 36901 of the California Government Code.

B. Infractions. Violations of any provision of this municipal code shall be a misdemeanor unless by such provision it is made an infraction. Such a violation may be presented in the name of the people of the state, or redressed by civil action. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by a fine. The maximum amount of fines assessed for infractions shall not exceed the limits established in Title 4, Division 3, Chapter 2, Section 36900 of the California Government Code.

C. Occurrences. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this municipal code is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and such person shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 94-1762 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1651 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1217 § 1, 1973.)


1.16.015 Violations.

The violation of any of the provisions of the Covina Municipal Code may be an infraction and may be punishable as provided in CMC 1.16.010(B); provided, however, that a fourth violation of the same section, regardless of time of occurrence, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in CMC 1.16.010(A).

Notwithstanding any other provision of this municipal code, whenever a violation of any section contained in this code is punishable as a misdemeanor, the city attorney may specify that the offense is an infraction, and proceed with prosecution as an infraction, unless the defendant objects to the offense being made an infraction, in which event the court may elect to have the complaint amended to charge as a misdemeanor, and the case shall proceed as a misdemeanor complaint. (Ord. 94-1762 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1651 § 1, 1987.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose penalties for violation of ordinances, see Title 4, Division 3, Chapter 2, of the California Government Code. 


Chapter 1.20 CITATION PROCEDURE1

Sections:

1.20.010    Designated.

1.20.020    Authority to arrest and issue citations.


1.20.010 Designated.

When any person is arrested in the city for violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this code or any other ordinances of the city, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as provided in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer or employee may prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, which notice shall contain the name and address of such person to whom the notice is issued, the offense charged against him and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. The time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least five days after such arrest. Such written notice shall be presented to the arrested person and request shall be made for a written promise to appear at such time and place. Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. (Ord. 1633 § 1, 1986; 1964 Code § 1.10.)


1.20.020 Authority to arrest and issue citations.

In addition to those public officers and employees otherwise authorized to arrest and issue written notices to appear, the following city employees and nonemployee volunteers are authorized pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 to arrest a person without warrant and to issue a written notice to appear whenever the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested or cited has committed a violation of this code in the employee’s presence:

A. Personnel designated by job description as being responsible for enforcement of the municipal code;

B. Municipal code enforcement officers as appointed by the city manager or his designee;

C. Members in good standing of the Citizen Volunteer Patrol program, as appointed by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 10-1988 § 1, 2010; Ord. 94-1779 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1675 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1633 § 3, 1986.)1

For statutory provisions establishing citation procedure for persons accused of a misdemeanor, see Penal Code §§ 853.6 – 853.8. 


Chapter 1.24 PRISONERS1

Sections:

1.24.010    Prisoner labor on public works.

1.24.020    Commitment for violation.

1.24.030    Imprisonment.

1.24.040    City’s expenses.


1.24.010 Prisoner labor on public works.

All prisoners sentenced to serve any time in the city jail may be compelled to labor on public works by the police chief under the direction of the field operations director for a period of eight hours during every working day of the term of confinement of such persons unless the health officer, upon examination, ascertains that the prisoner is physically unable to work. (Ord. 1394 § 1, 1978; 1964 Code § 1.11.)


1.24.020 Commitment for violation.

Any person under arrest charged with the violation of this code or other ordinance of the city may before conviction, unless released on bail or on recognizance, be committed to the custody of the sheriff of the county, except during such times as it may be necessary for such persons to attend court upon any proceeding connected with the trial of such charge. (1964 Code § 1.12.)


1.24.030 Imprisonment.

Any person sentenced to imprisonment for the violation of any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city may be imprisoned in the county jail. (1964 Code § 1.13.)


1.24.040 City’s expenses.

All expenses of any confinement provided for under CMC 1.24.020 and 1.24.030 shall be borne by the city. (1964 Code § 1.14.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to require prisoners to labor on public property or works within the city, see Government Code § 36904; for provisions regarding place of imprisonment and expense of imprisonment in county jail, see Government Code § 36903. 


Chapter 1.26 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS

Sections:

1.26.010    Findings.

1.26.020    Applicability.

1.26.030    Definitions.

1.26.040    Scope.

1.26.050    Issuance of administrative citation – Contents thereof.

1.26.060    Service of citation.

1.26.070    Imposition of administrative fines, late penalty and interest charges, as well as reinspection fees – Payment and collection thereof.

1.26.080    Right to an administrative hearing – Waiver of advance deposit of fine.

1.26.090    Administrative hearing – Procedures.

1.26.100    Hearing officer decision – Right of appeal therefrom.

1.26.110    Denial of city approvals, entitlements, licenses and permits for delinquent administrative citation fines, late penalty and interest charges, as well as for unpaid reinspection fees.

1.26.120    Penalties.


1.26.010 Findings.

The city council of the city of Covina finds and declares as follows:

A. Enforcement of the Covina Municipal Code and adopted ordinances throughout the city is an important public service. A program for enforcement of local codes is vital to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The establishment of a comprehensive and effective code enforcement program that is able to utilize both administrative and judicial remedies against violations of the city’s laws is best equipped to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 

B. Government Code Section 53069.4 authorizes local jurisdictions to enact legislation making a violation of any local ordinance subject to an administrative fine or penalty. The state Legislature has also enacted other provisions of California law that allow local governments to impose administrative fines and/or penalties for violations of specified provisions of state law. The city council intends, pursuant to this statute, to establish an administrative citation program that:

1. Imposes a nonjudicial administrative fine and/or penalty for offenses of the Covina Municipal Code (including, but not limited to, any other code adopted therein) and other state laws as authorized by statute;

2. Encourages prompt abatement or correction of prohibited conditions, uses or activities in the city; and

3. Creates deterrence against future violations of the city’s laws.

C. The administrative citation remedy is not intended to replace any other remedy allowed by the Covina Municipal Code or state law. It is intended to provide an alternative and/or additional means by which the city’s laws may be enforced. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.020 Applicability.

A. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city and is one remedy that the city has to address violations of the Covina Municipal Code or other applicable provisions of state law. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion or ability to utilize any administrative, civil, criminal, or other remedy available at law or equity, or any combination thereof, to address violations of the city’s laws.

B. This chapter makes a violation of any provision, restriction, or requirement of this code or any code adopted by reference herein, any ordinance of the city, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, or any condition of any permit, license, or other entitlement issued pursuant to this code subject to an administrative fine.

C. This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of administrative fines and/or penalties pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.

D. An administrative fine in an amount adopted by resolution of the city council shall be imposed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer, and shall be paid directly to the city of Covina. Payment of a fine shall not excuse a failure to correct a violation, nor shall it bar concurrent or further enforcement actions by the city.

E. The city manager, or a designee thereof, may dismiss a citation at any time if a determination is made that it was issued in error, in which event any deposit of a fine shall be refunded. Notice of such action shall be given to the citee in writing.

F. The city manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to promulgate procedural rules and regulations governing the provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.030 Definitions. 

As used in this chapter, the following words are defined as follows:

A. “Administrative fine,” “fine,” “penalty” and/or “administrative penalty” shall mean the monetary sanction established by resolution of the city council that is imposed upon a responsible person by means of a citation.

B. “Citation” shall mean an administrative citation that is issued to a responsible person pursuant to this chapter.

C. “Citee” shall mean a responsible person to whom a citation is issued.

D. “City” shall mean the city of Covina, California.

E. “City manager” shall mean the chief administrative official of the city as appointed by the city council.

F. “Code” shall include: (1) the entire Covina Municipal Code and any other code, rule, or regulation incorporated therein by adoption or reference, (2) any uncodified ordinance adopted by the city council of Covina, (3) any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of the Covina Municipal Code, (4) any condition of any permit, license, or other entitlement issued pursuant to this code, and (5) other state laws as authorized by statute.

G. “Enforcement officer” and “officer” shall mean any city employee with obligations to enforce the Covina Municipal Code. Enforcement officers shall include personnel of the public works department and Covina police officers. The city manager may designate additional employees of other city departments to act as officers for purposes of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

H. “Hearing officer” shall include a private person, or a public official, or duly constituted reviewing authority or commission that the city manager designates or appoints to consider all timely requests for an administrative hearing upon issuance of a citation.

I. “Owner” shall mean and include any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, or responsibility for, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor’s office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, responsibility for, or possession of such property.

J. “Person” shall mean and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, a corporation of any kind, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as fiduciaries, trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. “Person” also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city.

K. “Property” or “premises” shall mean any real property, or improvements thereon, or portions thereof, as the case may be. “Property” includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting such real property. “Property” shall also include all forms of personal property or animals, where applicable.

L. “Responsible person” shall mean any person, whether as an owner or an agent, manager, or representative of an owner, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers, or permits a violation of the code to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty.

M. “Violation” shall mean an act, or omission of any act, or use or condition that constitutes an offense of the code, as well as a breach or violation of any condition of a permit, approval, entitlement or license issued pursuant to the code. A “transient” violation is one that is brief or spontaneous in its commission, or that is not typically confined to a fixed location. A “nontransient” violation is continuing in nature and generally present at one location. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.040 Scope.

This chapter provides for imposition of an administrative fine pursuant to a citation for any violation of the code, as well as for a breach or violation of any condition of a permit, approval, entitlement or license issued pursuant to the code. This remedy may be utilized in place of, or in addition to, any other remedy allowed by the code or state law. The city manager, or designees thereof, shall have sole discretion to utilize any remedy or remedies as authorized by law. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.050 Issuance of administrative citation – Contents thereof.

A. Whenever an officer determines that a violation has occurred, the officer may issue a citation on a city-approved form imposing an administrative fine or fines to the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. When the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that create an immediate danger to health or safety, a citation may be issued forthwith. In the absence of an immediate danger, a citation for a violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues shall not be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the responsible person has first been provided with a reasonable period, as determined by the officer, in which to complete the abatement or compliance actions.

C. An officer may issue a citation for a violation not committed in the officer’s presence if the officer has determined, through investigation, that the citee did commit, or is otherwise responsible for, the violation.

D. Each day, or any portion thereof, that a prohibited condition, use or activity under the code is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate violation for which an administrative fine may be imposed. A single citation may charge multiple violations of the code; however, each violation is subject to a separate and distinct administrative fine.

E. Each citation shall contain the following information:

1. Name and mailing address of the responsible person;

2. The address or description of the location of the violation;

3. The date and approximate time of the commission of the violation(s), or detection thereof by an officer;

4. The relevant provision(s) or section(s) of the code alleged to have been violated;

5. A description of the violation(s);

6. Amount of the fine for each violation, the amount of any reinspection fee, as well as the procedure and place to pay the fine(s) and/or reinspection fees, and any late penalty and/or interest charge(s), if not timely paid;

7. When appropriate, the action(s) required to correct the violation(s), and, if applicable, any deadlines or time limitations for commencing and completing such action(s);

8. A description of the administrative citation review process and the manner by which a hearing on a citation may be obtained (including the form to be used, where it may be procured from, and the period in which a request must be made in order to be timely);

9. The name and signature of the officer, and the signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person has committed a violation of the code;

10. A statement that the failure to timely tender the fine(s) and other charges/fees imposed pursuant to this chapter may result in: (a) a civil action against citee; (b) the recordation of a lien or special assessment against the citee’s real property; and (c) the denial of any city approval, license, entitlement or permit to citee until all delinquent monies are paid to the city; and

11. Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.060 Service of citation.

A. A citation may be served either by personal delivery to the citee or by first class mail through the United States Postal Service. The date of personal service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

B. If served by first class mail, the citation shall be sealed in an envelope with postage prepaid and addressed to the citee at his or her last-known business or residence address as same appears in public records of the city, the Los Angeles County tax assessor’s office, and/or the Secretary of State. The date a citation is deposited with the United States Postal Service shall constitute: (1) its issuance date, and (2) the date that service by first class mail shall be deemed to have been completed.

C. If an agent, manager or representative of a responsible person is personally served with a citation, a copy thereof shall also be served by first class mail to the responsible person at his or her last-known business or residence address as same appears in public records of the city, the Los Angeles County tax assessor’s office, and/or the Secretary of State. In such instances, the date a copy of the citation is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

D. If service cannot be accomplished personally or by mail for citations involving a real property-related violation of the code, the officer shall post the citation on the real property where the violation is alleged to have occurred. The date of posting shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

E. Any notice or order given pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be served in the manner provided for in this section, unless otherwise stated.

F. Failure of a citee to receive a citation or notice shall not invalidate any fine, late penalty charge, action or proceeding that is imposed or brought pursuant to this chapter, if service was given in a manner stated in this section. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.070 Imposition of administrative fines, late penalty and interest charges, as well as reinspection fees – Payment and collection thereof.

A. The amounts of the fines imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in a schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. The city council may, by resolution, also impose escalating fines in amounts it deems appropriate for repeat offenses of the same ordinance. The amounts of fines may be modified from time to time by a resolution of the city council.

B. If a violation is otherwise classified as an infraction under the code, the administrative fine shall not exceed $100.00 for a first offense, $200.00 for a second offense of the same code provision within a 12-month period of time, and $500.00 for a third or subsequent offense of the same code provision within a 12-month period of time, as set forth in subdivision (b) of Section 25132 and subdivision (b) of Section 36900 of the California Government Code. The amounts of such fines may be modified from time to time by a resolution of the city council provided they do not exceed the limits allowed by state law.

C. In addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter, a reinspection fee shall be assessed against any responsible person in an amount established by resolution of the city council if the responsible person does not timely and completely correct or abate a violation (with all requisite approvals, permits, entitlements, licenses, and/or inspections) after having received notification from the city to correct or abate same.

D. The due date for the city’s receipt of an administrative fine and any applicable reinspection fee shall be 20 calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. Thereafter, a late penalty charge shall be due and owing for the unpaid fine, as well as interest, as imposed by this chapter.

E. Failure to pay an administrative fine by the due date shall result in the assessment of a late penalty charge. The late penalty charge shall be equal to 100 percent of the total fine owed (excluding any reinspection fee).

F. Failure to pay an administrative fine within 60 days after the issuance of an uncontested administrative citation or, if contested, within 60 days after an order to pay pursuant to a decision by a hearing officer or judicial officer confirming the fine, shall also result in the imposition of an interest charge at a rate established by resolution of the city council. Interest shall not accrue on a late penalty charge or reinspection fee. The rate of interest may be modified from time to time by resolution of the city council.

G. Administrative fines, reinspection fees, late penalty charges, and any interest due shall be paid to the city at such location or address as stated in the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the city manager.

H. Payment of an administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.

I. Abatement of a violation shall not excuse the obligation of a citee to pay an administrative fine or any other charges, fees, or costs imposed as a result of the issuance of a citation.

J. Unpaid administrative fines and other charges, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter shall constitute a debt that may be collected in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to: (1) the filing of a civil action in the Los Angeles superior court; and/or (2) the recordation of a lien with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office against citee-owned property that was the subject of the citation in the manner set forth in CMC 1.28.040; and/or (3) by means of a special assessment against citee-owned property that was the subject of the citation in the manner set forth in CMC 1.28.050; and/or (4) by means of collecting the debt using the California Franchise Tax Board “Inter-Agency Offset Program” (pursuant to Section 12419.10 of the California Government Code); and/or (5) by denying the issuance or renewal, in the manner set forth in CMC 1.26.110, of any city approval, entitlement, license or permit to any citee who has failed to tender all unpaid administrative fines, late penalty charges, interest charges, or reinspection fees. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney’s fees and costs arising from an action to collect an administrative fine and other charges, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter, if it is the prevailing party and provided it made the election to seek attorney’s fees at the commencement of the action. A citee shall be entitled to recover his or her attorney’s fees if the city made the election to seek attorney’s fees at the outset of the action and the citee prevails thereon. The city manager, or a designee thereof, may promulgate policies and procedures for the city’s election to use one or more of the foregoing collection remedies. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.080 Right to an administrative hearing – Waiver of advance deposit of fine.

A. Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a city-approved form with the Office of the City Clerk, Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 and paying an appeal fee in an amount set by council resolution within 10 calendar days after the issuance date of a citation. If the office of the city clerk does not receive the request and/or payment of the appeal fee in the required period, the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final.

B. A request for a hearing shall contain the following: 

1. The citation number.

2. The name, address, telephone and any facsimile numbers, of each person contesting the citation.

3. A statement of the reason(s) why a citation is being contested.

4. The date and signature of the citee(s).

C. Reserved.

D. Requests for a hearing shall be accompanied by an advance deposit of the entire amount of the fine stated in the citation. Failure to deposit a fine within the required period, or the tender of a nonnegotiable check in the required period, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely, in which case the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. Fines that are deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. Fines deposited shall be returned to the person tendering the fines in the event a citation is overturned.

E. A citee who is financially unable to deposit the administrative fine with his or her request for a hearing may complete a city-approved application form for an advance deposit hardship waiver (hereinafter, “hardship waiver”). This form and all required accompanying records shall be tendered, along with a request for a hearing, to the Office of the City Clerk, Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 within 10 calendar days from the issuance date of a citation.

F. To be considered for a hardship waiver, the application form must be complete, signed, and must be accompanied by documents that enable the city to reasonably determine the citee’s present inability to deposit the fine. Documents suitable for consideration may include, without limitation, accurate, complete and legible copies of state and federal income tax returns and all schedules for the preceding tax year; financial statements, loan applications, bank account records, income and expense records for 12 months preceding submittal of the waiver form, as well as other documentation demonstrating the citee’s financial hardship. The city may, at its sole discretion, request additional documents in order to determine a citee’s financial ability to tender an advance deposit of the fine. Failure to submit sufficient evidence of a citee’s financial inability to tender an advance deposit of the fine shall result in a denial of the hardship waiver. The city may, at a time chosen in its sole discretion and after a citation is final or confirmed, destroy or discard the documents submitted by a citee for a hardship waiver without prior notice to the citee.

G. Failure to submit a completed, signed hardship waiver form, along with sufficient records that support a claim of financial hardship, shall render the request for hearing incomplete and untimely. In this event, the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final.

H. The city shall issue a written decision regarding the application for a hardship waiver. If the hardship waiver is denied, the written decision shall specify the reasons for not issuing the hardship waiver. This decision is final and nonappealable. The decision shall be served upon the person requesting the hardship waiver by first class mail.

1. Approval of a hardship waiver shall result in the city setting a hearing pursuant to CMC 1.26.090(A).

2. If the city determines that the citee is not entitled to a hardship waiver, he or she shall tender the full amount of the administrative fine to the office of the city clerk within 10 calendar days of the date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service. In the event the city clerk does not receive the full amount of the fine in the required period (a) the request for a hearing is rendered incomplete and untimely, (b) the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final, and (c) a late penalty charge shall be imposed upon the administrative fine.

I. A timely request for a hearing shall not excuse a citee from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.090 Administrative hearing – Procedures.

A. An administrative appeal hearing shall be scheduled and conducted within 60 calendar days after the date a timely and complete request is received by the office of the city clerk. A citee who files a request for an administrative hearing to contest a citation (hereafter “appellant”) shall be notified in writing by first class mail of the date, time, and location of the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing or city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

B. At the place and time set forth in the notification of administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the issuing officer, the appellant(s), and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the violation(s) alleged in the citation.

C. Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefor by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of an administrative citation shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation. The appellant(s), and officer, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. An appellant and the officer issuing the citation may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. An appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at the appellant’s sole expense. The city may, at its discretion, record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing.

D. An appellant may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the office of the city clerk at least three city business days prior to the hearing. If an appellant elects to appear at the hearing by written declaration, the enforcement officer who issued the citation shall not be required to attend or participate at the hearing. If the appellant fails to attend the scheduled hearing, or to otherwise submit a written declaration in a timely manner, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the appellant(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the citation (and corresponding fine and other applicable fees) shall be deemed final.

E. Hearings may be continued once at the request of an appellant or the officer who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.100 Hearing officer decision – Right of appeal therefrom.

A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefor. The city shall preserve all exhibits and evidence submitted at the hearing until all appeals have been exhausted. If the citation is upheld and the violation has not been fully corrected as of the date of the hearing, the hearing officer shall order correction thereof in the decision and provide a deadline to complete said action(s). The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If the citation is upheld and the appellant did not deposit the fine at the time the appellant requested an administrative appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall also order the payment of the fine (and other applicable fees and costs) within 20 calendar days of the decision.

B. The appellant(s) shall be served by first class mail with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision. The date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

C. Decisions of the hearing officer are, in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4(b), appealable to the superior court within 20 days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the appellant(s) of this appeal right and the procedures and court filing fee for its exercise. An appellant shall serve a copy of the court filed notice of appeal on the Office of the City Clerk, Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 by personal service or first class mail within five calendar days after filing the original thereof.

D. If a hearing officer’s decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed.

E. The superior court is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal from a hearing officer’s decision is not appealable to the city council. If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his or her filing fee, as well as the fine deposit in accordance with the court judgment. These monies shall be mailed to the responsible person within 45 calendar days after the city’s receipt of a notice of judgment or ruling from the superior court clerk. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.110 Denial of city approvals, entitlements, licenses and permits for delinquent administrative citation fines, late penalty and interest charges, as well as for unpaid reinspection fees.

A. Cause to Deny Approvals, Entitlements, Licenses and Permits. The city may deny any city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof, due to the citee’s nonpayment of all fines, late penalties and interest charges, as well as reinspection fees (hereafter, collectively, the “debt”) that are due in connection with an uncontested citation, or with a final or confirmed citation.

1. The city’s election not to exercise this remedy and to alternatively issue an approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof does not constitute a satisfaction, discharge, or waiver of the debt. The issuance of any approval, entitlement, license or permit does not bar the city from denying the issuance of a different city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof, nor the election to use any other remedy to collect the debt.

B. Notice Denying an Approval Due to an Unpaid Debt. The department charged with receiving an application for a city approval, license, permit or entitlement, or renewal thereof, may, within five business days after receiving an application, issue a written notice of denial to the citee and to the applicant therefor (hereafter in this section, collectively, the “citee”), stating that the application is denied for failure to pay the debt (a summary accounting for which shall be included therein). The notice shall also contain information concerning the right to appeal the denial and the time period and manner in which to do so.

C. Service of Notice. The notice issued under this section shall be served by first class mail to the citee. The date of its placement in a United States postal container shall be the date of service. Failure of the citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action under this section.

D. Appeal. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the code, a citee seeking to appeal a denial pursuant to this section (hereafter the “appellant”) may not challenge or contest the underlying basis for the issuance of the citation or citations that gave rise to the debt. For any other reasons to appeal a denial pursuant to this section, appellant shall file a written notice of appeal with the Office of the City Clerk, Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 within 10 calendar days of the date of service of the notice that contains the following information:

1. The full name, address and telephone number for each person filing the appeal.

2. The grounds for the appeal, including, if applicable, a completed or pending bankruptcy action whereby the debt has been discharged, or is subject to discharge.

3. A copy of the notice of denial that was issued pursuant to this section.

Payment of a fee is not required for an appeal under this section. If the office of the city clerk does not receive a notice of appeal in the required period, the appellant shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the denial. The appeal procedure in this section shall supersede all other appeal procedures in the code.

The procedure outlined in this section shall be the only method of challenging a denial of a city approval, license, permit or entitlement, or renewal thereof, that was based solely on the city’s contention that the citee has an outstanding debt.

E. Notice of Appeal Hearing. Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, the office of the city clerk shall issue a notice of hearing before the hearing officer, via first class mail to the appellant at the address shown in the application. An appeal hearing shall be set within 60 calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal.

1. The date the notice of hearing is deposited in a United States postal container shall constitute the date of service.

2. The notice shall include the date, time, and location of the hearing, which must be no sooner than 10 calendar days after the date of service of the notice of hearing.

3. The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not invalidate any action under this section.

F. Administrative Appeal Hearing – Procedure.

1. At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the appellant(s) and/or their witnesses, and of the representative, if present, of the department that issued the denial of the application, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the denial of the application.

2. This administrative hearing is informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The appellant bears the burden of proving he/she/it is not the citee that owes the debt, or that the entire debt has been paid to the city, or that the debt has been discharged in a bankruptcy action, or is subject to discharge in a pending bankruptcy action. The appellant(s), and department representative, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. An appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at the appellant’s sole expense. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing.

3. Failure of the appellant, or a representative thereof, to attend the hearing shall result in the hearing officer canceling the hearing and sending a notice thereof to the appellant by first class mail to the address stated in the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the denial of the application shall be deemed final, without right of appeal to the city council.

4. Hearings may be continued once at the request of the appellant or the department who issued the denial of application. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause.

G. Decision of Hearing Officer – Notice Thereof.

1. The hearing officer shall consider the evidence and testimony in reaching a decision, but shall not consider testimony or evidence that constitutes a challenge to the underlying basis for the issuance of a citation or citations that gave rise to the debt in rendering a decision.

2. The hearing officer shall affirm the denial of application if he or she determines the appellant is the citee with regard to the unpaid citation(s), and the entire debt has not been paid to the city.

3. The hearing officer shall overrule the denial of application if he or she determines: (a) the appellant is not the citee with regard to the unpaid citation(s); or (b) the entire debt has been paid to the city; or (c) the debt has been discharged, or is subject to discharge in a pending bankruptcy action, as established with satisfactory evidence of the appellant at the appeal hearing.

4. The appellant shall be served by first class mail with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision.

5. The decision shall be deemed final, without right of appeal to the city council.

A decision by a hearing officer to grant an appeal (i.e., to overturn the denial of a city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof) on any basis other than the debt having been paid or otherwise discharged by a bankruptcy does not constitute a satisfaction, discharge, or waiver of the debt, nor does such a decision bar the city from denying the issuance of a different city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof, nor the election to use any other remedy to collect the debt.

H. Effect on Existing Approvals, Entitlements, Licenses and Permits Pending Appeal. When the holder of a city approval, entitlement, license, or permit is notified in accordance with subsection (B) of this section that such approval, entitlement, license or permit will not be renewed unless a debt is paid, the approval, entitlement, license or permit shall remain in effect during the pendency of the appeal process described in subsections (F) and (G) of this section. When an approval, entitlement, license or permit is found to be eligible for renewal, through the appeal process, it shall remain in effect until the renewal is issued. When an approval, entitlement, license or permit is found to be ineligible for renewal, through the appeal process, it shall expire at such time as the holder has exhausted or failed to exhaust the appeal procedures described in this section. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


1.26.120 Penalties.

Failure of a citee to comply with a corrective action within the time stated in any uncontested citation, or with regard to a correction order in any hearing officer decision that is deemed confirmed and not appealed to the superior court, or with regard to a correction order appealed to and upheld by the superior court, shall constitute a misdemeanor. A citee’s willful nonpayment of administrative fines, late penalty charges, interest charges or reinspection fees shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 12-2015 § 2, 2013.)


Chapter 1.28 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.28.010    Enforcement.

1.28.020    Recovery of code enforcement fees.

1.28.030    Recovery of attorney’s fees.

1.28.040    Uniform lien procedures.

1.28.050    Uniform special assessment procedures.


1.28.010 Enforcement.

In addition to those public officers and employees authorized by state law, this code and any other ordinances of the city may be enforced by the police department of the city, city personnel designated by job description as being responsible for enforcement of the municipal code, and the city manager or designee thereof. (Ord. 10-1988 § 8, 2010; Ord. 1714 § 1, 1990; 1964 Code § 1.9.)


1.28.020 Recovery of code enforcement fees.

The city council finds and declares as follows:

A. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 54988 and California Health and Safety Code Section 17951 (and any successor statutes thereto), the Covina building code, and any other applicable local, state, or federal law, as well as by the city’s police powers as authorized by the California Constitution, responsible persons, who cause, allow, permit, suffer, or maintain a violation in, or upon, any real property located within the city, shall be charged fees (hereafter “code enforcement fees”) by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions. Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the city’s code enforcement actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to the initiation of such proceedings.

1. As used herein, “responsible person” means and includes any person that causes, creates, allows, permits, suffers, or maintains a public nuisance to exist or continue within the city, by any act or the omission of any act or duty, including, but not limited to, any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor’s office. A responsible person shall also include, but shall not be limited to, employees, principals, joint venturers, officers, agents, and/or other persons acting in concert with, or at the direction of, and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the lot, building or structure on, or in, which a public nuisance or violation exists or existed, as well as any persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court-appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. “Responsible person,” with regard to personal property, shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of such property. The actions or inactions of a responsible person’s agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person.

2. “Public nuisance” or “nuisance” means anything which is, or is likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or that unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square, street or highway. Any condition, use, or activity that violates or is otherwise contrary to any provision of this code or any approval, license, permit, or other entitlement issued pursuant to or in accordance with this code, or that violates or is contrary to any applicable county, state, or federal law or regulation, shall also constitute a public nuisance.

3. As used herein, “violation” means and includes any prohibited activity, condition, or use on land or in connection with a building or a structure that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, inaction, or omission) by a responsible person in disregard of, or nonconformity with, any other provision, regulation, prohibition, or requirement of the Covina Municipal Code, or any applicable county, state, or federal laws or regulations. Any such violation shall also constitute an unlawful public nuisance for each and every day or part thereof during which it is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by a responsible person.

4. As used herein, “code enforcement fees” shall mean fees imposed by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, pursuant to California Government Code Section 54988 and California Health and Safety Code Section 17951 (and any successor statutes thereto), the Covina building code, and any other applicable local, state, or federal law, as well as by the city’s police powers as authorized by the California Constitution, including, but not limited to, the time and other resources of public officials and city consultants expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at a real property. Examples of code enforcement actions include, but are not limited to, site inspections, drafting reports, taking photographs, procuring other evidence, engaging in meetings with other officials of the city or other agencies, engaging in conferences and communications with responsible persons, their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with attorneys for the city at any time, and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the commencement or pendency of a judicial or administrative hearing. The time and resources that public officials and city consultants further expend to confirm that a real property remains free of a violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a property remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action shall also constitute code enforcement actions.

B. The amount(s) or rate(s) of code enforcement fees for city personnel time and other resources that are used for code enforcement actions shall be established, and may thereafter be amended, by resolution of the city council.

C. The city manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of code enforcement fees, and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees.

D. The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fines, fees, interest or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of the Covina Municipal Code, or which are imposed pursuant to county, state or federal laws or regulations.

E. Code enforcement fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement or cessation of, or otherwise remove, a violation as defined in this section.

1. In every instance where an owner or other responsible person is required to obtain a permit, approval, license or entitlement under any provision of the Covina Municipal Code in connection with the abatement of a violation, the city may condition the issuance of said permit, approval, license or entitlement on the prior payment of all code enforcement fees.

F. Unpaid code enforcement fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to: (1) the filing of a civil action in the Los Angeles superior court; and/or (2) the recordation of a lien with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office provided the responsible person has a legal interest in the property on which the violation was located; and/or (3) by means of a special assessment provided the responsible person has a legal interest in the property on which the violation was located; and/or (4) by means of collecting the debt using the California Franchise Tax Board “Inter-Agency Offset Program” (pursuant to Section 12419.10 of the California Government Code); and/or (5) by denying the issuance or renewal, pursuant to CMC 1.26.110, of any city approval, license, entitlement, or permit to any responsible person who has failed to pay code enforcement fees that are imposed pursuant to this section. The remedies may be concurrently used to collect unpaid code enforcement fees. (Ord. 12-2016 § 1, 2013; Ord. 09-1969 § 1, 2009.)


1.28.030 Recovery of attorney’s fees.

A. A prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate, or cause the abatement of, a violation of this code or any public nuisance, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney’s fees. Attorney’s fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the city manager, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city’s attorney’s fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney’s fees in favor of any person or the city.

B. Provided that the city has made an election to seek attorney’s fees, an award of attorney’s fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding.

C. Unpaid attorney’s fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. (Ord. 12-2016 § 2, 2013; Ord. 09-1969 § 1, 2009.)


1.28.040 Uniform lien procedures.

A. Unless a different procedure is authorized elsewhere in this code, where the code authorizes the city to record a lien for any unpaid fee, cost, charge, or other monies, the following procedures shall apply:

1. A lien may be recorded upon real property that is the subject of enforcement activity if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies resulting from said enforcement activity are not paid within 45 calendar days of written notice thereof.

a. Said notice must have advised the owner(s) of the subject property in plain language of the city’s intent to record a lien if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies were not paid within 45 calendar days, the amount of the proposed lien, a description of the basis for the amount(s) comprising the lien, and an opportunity to appear before the city council (or designee thereof) and to be heard regarding the amount of the proposed lien.

b. Where the city council designates another hearing body should the property owner(s) exercise his/her/their right to be heard, the hearing body shall make a written recommendation to the city council that shall include factual findings based on evidence introduced at the hearing. The city council may adopt the recommendation without further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before the city council. Notice in writing of the de novo hearing shall be provided to the property owner(s) at least 10 calendar days in advance of the scheduled hearing.

2. The lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.

3. A lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the city, the name of the city department or division on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date upon which the lien was created, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

4. In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (A)(3) of this section shall be recorded by the city. A lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.

5. A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment.

6. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien, providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien, and of pursuing a foreclosure action to enforce the lien. (Ord. 12-2016 § 3, 2013.)


1.28.050 Uniform special assessment procedures.

A. Unless a different procedure is authorized elsewhere in this code, where the code authorizes the city to impose a special assessment for any unpaid fee, cost, charge, or other monies, the following procedures shall apply:

1. A special assessment may be imposed upon real property that is the subject of enforcement activity if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies resulting from said enforcement activity are not paid within 45 calendar days of written notice thereof.

a. Said notice must have advised the owner(s) of the subject property in plain language of the city’s intent to impose a special assessment if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies were not paid within 45 calendar days, the amount of the proposed assessment, a description of the basis for the amount(s) comprising the assessment, and an opportunity to appear before the city council (or designee thereof) and to be heard regarding the amount of the proposed assessment.

b. Where the city council designates another hearing body should the property owner(s) exercise his/her/their right to be heard, the hearing body shall make a written recommendation to the city council that shall include factual findings based on evidence introduced at the hearing. The city council may adopt the recommendation without further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before the city council. Notice in writing of the de novo hearing shall be provided to the property owner(s) at least 10 calendar days in advance of the scheduled hearing.

2. The special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment, except that if any real property to which the assessment would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of taxes would become delinquent, then the assessment that would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to the real property and instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

3. A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is imposed which shall contain the following recitals:

 The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment.

4. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use, or consideration, by the tax collector for the city in collecting a special assessment.

5. The notice of special assessment shall also be entitled to recordation with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office.

6. It shall be the duty of the city manager (or designee thereof) to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective real property in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the Los Angeles County department of auditor-controller.

7. The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the owner’s subject property. (Ord. 12-2016 § 4, 2013.)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.04    City Council

2.08    City Manager

2.12    City Attorney

2.16    Finance Department

2.20    Purchasing Division

2.24    Lost Money, Goods, and Other Unclaimed Property

2.28    Planning Commission

2.32    Community Redevelopment Agency

2.36    Personnel System

2.40    Emergency Services

2.44    Public Library

2.48    Training of Law Enforcement Officers

2.50    Incompatible Activities

2.54    Public Projects


Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL1

Sections:

2.04.010    Regular meetings – Time.

2.04.020    Regular meetings – Place.

2.04.030    Special meetings.


2.04.010 Regular meetings – Time.

The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each and every calendar month of the year as follows: at 6:30 p.m. for closed session business and/or study sessions, when scheduled, and at 7:30 p.m. for the general business session. Should the first or third Tuesday of any month be a legal holiday, then such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the first legal date subsequent thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, closed session meetings of the city council may be scheduled as part of the general business session, when necessary, and nothing herein shall operate to preclude the city council from reconvening into closed session discussions in the event that the city council does not complete the closed session between 6:30 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. (Ord. 18-14 § 1, 2019; Ord. 09-1974 § 1, 2009; Ord. 90-1718 § 1, 1990; 1964 Code § 2.1.)


2.04.020 Regular meetings – Place.

All meetings of the city council and planning commission shall be public and shall be held in the council chamber of the City Hall at 125 East College Street, in the city; provided, that the city council or planning commission may, where anticipated public attendance or other factors require, determine that a particular meeting shall be held at some other location in the city. (Ord. 1225 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.2.)


2.04.030 Special meetings.

Special meetings of the city council may be called at any time in the manner prescribed by law. (1964 Code § 2.3.)1

For statutory provisions regarding city council meetings, see Government Code §§ 36805 – 36811. 


Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER

Sections:

2.08.010    Position created.

2.08.020    Supervision and control.

2.08.030    Bond.

2.08.040    Compensation.

2.08.050    Expenses – Reimbursement.

2.08.060    Absence from city.

2.08.070    Term of office.

2.08.080    Removal from office – Generally.

2.08.090    Removal from office – Preliminary resolution – Salary continuance.

2.08.100    Removal from office – Following municipal election.

2.08.110    Powers and duties – Generally.

2.08.120    Administrative supervision.

2.08.130    Council meeting attendance.

2.08.140    Administrative coordination.

2.08.150    Departmental function analysis – Operational recommendations.

2.08.160    Expenditure estimates – Budget.

2.08.170    Expense supervision – Purchasing.

2.08.180    Public improvement projects and programs.

2.08.190    Public relations duties.

2.08.200    Community organization cooperation.

2.08.210    City property inventory – Purchase recommendations.

2.08.220    Property transfer and disposal recommendations.

2.08.230    Personnel studies, surveys and recommendations.

2.08.240    Technical service contract advice.

2.08.250    Council correspondence responsibility.

2.08.260    Public property supervision.

2.08.270    Officials and employees – Appointment and removal.

2.08.280    Public contacts.

2.08.290    Limitations – Generally.

2.08.300    Limitations – Duties of other officials.

2.08.310    Execution of contracts with prior city council approval.


2.08.010 Position created.

There is created in the unclassified service of the city the position of city manager. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.11.)


2.08.020 Supervision and control.

The city manager shall serve directly under the supervision and control of the city council in a purely administrative capacity. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.12.)


2.08.030 Bond.

The city manager shall secure a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council, in such sum as may be determined by the city council, conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. The fee for such bond shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.13.)


2.08.040 Compensation.

The compensation to be paid to the city manager shall be fixed and determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, which compensation shall be in full satisfaction for payment of all services performed and rendered by the city manager. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.14.)


2.08.050 Expenses – Reimbursement.

The city manager shall be reimbursed for and shall be allowed traveling, hotel and incidental expenses reasonably incurred when absent from the city on official city business, but no reimbursement or allowance shall be made except upon an itemized claim duly presented to and approved and allowed by the city council. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.15.)


2.08.060 Absence from city.

Any absence of the city manager from the city on official city business shall be subject to the approval in advance by the city council. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.16.)


2.08.070 Term of office.

The city council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.17.)


2.08.080 Removal from office – Generally.

The city council may remove the city manager by a majority vote. The city council, in removing the city manager, shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.18.)


2.08.090 Removal from office – Preliminary resolution – Salary continuance.

At least 30 days before the removal of the city manager becomes effective, the city council shall, by a majority vote of its members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reason for his removal. By the preliminary resolution the city council may suspend the city manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him any unpaid balance of his salary and his monthly salary shall continue to be paid for the next 30 days following the adoption of the preliminary resolution. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.19.)


2.08.100 Removal from office – Following municipal election.

Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 2.08.080 and 2.08.090, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city, at which election a member of the city council is elected. After the expiration of such 90-day period, the provisions of CMC 2.08.080 and 2.08.090 as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.20.)


2.08.110 Powers and duties – Generally.

The powers and duties of the city manager shall be as set forth in CMC 2.08.120 through 2.08.300. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.21.)


2.08.120 Administrative supervision.

The city manager shall execute on behalf of the city council its administrative supervision and control of such affairs of the city as may be placed in his charge. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.22.)


2.08.130 Council meeting attendance.

The city manager shall attend meetings of the city council with the duty of reporting on or discussing any matter concerning the affairs of the departments, services or activities under his supervision upon which, in his judgment, the city council should be informed. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.23.)


2.08.140 Administrative coordination.

The city manager shall assist the city council in coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the various departments, divisions, properties and services of the city government, and on its behalf carry out the policies, rules and regulations and ordinances adopted by it relating to the administration of the affairs of such departments, divisions, properties or services. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.24.)


2.08.150 Departmental function analysis – Operational recommendations.

The city manager shall analyze the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, divisions, properties and services of the city government and of all employees thereof, and shall make such recommendations to the city council with reference thereto as in his judgment will result in the highest degree of efficiency in the overall operation of the city government. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.25.)


2.08.160 Expenditure estimates – Budget.

The city manager shall cause to be prepared and submitted to him by each department, division, or service of the city government itemized annual estimates of expenditures required by any of them for capital outlay, salaries, wages and miscellaneous operating costs, and shall tabulate the same into a preliminary consolidated municipal budget and submit the same to the city council before the fifteenth day of June of each year, with his recommendations as to such changes which he deems advisable.

The city manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its final adoption. The city manager shall be authorized to amend the budget between cost centers within each fund. City council authorization shall be required for increases in total fund appropriation and the use of council contingency reserve. Continuing appropriations for year-end encumbrances, contractual commitments, and capital projects shall be automatically carried forward. All other appropriations shall lapse at year-end unless carried forward by city council action. The city manager shall keep the city council informed with respect thereto. (Ord. 00-1872, 2000; Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.26.)


2.08.170 Expense supervision – Purchasing.

The city manager shall, as agent for the city council, supervise the expenditure of all departments, divisions, properties or services of the city government and act as purchasing agent for the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required for any of such departments, divisions, properties or services. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.27.)


2.08.180 Public improvement projects and programs.

The city manager shall develop and organize necessary public improvement projects and programs and aid and assist the city council and the various departments in carrying the same through to successful conclusion. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.28.)


2.08.190 Public relations duties.

The city manager shall serve as the public relations director of the city government, and follow through and endeavor to adjust all just complaints filed against any employee, department, division or service thereof. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.29.)


2.08.200 Community organization cooperation.

The city manager shall cooperate with all the community organizations whose aim and purpose it is to advance the spiritual and material interests of the city and its people, and provide them with assistance through the city government. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.30.)


2.08.210 City property inventory – Purchase recommendations.

The city manager shall make and keep up-to-date an inventory of all property, real and personal, owned by the city. He shall recommend to the city council the purchase of new machinery, equipment and supplies whenever in his judgment the same can be obtained at the best advantage, taking into consideration trade-in value of machinery, equipment, etc., in use. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.31.)


2.08.220 Property transfer and disposal recommendations.

The city manager shall recommend to the city council the transfer of the city-owned equipment, machinery, furnishings, supplies, materials and furniture from one department to another, or the disposal of the same for the benefit of the city whenever in his judgment the transfer or disposal thereof would be advantageous to the city government. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.32.)


2.08.230 Personnel studies, surveys and recommendations.

The city manager shall make studies and surveys of the duties, responsibilities and work of the personnel in the various departments, divisions and services of the city government. He shall recommend to the city council abolition or consolidation of positions or transfers or removal of personnel whenever in his judgment such action would increase efficiency in the administration of the city government. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.33.)


2.08.240 Technical service contract advice.

The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.34.)


2.08.250 Council correspondence responsibility.

The city manager shall receive and open all mail addressed to the city council and give immediate attention thereto, to the end that all administrative business referred to in such communications and not necessarily requiring action by the city council may be disposed of between council meetings. All actions taken pursuant to such communications shall be reported to the city council at its next regular meeting thereafter. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.35.)


2.08.260 Public property supervision.

The city manager shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, public streets and other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.36.)


2.08.270 Officials and employees – Appointment and removal.

The city manager shall appoint and remove any officials and employees of the city except elective officials, the city attorney and the city auditor. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.37.)


2.08.280 Public contacts.

In the discharge of his duties as city manager, the person holding such position shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in his contacts with the public and with all city commissions, boards, departments, officers and employees. He shall use his best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between all personnel employed in the city government, to the end that the highest possible standards of public service be continuously maintained. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.38.)


2.08.290 Limitations – Generally.

The city manager shall not exercise any policy-making or legislative functions whatsoever, nor attempt to commit or bind the city council or any member thereof to any action, plan or program requiring official action by the city council. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.39.)


2.08.300 Limitations – Duties of other officials.

No provision of CMC 2.08.110 through 2.08.300 shall be deemed to grant any authority to or impose any duty upon the city manager which is vested in or imposed by general law or provision of this code or other valid city ordinance in any other city commission, board, department, officer or employee. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.40.)


2.08.310 Execution of contracts with prior city council approval.

The city manager may execute by signing a specific contract or conveyance for any dollar amount on behalf of the city whenever such contract or conveyance has been expressly approved by the city council for execution by ordinance, resolution, motion, minute order, contract, or other appropriate city council action. (Ord. 18-07 § 2, 2018; Ord. 17-12 § 2, 2017.)


Chapter 2.12 CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

2.12.010    Appointment – Term.

2.12.020    Duties – Compensation other than salary.


2.12.010 Appointment – Term.

The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the pleasure of the city council. (1964 Code § 2.4.)


2.12.020 Duties – Compensation other than salary.

It shall be the duty of the city attorney to advise the city authorities and officers in all legal matters pertaining to the business of the city and to frame all ordinances and resolutions required by the city council.

The city attorney shall perform such other legal services as the city council may require from time to time. For such other legal services the city attorney shall be paid, in addition to his salary, such compensation as may be allowed by the city council. (1964 Code § 2.5.)


Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DEPARTMENT1

Sections:

2.16.010    Established.

2.16.020    Powers and duties generally.

2.16.030    Financial reports.

2.16.040    Additional functions.

2.16.050    Finance director – Department direction – Duties.

2.16.060    Finance director – Duty transfers from city clerk.


2.16.010 Established.

In order to establish a central area for the uniform processing and development of all fiscal and budgetary functions, there is established a finance department. Wherever in this code reference is made to the public service department, it means the finance department. (1964 Code § 2.106.)


2.16.020 Powers and duties generally.

The finance department shall be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities:

A. To maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each of the respective departments, divisions and services thereof;

B. To perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses;

C. To keep and maintain or to prescribe and require the keeping and maintaining of inventory records of municipal properties necessary in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices;

D. To assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties relating to the administration of sales taxes and license taxes levied by the city and of the collection thereof;

E. To assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims and demands against the city, including payrolls;

F. To assist in the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the city;

G. To assist in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration thereof. (1964 Code § 2.107.)


2.16.030 Financial reports.

The finance department shall prepare and present to the city council in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition:

A. A quarterly, or more frequently as may be desired, statement of all receipts, disbursements and balances of the city;

B. An annual statement and report of the financial condition of the city;

C. Such other financial reports as may be required. (1964 Code § 2.108.)


2.16.040 Additional functions.

The finance department shall perform such additional duties and functions as may be prescribed or required by the city council or the city manager. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.109.)


2.16.050 Finance director – Department direction – Duties.

The finance department shall be directed by the finance director for the city. With the approval of the city council, the finance director may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as such officer under this section to any other officer or employee of the city. The finance director shall:

A. Supervise the public service department;

B. Appoint, in accordance with merit system procedures, such subordinate employees as may be authorized by the city council for this department;

C. Cooperate with the city treasurer and other officials of the city in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments, divisions and services of the city in accordance with modern municipal accounting practice. (1964 Code § 2.110.)


2.16.060 Finance director – Duty transfers from city clerk.

In accordance with the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk under Sections 40802 to 40805 of the Government Code of the state are transferred to the director of finance. (1964 Code § 2.111.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing the transfer of the city clerk’s financial duties to a director of finance, see Government Code §§ 37209 and 40805.5; for provisions regarding the financial powers of cities generally, see Government Code § 37201 et seq. 


Chapter 2.20 PURCHASING DIVISION1

Sections:

2.20.010    Adoption.

2.20.020    Purchasing division.

2.20.030    Purchasing supervisor.

2.20.040    Filing estimates of requirements.

2.20.050    Requisitions.

2.20.060    Purchase orders.

2.20.070    Unencumbered appropriation in account.

2.20.080    Bidding – Required – Exceptions.

2.20.090    Formal bid procedure – Generally.

2.20.100    Notice inviting bids.

2.20.110    Bidder’s security.

2.20.120    Bid – Opening procedure.

2.20.130    Bid – Rejection.

2.20.140    Award of contracts.

2.20.150    Tie bids.

2.20.160    Performance bonds.

2.20.170    Informal bid procedure.

2.20.175    Purchase – Professional and specialized services.

2.20.180    Purchase – Inspection and testing.

2.20.190    Disposition of surplus or obsolete supplies and equipment.

2.20.200    Joint bidding with other governmental entities.

2.20.210    Joint purchasing agreements with other governmental entities.


2.20.010 Adoption.

In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. (1964 Code § 20A.1.)


2.20.020 Purchasing division.

There is created a centralized purchasing division in the finance department which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.2.)


2.20.030 Purchasing supervisor.

There is created the position of purchasing supervisor. The duties of purchasing supervisor may be combined with those of any other office or position. While the position of purchasing supervisor is unfilled, these duties generally are to be assumed by each individual department head. The purchasing supervisor shall have authority to:

A. Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the finance director shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or city manager;

B. Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

C. Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city;

D. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

E. Prepare and recommend to the finance director rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;

F. Prepare and recommend to the finance director revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

G. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

H. Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

I. Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

J. Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use;

K. Maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.3.)


2.20.040 Filing estimates of requirements.

All departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time and for such future periods as the purchasing supervisor shall prescribe. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.4.)


2.20.050 Requisitions.

All departments shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing supervisor by standard requisition forms. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.5.)


2.20.060 Purchase orders.

Purchase of supplies, services and equipment of estimated value greater than $1,000 shall be made only by purchase order. The city manager shall authorize purchases and contracts for supplies, services and equipment with an estimated value of $25,000 or less. The city council shall authorize all purchases and contracts for supplies, services and equipment with an estimated value greater than $25,000. (Ord. 07-1943 § 1, 2007; Ord. 00-1872, 2000; Ord. 1599 § 1, 1985; 1964 Code § 20A.6.)


2.20.070 Unencumbered appropriation in account.

Except in cases of emergency, the finance director shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services, and equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund cost center against which such purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 00-1872, 2000; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.7.)


2.20.080 Bidding – Required – Exceptions.

A. Purchase of supplies, services, or equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to CMC 2.20.090 through 2.20.170.

B. Procurement by noncompetitive proposals may be made only when at least one of the following circumstances applies: 

1. The supply, service or equipment is available from only one source;

2. The public exigency or emergency for the supply, service or equipment will not permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation; 

3. After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate; 

4. The amount involved is $10,000 or less; or

5. The services being procured are professional or specialized services as identified within CMC 2.20.175. (Ord. 07-1943 § 2, 2007; Ord. 03-1897 § 1, 2003; Ord. 00-1872, 2000; Ord. 92-1742 § 1, 1992; 1964 Code § 20A.8.)


2.20.090 Formal bid procedure – Generally.

Except as otherwise provided by federal and state statutes and herein, purchases and contracts for supplies, services and equipment of estimated value greater than $25,000 shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the formal bid procedure prescribed in CMC 2.20.100 through 2.20.160. (Ord. 07-1943 § 3, 2007; Ord. 00-1872, 2000; Ord. 1599 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.100 Notice inviting bids.

A. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.

B. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least 10 days before the date of opening of bids. Notice shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.110 Bidder’s security.

A. All bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

1. Cash;

2. Cashier’s check made payable to the city;

3. A certified check made payable to the city;

4. A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city.

B. The security shall be in an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the amount bid. A bid shall not be considered unless one of the forms of bidder’s security is enclosed with it. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within 10 days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

C. The finance director may waive the requirement of bidder’s security in requests for supplies, services and equipment of less than $100,000 if the result of doing so would encourage additional parties to participate in the competitive bidding process. (Ord. 07-1943 § 4, 2007; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.120 Bid – Opening procedure.

Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.130 Bid – Rejection.

In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.140 Award of contracts.

Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.150 Tie bids.

If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bids made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.160 Performance bonds.

Before entering into a contract, the city council may require a performance bond in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.9.)


2.20.170 Informal bid procedure.

Purchases of supplies, services and equipment of an estimated value greater than $10,000 and equal to or less than $25,000 may be made by utilizing informal bids without observing the formal bid procedure prescribed by CMC 2.20.090 through 2.20.160.

A. Informal bid purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible quote.

B. Bids shall be solicited by written requests to prospective vendors or by telecommunications.

C. A record of bids shall be kept for a period of one year after the submission of the bids or the placing of the orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 07-1943 § 5, 2007; Ord. 00-1872, 2000; Ord. 1599 § 3, 1985; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.10.)


2.20.175 Purchase – Professional and specialized services.

Purchase of professional and specialized services by persons, firms, companies, or corporations (including, but not limited to, architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, environmental, land surveying, legal, accounting or construction management) shall be made on the basis of demonstrated competence and experience of the service provider and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. The purchasing supervisor shall attempt to obtain information relating to prices and availability of such professional or specialized services from different sources prior to making the purchase; however, neither formal nor informal bidding shall be required prior to the purchase of professional or specialized services. (Ord. 03-1897 § 2, 2003.)


2.20.180 Purchase – Inspection and testing.

The purchasing supervisor shall have the authority to require supplies and equipment tested to determine their compliance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing supervisor shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and compliance with specifications. (1964 Code § 20A.11.)


2.20.190 Disposition of surplus or obsolete supplies and equipment.

All using departments shall submit to the finance director, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The finance director shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for or trade in the same on new supplies and equipment. Such sales shall be made pursuant to CMC 2.20.090 through 2.20.160 or 2.20.170, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 20A.12.)


2.20.200 Joint bidding with other governmental entities.

The formal bid procedure prescribed in CMC 2.20.100 through 2.20.160 may be waived by the city manager in those instances where it is to the city’s advantage to combine its purchases with those of another governmental entity in order to effect economies by bidding combined requirements and the governmental entity actually soliciting the bids employs a bidding procedure adequate to ensure competition among responsible bidders. (Ord. 1646 § 1, 1987.)


2.20.210 Joint purchasing agreements with other governmental entities.

When it is to the cityâs advantage, the formal bid procedure prescribed in CMC 2.20.100 through 2.20.160 may be waived by the city manager in the following instances: 

A. Supplies, vehicles, equipment or services can be purchased in cooperation with other governmental entities or associations; or 

B. Supplies, vehicles, equipment or services can be purchased from a vendor offering the same prices, terms and conditions as in a previous award from the city or another governmental entity either by competitive bid or through a negotiated process. (Ord. 16-2051 Â§ 1, 2016.)1

For statutory provisions regarding purchasing of supplies and equipment by local agencies, see Government Code §§ 54201 – 54205. 


Chapter 2.24 LOST MONEY, GOODS, AND OTHER UNCLAIMED PROPERTY1

Sections:

2.24.010    Duty of finder.

2.24.020    Unknown owner – Delivery of property to police department.

2.24.030    Time for claiming property by owner.

2.24.040    Unclaimed property – Disposition.

2.24.050    Unclaimed property – Sale.

2.24.060    Sale – Notice.

2.24.070    Sale – Proceeds disposition.

2.24.080    Sale – Minimum bid.

2.24.090    Unclaimed property – Public use.


2.24.010 Duty of finder.

Any person who finds and takes possession of any money, goods or other personal property shall, within a reasonable time, inform the owner, if known, and make restitution without compensation, except a reasonable charge for taking care of the property. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.020 Unknown owner – Delivery of property to police department.

If the owner is unknown or has not claimed the property, the person finding the property shall, if such property is of the value of $10.00 or more, within a reasonable time turn the property over to the police department, and make an affidavit, stating when and where he found the property, particularly describing it. The police department shall notify the owner, if his identity is reasonably ascertainable, that it possesses the property and where it may be claimed. The police department may require payment by the owner of a reasonable charge to defray costs of storage and care of the property. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.030 Time for claiming property by owner.

If the owner appears within 120 days after receipt of the property by the police department, proves his ownership of the property, and pays all reasonable charges, the police department shall restore the property to him. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.040 Unclaimed property – Disposition.

When property is found and turned over to the police department and no owner appears and proves his ownership within 120 days:

A. If the reported value of the property is less than $50.00 and no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property within 120 days, the title shall vest in the person who found or saved the property, unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property shall be sold at public auction.

B. If the reported value of the property is $50.00 or more, and no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property within 120 days, the police department shall cause a notice of the property to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. If, after seven days following the first publication of the notice, no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property and the person who found or saved the property pays the cost of the publication, the title shall vest in the person who found or saved the property, unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property shall be sold at public auction. (Ord. 1380 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.050 Unclaimed property – Sale.

All other unclaimed property, held by the police department for a period of at least four months, shall thereafter be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.060 Sale – Notice.

Notice of sale of unclaimed property shall be given by the police chief at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.070 Sale – Proceeds disposition.

All money obtained from the sale of any unclaimed property shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.080 Sale – Minimum bid.

Whenever the policy chief or any city official designated by the police chief determines that unclaimed property has a special value, it shall be appraised for the purpose of establishing a minimum bid for such item. In the event such item does not receive the minimum bid at auction, it may be retained by the police chief or his designate and thereafter the item may be sold pursuant to CMC 2.20.090. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)


2.24.090 Unclaimed property – Public use.

If the police chief, his designate or the purchasing supervisor of the city determines that any unclaimed property transferred to him for sale is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. (Ord. 1305 § 1, 1975.)1

For statutory provisions regarding the disposition of lost or unclaimed property, see Civil Code § 2080 et seq. Prior history: 1964 Code §§ 28.1 – 28.5, as amended by Ord. 1231. 


Chapter 2.28 PLANNING COMMISSION1

Sections:

2.28.010    Creation.

2.28.020    Composition.

2.28.030    Members – Appointment.

2.28.040    Vacancies.

2.28.050    Members – Removal.

2.28.060    Chairman and officials – Election.

2.28.070    Meetings.

2.28.080    Records.

2.28.100    Funds – Expenditures.

2.28.110    Powers and duties.


2.28.010 Creation.

A city planning commission is created. (1964 Code § 2.112.)


2.28.020 Composition.

The city planning commission shall consist of five members. (1964 Code § 2.113.)


2.28.030 Members – Appointment.

The members of the city planning commission shall be appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 2.114.)


2.28.040 Vacancies.

If a vacancy occurs in the city planning commission otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. (1964 Code § 2.115.)


2.28.050 Members – Removal.

Any appointee member of the city planning commission may be removed by the mayor at his pleasure subject to the approval of the city council, or by a majority vote of the city council. (1964 Code § 2.116.)


2.28.060 Chairman and officials – Election.

The city planning commission shall elect a chairman from among its appointed members for a term of one year, and subject to other provisions of law may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. (1964 Code § 2.117.)


2.28.070 Meetings.

The city planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. (1964 Code § 2.118.)


2.28.080 Records.

The city planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. (1964 Code § 2.119.)


2.28.100 Funds – Expenditures.

The city council shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the work of the planning commission of the city. The planning commission shall not create indebtedness in any one year in excess of the amount of funds provided or budgeted by the city council. (1964 Code § 2.121.)


2.28.110 Powers and duties.

The city planning commission shall perform the duties and have the power and authority which may, from time to time, be delegated to the planning commission by the city council and by the Government Code of the state, Section 65000 et seq. (1964 Code § 2.122.)1

For statutory provisions regarding the establishment and duties of a city planning agency, see Government Code § 65100 et seq.; for provisions regarding a city planning commission, see Government Code § 65150. 


Chapter 2.32 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY1

Sections:

2.32.010    Need declared.


2.32.010 Need declared.

The city council finds, determines and declares that there is need for a community redevelopment agency to function in this city. Such agency shall be known as the Covina redevelopment agency. (1964 Code § 2.10-1.)1

For statutory provisions regarding the Community Redevelopment Law, see Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq. 


Chapter 2.36 PERSONNEL SYSTEM1

Sections:

2.36.010    Adoption.

2.36.020    Employee relations officer.

2.36.030    Chapter applicability.

2.36.040    Personnel rules – Adoption, amendment and purpose.

2.36.050    Appointments.

2.36.060    Probationary period.

2.36.070    Personnel rules – Applicability to exempt positions.

2.36.080    Demotion – Dismissal – Pay reduction – Suspension.

2.36.090    Appeal procedure.

2.36.100    Abolition of position – Reemployment procedures.

2.36.110    Political activities.

2.36.120    Discrimination prohibited.

2.36.130    Technical services – Contract.

    Prior legislation: 1964 Code §§ 2.43, 2.44 and 2.49.


2.36.010 Adoption.

In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel system, provisions of which are contained in this chapter, is adopted. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.41.)


2.36.020 Employee relations officer.

The city manager shall be the employee relations officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him/her as employee relations officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in CMC 2.36.130. The employee relations officer shall:

A. Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

B. Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such rules and amendments prior to their submission to the city council;

C. Provide for the publishing or posting notices of tests for positions in the competitive service, the receiving of applications therefor, the conducting and grading of tests and the certifications to the appointing power of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.42.)


2.36.030 Chapter applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:

A. The city manager and all executive employees as defined in the executive compensation rules adopted by city council resolution;

B. Elective officers;

C. Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

D. Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or other services;

E. Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen and reserve policemen;

F. City attorney;

G. Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property;

H. Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are employed less than half-time, which is defined as employees who are expected to or do work less than 1,040 hours in any one fiscal year. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; Ord. 04-1908 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.45. Formerly 2.36.050.)


2.36.040 Personnel rules – Adoption, amendment and purpose.

Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such action has been publicly posted at least five days prior to city council consideration. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including:

A. Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification system covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

B. Preparation, revision and administration of compensation directly correlated with the position classifications, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

C. Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment;

D. Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

E. Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional and emergency appointments;

F. Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;

G. Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

H. Separation of employees from the city service;

I. Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training;

J. The establishment of adequate personnel records;

K. The establishment of grievance and appeal procedures. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.46. Formerly 2.36.060.)


2.36.050 Appointments.

Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combination of these or other tests. Physical and medical tests may be given as part of any examination.

In any examination, the employee relations officer may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and may set minimum standards therefor.

Appointments shall be made by the city council or by the city manager, in whom the power to make appointments is vested.

When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the employee relations officer shall transmit to the appointing power the names of all persons on the appropriate certified employment list, in the order in which they appear on the list.

In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a provisional appointment may be made not to exceed six months by the appointing authority of a person meeting the minimum training and experience qualifications for the position. A provisional employee may be removed at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

No special credit shall be allowed in meeting any qualification or in the giving of any test or the establishment of any employment or promotional lists for service rendered under a provisional appointment.

During the period of suspension of an employee or pending final action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or discharge of an employee, such vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority subject to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.47. Formerly 2.36.070.)


2.36.060 Probationary period.

All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months; except, that as to any class of position the rules may provide for an extension of the period for not more than an additional six months. With respect to newly employed police and fire personnel, the minimum probationary period shall be not less than one year. In the event the probationary period exceeds these minimum requirements, the applicable memorandum of understanding or compensation rules shall apply. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he/she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he/she was promoted unless he/she is discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules.

An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he/she was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him/her unless he/she is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.48. Formerly 2.36.080.)


2.36.070 Personnel rules – Applicability to exempt positions.

The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.50. Formerly 2.36.100.)


2.36.080 Demotion – Dismissal – Pay reduction – Suspension.

The appointing power shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend without pay for 30 calendar days any permanent employee. Notice of such action must be in writing and served personally on such employee, except where an emergency situation exists, in which case the notice shall be served within three working days of the action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or reasons therefor.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.51. Formerly 2.36.110.)


2.36.090 Appeal procedure.

A. Employees – in Classifications Represented by a City-Affiliated Employee Bargaining Unit.

1. Any employee in the competitive service who is represented by a city-affiliated employee bargaining unit shall have the right to appeal any disciplinary action expressly authorized to be appealed by the applicable memorandum of understanding between the city and the city-affiliated employee bargaining unit of which the appealing employee’s classification is represented.

2. To timely appeal any disciplinary action expressly authorized to be appealed by this section, the appealing employee in the competitive service shall follow the appeal procedures set forth in the disciplinary appeal provisions of the applicable memorandum of understanding between the city and the city-affiliated employee bargaining unit of which the appealing employee’s classification is represented.

B. Unrepresented Employees – Employees Not a Member of a City-Affiliated Employee Bargaining Unit.

1. Any unrepresented employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal any disciplinary action expressly authorized to be appealed by the applicable compensation rules for unrepresented employees, as approved by city council resolution.

2. To timely appeal any disciplinary action expressly authorized to be appealed by this section, the appealing unrepresented employee in the competitive service shall follow the appeal procedures set forth in the disciplinary appeal provisions of the applicable compensation rules for unrepresented employees, as approved by city council resolution. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.52. Formerly 2.36.120.)


2.36.100 Abolition of position – Reemployment procedures.

Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service. Employees transferred, demoted or laid off because of the abolishment of positions shall not be subject to written charges nor shall they have the right of appeal in such cases.

The names of probationary and permanent employees laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists for classes which, in the opinion of the employee relations officer, require basically the same qualifications and duties and responsibilities of those of the class of positions from which layoff was made.

Names of persons laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists in order of their competency, and shall remain on such lists for a period of two years unless reemployed sooner. For reemployment purposes, competency of a person laid off shall be determined by the head of the department in which such person worked.

Seniority shall be observed in effecting such reduction in personnel and the order of layoff shall be in the reverse order of total cumulative time served in permanent and probationary status in the competitive service upon the effective date of the layoff. Layoff shall be made within classes of positions and all provisional employees in the affected class or classes shall be laid off prior to the layoff of any probationary or permanent employee.

For the purpose of determining order of layoff, total cumulative time shall include time served on military leave of absence. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.53. Formerly 2.36.130.)


2.36.110 Political activities.

The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.54. Formerly 2.36.140.)


2.36.120 Discrimination prohibited.

No person in the competitive service or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race, color, ancestry, national origin or religious belief. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; 1964 Code § 2.55. Formerly 2.36.150.)


2.36.130 Technical services – Contract.

The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

A. The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

B. The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

C. The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

D. The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

E. Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 18-10 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 2.56. Formerly 2.36.160.)1

For statutory provisions regarding employees’ civil service, see Government Code § 45000 et seq.; for provisions regarding political activities of public employees, see Government Code §§ 53201 – 53206. 


Chapter 2.40 EMERGENCY SERVICES1

Sections:

2.40.010    Chapter purpose.

2.40.020    Emergency defined.

2.40.030    Disaster council – Creation – Membership.

2.40.040    Disaster council – Powers and duties.

2.40.050    Emergency services director and assistant director – Offices created.

2.40.060    Emergency services director and assistant director – Powers and duties.

2.40.070    Emergency organization.

2.40.080    Emergency plan.

2.40.090    Expenditures.

2.40.100    Prohibited acts – Penalty.


2.40.010 Chapter purpose.

The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.020 Emergency defined.

As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.030 Disaster council – Creation – Membership.

The Covina disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

A. The mayor, who shall be chairman;

B. The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman;

C. The assistant director of emergency services;

D. Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city;

E. Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans’, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.040 Disaster council – Powers and duties.

The Covina disaster council shall develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.050 Emergency services director and assistant director – Offices created.

A. There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

B. There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.060 Emergency services director and assistant director – Powers and duties.

A. The director shall:

1. Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2. Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5. Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

6. In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director shall:

a. Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

b. Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c. Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

d. Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

e. Execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

B. The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

C. The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.070 Emergency organization.

All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of CMC 2.40.060(A)(6)(c), are charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, and shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.080 Emergency plan.

The Covina disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.090 Expenditures.

Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1972.)


2.40.100 Prohibited acts – Penalty.

It is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in CMC 1.16.010, for any person, during an emergency, to:

A. Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C. Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1177 § 1, 1973.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to establish disaster relief bodies, see Government Code § 8610 et seq.; for provisions regarding the State Emergency Council’s rules and regulations governing disaster service workers, see Government Code § 8580. 


Chapter 2.44 PUBLIC LIBRARY1

Sections:

2.44.010    Established.

2.44.020    Government and management.

2.44.030    Property title.

2.44.040    Board of trustees – Management function – Membership.

2.44.050    Board of trustees – Powers.

2.44.060    Board of trustees – Management guidelines.

2.44.070    Materials – Injuring or defacing – Taking without permission.

2.44.080    Materials – Retention after notice – Penalty.


2.44.010 Established.

A public library is established in and for the city. (1964 Code § 2.123.)


2.44.020 Government and management.

The public library shall be governed and managed in accordance with the terms of Sections 27301 and 27456 of the Education Code of the state. (1964 Code § 2.124.)


2.44.030 Property title.

The title of all property owned or acquired by the city for library purposes, or that may be hereafter acquired for such purposes, when not otherwise provided, is vested in the city. (1964 Code § 2.125.)


2.44.040 Board of trustees – Management function – Membership.

The public library shall be managed by a board designated as the board of library trustees, consisting of five members to be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. (1964 Code § 2.126.)


2.44.050 Board of trustees – Powers.

The library trustees shall severally hold office as provided in Sections 27301 to 27456 of the Education Code of the state and are vested with all the powers, rights and privileges given boards of library trustees thereby. (1964 Code § 2.127.)


2.44.060 Board of trustees – Management guidelines.

The board of library trustees shall in all respects govern, manage and conduct the public library in accordance with the terms of Sections 27301 to 27456 of the Education Code of the state. (1964 Code § 2.128.)


2.44.070 Materials – Injuring or defacing – Taking without permission.

A. No person shall willfully cut, tear, deface, break, mark, or injure any book, magazine, periodical, map, picture, engraving, statue, apparatus, or other work of literature, art, or mechanics in or owned by any public library in the city.

B. No person shall willfully take or retain any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, map, chart, picture, statue, or other work of literature, art, or mechanics belonging to any public library in the city without permission and authority of the library director of the city and contrary to the rules and regulations of the board of library trustees. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 1976.)


2.44.080 Materials – Retention after notice – Penalty.

A. No person shall retain any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, or other personal property belonging in or to the Covina Public Library for a period exceeding 30 days after notification by mail to the borrower’s address on file with the library, given after the expiration of the time during which, by the rules and regulations of the Covina Public Library, the book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, or other personal property may be kept. The mailed notice shall bear on its face or have attached thereto a reference to this section of the Covina Municipal Code.

B. Any person who fails to return any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, or other personal property belonging to the Covina Public Library within 30 days after the notice is mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be liable for and shall pay a penalty in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council for each item of such personal property kept or retained by any such person or borrower contrary to the provisions of this section. In addition to any other remedies, the library director may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction civilly to recover any such penalty for and on behalf of the city.

C. The city council finds and determines that various and numerous items of personal property belonging to the Covina Public Library have been retained by the borrowers thereof for periods in excess of the lending period; that such items have been lost or willfully kept so that they are not returned to the public library; that in many cases it is impossible to replace such items; and that a penalty should be imposed for the retention of any personal property belonging to the Covina Public Library to encourage the return of such items and make the same available for members of the public who may desire to use them. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1335 § 1, 1976.)1

For statutory provisions regarding municipal libraries, see Education Code § 27301, et seq. 


Chapter 2.48 TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS1

Sections:

2.48.010    Aid desired.

2.48.020    State standards adherence pledged.


2.48.010 Aid desired.

The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the State Penal Code. (1964 Code § 2.129.)


2.48.020 State standards adherence pledged.

Pursuant to Section 13522 of such Chapter 1 referred to in CMC 2.48.010, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to such Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the State Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (1964 Code § 2.130.)1

For statutory provisions regarding the recruitment and training requirements necessary to enable cities to qualify for state aid from the California Peace Officer’s Training Fund, see Penal Code § 13522. 


Chapter 2.50 INCOMPATIBLE ACTIVITIES1

Sections:

2.50.010    Purpose.

2.50.020    Appointing power.

2.50.030    Officers and officials subject to chapter.

2.50.040    Incompatible outside activities.

2.50.050    Determination of incompatible outside activities.

2.50.060    Notice of proscribed incompatible outside activities to affected officers or employees.

2.50.070    Appeal of determination.

2.50.080    Disciplinary action – Notice and right to appeal.


2.50.010 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted for the purpose of adopting guidelines and rules for public officers and employees of the city with respect to any outside employment, activity or enterprise for compensation which is or may be inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict with, or inimical to his or her duties as an officer or employee of the city for purposes of Government Code Section 1126. Nothing contained herein is intended to modify or abridge the provisions of Government Code Sections 1090, et seq., relating to prohibited contracts, sales and purchases made in an official capacity or the Political Reform Act of 1974 as amended, Government Code Sections 81000, et seq.; or any other provisions of law pertaining to conflict of interest. This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent therewith. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.020 Appointing power.

The term “appointing power” as used in this chapter and in Government Code Section 1126 shall mean the city council, the city manager and those department heads designated by the city manager. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.030 Officers and officials subject to chapter.

The public officers and employees subject to the provisions of this chapter are:

A. Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

B. All city employees. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.040 Incompatible outside activities.

Officers or employees as defined in CMC 2.50.030 shall not engage in any employment, activity or enterprise for compensation which is inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict with, or inimical to his or her duties as an officer or employee or with the duties, functions or responsibilities of his or her appointing power or the city. Such officer or employee shall not perform any work, service or counsel for compensation outside of his or her city employment where any part of his or her efforts will be subject to approval by any other officer, employee, board or commission of his or her employing body where such work, service, or counsel for compensation has been determined as provided for in this chapter as being inconsistent with, incompatible to or in conflict with his or her duties. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.050 Determination of incompatible outside activities.

The appointing power shall determine those outside activities which, for officers and employees under its jurisdiction, are inconsistent with, incompatible to or in conflict with their duties as officers or employees. In determining which outside activities are inconsistent with, incompatible to or in conflict with the duties of officers or employees, appointing power shall prohibit outside employment, activity or enterprise if it:

A. Involves the use for private gain or advantage of his or her city time, facilities, equipment and supplies; or the badge, uniform, prestige or influence of his or her city office or employment; or

B. Involves receipt or acceptance by the officer or employee of any money or other consideration from anyone other than the city for the performance of an act which the officer or employee, if not performing such act, would be required or expected to render in the regular course of hours of his or her city employment or as a part of his or her duties as a city officer or employee; or

C. Involves the performance of an act in other than his or her capacity as an officer or employee which act may later be subject directly or indirectly to the control, inspection, review, audit or enforcement of any other officer or employee or by the city; or

D. Involves such time demands as would render performance of his or her duties as a city employee less efficient. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.060 Notice of proscribed incompatible outside activities to affected officers or employees.

When the appointing power has made a determination of incompatible outside activities with respect to officers or employees under its jurisdiction, each affected officer or employee shall be provided with a written notice of determination. Thereafter, each affected officer or employee shall refrain from engaging in the specified incompatible outside activity. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.070 Appeal of determination.

Each officer or employee affected by a determination of incompatible outside activities shall have the right, within 10 days after being served with a written notice of determination, to initiate an appeal of the matter to the appointing power. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the appointing power. The appointing power shall decide the appeal within 20 days and such decision shall be final. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)


2.50.080 Disciplinary action – Notice and right to appeal.

If, after a determination of the appeal adverse to the officer or employee, or if the time for appeal has expired, 30 days after the affected officer or employee has been served with a written notice of determination describing incompatible outside activities, the officer or employee continues to engage in said incompatible outside activities, the appointing power may take disciplinary action, up to and including termination. In the event disciplinary action is contemplated, the following procedure shall be followed:

A. Written notice of the continuation of incompatible outside activities, the notice of intended disciplinary action, along with all supporting documentation, if any, shall be personally delivered to the affected officer or employee.

B. The affected officer or employee shall have 10 days to respond to the intended disciplinary action, either orally or in writing. The response shall be made directly to the appointing power.

C. The appointing power shall, within 10 days of the officer’s or employee’s response, or if no response, within 10 days after the last day to respond, make its determination with respect to the disciplinary action, if any, to be taken.

D. Any officer or employee subject to disciplinary action hereunder other than those offices, positions and employments specified in CMC 2.36.030 shall have a right of appeal in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.36 CMC and the personnel system rules and regulations of the city as amended from time to time. (Ord. 19-02 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1540 § 1, 1983.)1

Prior history: Ord. 1271. 


Chapter 2.54 PUBLIC PROJECTS

Sections:

2.54.010    Intent.

2.54.020    Definitions.

2.54.030    Applicability.

2.54.040    Bid requirements, purchasing procedures, and contracting procedures.

2.54.050    Delegation of authority to award informal contracts.

2.54.060    Bid security.


2.54.010 Intent.

The intent of this chapter is to provide standardized procedures for awarding contracts for public projects in conformance with the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. (Ord. 15-2043 § 1, 2015.)


2.54.020 Definitions.

Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:

“Change order” shall mean a written authorization from the city directing an addition, deletion, or revision to an awarded purchase order or contract.

“Public project” shall be defined as that term is defined in Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code or any successor statute thereto.

“Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act” shall mean the procedures and regulations set forth in Chapter 2, commencing with Section 22000, to Part 3 of Division 2 of the California Public Contract Code or any successor act thereto. (Ord. 15-2043 § 1, 2015.)


2.54.030 Applicability.

All public projects shall be bid and let to contract in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, or any successor act thereto, and the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 15-2043 § 1, 2015.)


2.54.040 Bid requirements, purchasing procedures, and contracting procedures.

This section shall govern the procedures for bidding and awarding all purchase orders and contracts to perform public projects, including any associated purchase of goods and supplies for such projects. Bidding requirements and other purchasing and contracting procedures are categorized into three different levels set forth below. Each level shall govern purchases and contracts of different values. Level 1 shall govern the least expensive purchase orders and contracts and Level 3 shall govern the most expensive purchase orders and contracts. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the bidding and other procedures for awarding public project contracts shall not violate the limitations of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, as they may be amended from time to time by the State Controller or the State Legislature.

A. Level 1 Projects. Public projects of $45,000 or less may be performed by city employees by force account or may be awarded by negotiated contract or by purchase order without competitive bidding.

B. Level 2 Projects. Public projects of $175,000 or less may be let to contract by the informal bid procedures set forth in this subsection (B). All Level 2 project contracts shall require informal competitive written bidding, as follows:

1. Written Bids.

a. Bid specifications shall be prepared and written notices soliciting written bids shall be disseminated consistent with subsection (B)(3) of this section.

b. Bids shall be submitted in writing and must be received prior to the bid closing date to be considered.

c. The city council shall award the contract to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. The city council may reject all bids, or waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.

2. Contractors List. The city shall develop and maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work, in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the California Public Contract Code, or any successor statute thereto, and the minimum criteria for development and maintenance of the contractors list as determined by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.

3. Notice Inviting Informal Bids. At least 10 calendar days prior to the date informal bids are due, the city shall mail a notice inviting informal bids to all contractors from the applicable category of work to be bid, as shown on the contractors list developed in accordance with subsection (B)(2) of this section, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the California Public Contract Code, or any successor statute thereto. Said notice shall describe the project in general terms, shall clearly indicate how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and shall set forth the time and place for the submission of bids. Additional contractors or construction trade journals may be noticed at the discretion of the city department soliciting bids; provided, however:

a. If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

b. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

4. Excess Bids. If all bids received pursuant to the procedures outlined in this subsection (B) are in excess of $175,000, the city council may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract at $187,500 or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, without complying with the formal bidding procedures set forth in subsection (C) of this section; provided, that the city council determines that the cost estimate of the project was reasonable.

C. Level 3 Projects. Public projects of more than $175,000 shall, except as otherwise provided by law, be let to contract by the formal bidding procedures set forth in this subsection (C). Public projects which must be let pursuant to Level 3 procedures shall be approved by the city council and shall require competitive written bidding, as described in this subsection (C).

1. Bid Specifications. For all public projects that must be let pursuant to Level 3 procedures, bid specifications shall be prepared. In addition, the city council shall adopt all plans, specifications, and working details for all public projects in accordance with the requirements of Section 22039 of the Public Contract Code or any successor statute.

2. Notice Inviting Formal Bids. The city shall publish and mail a notice inviting sealed formal bids in accordance with the provisions of California Public Contract Code Section 22037, or any successor statute thereto.

3. Receipt of Bids. Bids shall be sealed, and shall not be opened until the time and place designated in the bid specifications. Bids must be received prior to the bid opening to be considered.

4. The city council shall award the bid to the lowest responsible bidder, or reject all bids pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22038, or its successor statute. The city council may waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding. (Ord. 15-2043 § 1, 2015.)


2.54.050 Delegation of authority to award informal contracts.

The city manager is authorized to award bids and enter into contracts for public projects pursuant to this chapter where the amount of such contract does not exceed $25,000, or such other amount as the city council may designate by resolution, provided there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the expense is to be charged. Where the amount of any such contract exceeds $25,000, or such other amount as the city council may designate by resolution, the contract shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 15-2043 § 1, 2015.)


2.54.060 Bid security.

Bid security shall be required as a condition of submitting a written bid unless deemed unnecessary by the city manager or his or her designee. (Ord. 15-2043 § 1, 2015.)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.02    Cost Recovery for Services

3.04    Claims and Demands Against City

3.08    Transfer of Tax Functions to County

3.12    Sales and Use Tax

3.14    Utility Users Tax

3.16    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.18    Transactions and Use Tax

3.20    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.24    State Gas Tax Improvement Fund

3.25    Vehicle Registration Fee Funding of Mobile Source Air Pollution Reduction Measures


Chapter 3.02 COST RECOVERY FOR SERVICES

Sections:

3.02.010    Generally.


3.02.010 Generally.

The schedule of rates, compensations, and charges, as set out in the table of rates on file in the office of the city clerk, are fixed and established as the rates, compensations, and charges and minimum charges to be charged and collected by the city for recovery of costs for services except as hereinafter specifically provided, or as provided by those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by a resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 94-1764 § 1, 1994.)


Chapter 3.04 CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST CITY1

Sections:

3.04.010    State provisions and applicability of chapter.

3.04.020    Presentation of claims – Prerequisite for bringing suit.

3.04.030    Authority of city’s risk manager and city manager.

3.04.040    Contents of claim – Review for sufficiency.

3.04.050    Time limitation for presentation of claims.

3.04.060    Time for action by city.

3.04.070    Application to file a late claim.

3.04.080    Time barred claim.

3.04.090    Effective date of chapter.

3.04.100    No enjoining collection of taxes, assessments, or fees/payments required as condition to filing suit.


3.04.010 State provisions and applicability of chapter.

The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures applicable to the city and all local public agencies are governed by the provisions of the California Government Code, Chapters 1 and 2 of Division 3.6, commencing with Section 900 and following. The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Government Code Section 935 and shall apply to all claims against the city for money or damages, including all claims which are excepted by Government Code Section 905; provided, that such claims are not governed by any other statutes, ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.020 Presentation of claims – Prerequisite for bringing suit.

No suit subject to this chapter may be brought against the city until a claim has been presented to and acted upon by the city, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 945.4. Any action brought against the city on a claim after it has been presented to and acted upon by the city shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.030 Authority of city’s risk manager and city manager.

Pursuant to Government Code Section 935.4, the city council delegates authority to the city’s risk manager and city manager and their designees to review all claims for sufficiency and to reject any and all claims. The city council delegates to the city’s risk manager authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims, including workers’ compensation claims, for an amount up to $15,000. The city council delegates to the city manager authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims, including workers’ compensation claims, for an amount up to $25,000. The city council shall have sole authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims for an amount in excess of $25,000. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.040 Contents of claim – Review for sufficiency.

A claim shall be in writing, verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator, and shall be presented to the city clerk by the claimant or by a person acting on the claimant’s behalf. The claims shall show all information as required by Government Code Section 910. The foregoing reference to Government Code Section 910 shall not be construed to authorize a class action, and no claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall review all claims for sufficiency of information. The city manager, or his or her designee, may, within 20 days of receipt of a claim, either personally deliver or mail to claimant a notice stating deficiencies in the claim presented. If such notice is delivered or sent to claimant, the city shall not act upon the claim until at least 15 days after such notice is sent. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.050 Time limitation for presentation of claims.

Pursuant to Government Code Section 911.2, any claim specified in CMC 3.04.010 shall be presented within the following time limitations: 

A. Claims relating to a cause of action for death, injury to person or to personal property or growing crops shall be presented within six months after the accrual of the cause of action. 

B. Claims relating to any other cause of action shall be presented within one year after the accrual of the cause of action. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.060 Time for action by city.

Pursuant to Government Code Section 912.4, the city council or city manager or his or her designee shall act on a claim within 45 days after the claim has been presented. By mutual agreement of the claimant and the city council or city manager or his or her designee, such 45-day period may be extended by written agreement. If the claim is not acted on within 45 days, it shall be deemed to have been rejected on the forty-fifth day unless such time period has been extended, in which case it shall be denied on the last day of the period specified in the extension agreement. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.070 Application to file a late claim.

Any applicant who fails to file a claim within the time period required by CMC 3.04.050 may submit a written application to the city for leave to present a late claim, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 911.4. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall grant or deny the application to present a late claim within 45 days after it is presented to the city, in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Sections 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.080 Time barred claim.

Nothing in this chapter revives or reinstates any cause of action that, on the effective date of this chapter, is barred by failure to comply with any previously applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation requiring the presentation of a claim prior to a suit subject to this chapter, or by failure to commence any action thereon within the period prescribed by an applicable statute of limitations. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.090 Effective date of chapter.

Subject to CMC 3.04.080, the provisions of this chapter shall apply retroactively to any causes of action occurring prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that a claimant who has a cause of action occurring more than 10 months before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall file a claim within 60 days after this chapter’s effective date in accordance with its provisions or such claim shall be barred. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)


3.04.100 No enjoining collection of taxes, assessments, or fees/payments required as condition to filing suit.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no injunction, writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the city or an officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes, assessments, or fees (whether established by ordinance, resolution or other action of the city) which are sought to be collected from any person by the city, or are otherwise due and owing from any person to the city pursuant to this code or otherwise, and payment of all said taxes, assessments, fees, plus any interest and penalties, shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax, assessment or fee liability. For purposes of this section, the term “city” shall include but not be limited to any agency, district or entity formed or governed by the city. (Ord. 11-2004 § 1, 2011.)1

For statutory provisions regarding payment of claims against the city, see Government Code § 53910, et seq. 


Chapter 3.08 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY1

Sections:

3.08.010    Generally.


3.08.010 Generally.

The city council, deeming it for the best interests of the city and determining that the public interest and necessity demands the action taken in this section, elects to avail itself of the provisions of the act of the Legislature of the state, entitled, “An act to provide for the levy and collection of taxes by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the State of California, except municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain municipal offices, and to provide that their duties may be performed by certain officers of the county, and fixing the compensation allowed for such county officers, for the services so rendered to such municipal corporations,” approved March 27, 1895, being Chapter CLXXXII, of the statutes of the state for the year 1895, and all acts amending of the same, except Section 2 and Section 7 of such act. The city council elects that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector respectively. (1964 Code § 25.1.)1

For statutory provisions regarding transfer of city taxing functions to the county, see Government Code § 51334. 


Chapter 3.12 SALES AND USE TAX1

Sections:

Article I. Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax

3.12.010    Short title.

3.12.020    Rate.

3.12.030    Operative date.

3.12.040    Purpose.

3.12.050    Contract with state.

3.12.060    Sales tax imposed.

3.12.070    Place of sale.

3.12.080    Use tax imposed.

3.12.090    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.12.100    Limitations on adoption of state law.

3.12.110    Permit not required.

3.12.120    Exclusions from gross receipts.

3.12.130    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.12.135    Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.

3.12.136    Credit for taxes due redevelopment agency.

3.12.140    Amendments.

3.12.145    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.12.150    Penalties.

Article II. Covina Redevelopment Agency Sales and Use Tax

3.12.160    Title of article.

3.12.170    Agency sales tax.

3.12.180    Agency use tax.

3.12.220    Contract with the State Board of Equalization.

3.12.230    Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.

3.12.240    Consideration of the California Constitution.

Article I. Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax


3.12.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax chapter. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.27A.)


3.12.020 Rate.

The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 1242, 1973; 1964 Code § 24.27B.)


3.12.030 Operative date.

This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.27C.)


3.12.040 Purpose.

The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes;

D. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to the taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.28.)


3.12.050 Contract with state.

Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city has contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in CMC 3.12.010 through 3.12.150. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.29.)


3.12.060 Sales tax imposed.

For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in CMC 3.12.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after January 1, 1974. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.30A.)


3.12.070 Place of sale.

For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.30B.)


3.12.080 Use tax imposed.

An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after January 1, 1974, for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in CMC 3.12.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.30C.)


3.12.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.31A.)


3.12.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.

In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.31B.)


3.12.110 Permit not required.

If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code § 25.31C.)


3.12.120 Exclusions from gross receipts.

There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

D. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 1555 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.32A.)


3.12.130 Exclusions and exemptions.

There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purpose.

D. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purpose is exempted from the use tax.

E. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

F. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 1555 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.32B.)


3.12.135 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.

CMC 3.12.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same or substantially the same language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202, as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 1555 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.32C.)


3.12.136 Credit for taxes due redevelopment agency.

Any person subject to a sales and use tax under this chapter shall be entitled to a credit against payment due under an ordinance of the Covina redevelopment agency which imposes a sales and use tax pursuant to Section 7202.6 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 93-1757 § 1, 1993.)


3.12.140 Amendments.

All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.33A.)


3.12.145 Enjoining collection forbidden.

No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.33B.)


3.12.150 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of CMC 3.12.010 through 3.12.140 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 CMC. (Ord. 1242 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 25.33C.)

Article II. Covina Redevelopment Agency Sales and Use Tax


3.12.160 Title of article.

This article shall be known as the Covina redevelopment agency of the city of Covina sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. CRA 1 § 1, 1994.)


3.12.170 Agency sales tax.

A.1. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed by the Covina redevelopment agency of the city upon all retailers located within the area described more fully in Exhibit A attached to the original ordinance and by this reference incorporated herein (the “redevelopment project”) at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail within the redevelopment project on and after the operative date of this article.

2. All retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state of California sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

B.1. Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state (the “Code”), all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with the Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on August 17, 1993, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

2. Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Covina Redevelopment Agency of the City of Covina” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Covina Redevelopment Agency of the City of Covina” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

3. If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of subsection (B)(2) of this section.

4. There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax due under this section is measured, the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

5. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the redevelopment project and the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA 1 § 1, 1994.)


3.12.180 Agency use tax.

A. An excise tax is hereby imposed by the agency on the storage, use or other consumption in the redevelopment project of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after August 17, 1993, for storage, use or other consumption in the redevelopment project at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

B.1. Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on August 17, 1993, applicable to use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

2. Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Covina Redevelopment Agency of the City of Covina” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Covina Redevelopment Agency of the City of Covina” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

3. There shall be excluded from the amount subject to tax under this section any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

4. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

a. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1 or 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code by any city and county, county, city or redevelopment agency in the state; and

b. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA 1 § 1, 1994.)


3.12.220 Contract with the State Board of Equalization.

Prior to the operative date of this article, the secretary of the agency shall cause the agency to contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article; provided, however, that if the agency shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to 31 days before the operative date of this article, this article shall not become operative until 31 days following the execution of such a contract by and between the agency and the State Board of Equalization, shall continue in effect so long as the county of Los Angeles and the city of Covina shall have operative sales and use tax ordinances enacted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code. (Ord. CRA 1 § 1, 1994.)


3.12.230 Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.

All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the enactment of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code relating to sales and use tax and not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code shall automatically become a part of this article. (Ord. CRA 1 § 1, 1994.)


3.12.240 Consideration of the California Constitution.

Prior to enacting this article, the agency considered the applicability of Section 4 of Article XIII A of, and Article XIII B of, the California Constitution to this article and hereby finds and determines that this article does not violate any of the provisions of the California Constitution. (Ord. CRA 1 § 1, 1994.)1

For statutory provisions regarding state sales and use taxes, see Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001, et seq.; for provisions regarding the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Act, see Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200; for provisions authorizing cities to impose sales and use taxes, see Government Code § 37101. 


Chapter 3.14 UTILITY USERS TAX

Sections:

3.14.010    Purpose.

3.14.020    Definitions.

3.14.030    Telephone users tax.

3.14.040    Electricity users tax.

3.14.050    Gas users tax.

3.14.060    Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.

3.14.070    Water users tax.

3.14.080    Constitutional and statutory exemptions.

3.14.090    Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.

3.14.100    Duty to collect – Procedures.

3.14.110    Filing return and payment.

3.14.120    Collection of penalties.

3.14.130    Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.

3.14.140    Administrative remedy – Nonpaying service users.

3.14.150    Actions to collect.

3.14.160    Additional powers and duties of tax administrator.

3.14.170    Records.

3.14.180    Refunds.

3.14.190    Appeals.

3.14.200    No injunction/writ of mandate.

3.14.210    Remedies cumulative.

3.14.220    Notice of changes to chapter.

3.14.230    Penalties.

3.14.240    Future amendment to cited statute.

3.14.250    Operative date.

3.14.260    Sunset of tax.


3.14.010 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s general fund and used for the usual current expenses of the city. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

A. “Billing address” shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

B. “Charges for mobile telecommunications services” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Sections 116 and 124) and the regulations thereunder.

C. “City” means the city of Covina.

D. “City manager” means the city manager of the city, or his or her authorized representative.

E. “Cogenerator” shall mean any corporation or person employing cogeneration (as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities Code) for producing power for the generation of electricity for self-use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and regulations thereunder).

F. “Exempt wholesale generator” shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) and regulations thereunder.

G. “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor.

H. “Mobile telecommunications service” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

I. “Month” means a calendar month.

J. “Nonutility supplier” shall mean:

1. A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to, any publicly owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing authority, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;

2. An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city; and

3. A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer, or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas to users within the city.

K. “Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint-stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city), cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.

L. “Place of primary use” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 116, et seq.) and the regulations thereunder.

M. “Service address” means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user, and in the case of mobile telecommunications service, the service user’s place of primary use.

N. “Service supplier” shall mean any entity or person, including the city, that provides telephone communication, electric, or gas service to a user of such services within the city, and includes an entity or person required to collect, or self-collect under CMC 3.14.060, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric, gas, water or video service suppliers.

O. “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter.

P. “State” shall mean the state of California.

Q. “Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city or his or her designee.

R. “Telephone communication services” shall include “communications services” as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations thereunder, and shall include teletypewriter exchange and similar data services, and any service that is capable of transmitting telephonic quality communications (including the use of Internet Protocol (IP)) or other similar means for digitalization and/or packetization of telephonic quality communications for transmission over digital networks, such as voice over internet (or VoIP), by analog, digital, electronic, radio or similar means through “interconnected service” with the “public switched network” (as these terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission – see 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d)), whether such transmission occurs by wire, teletypewriter, cable, cable modem or digital subscriber line (DSL), internet, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, switching facilities, satellite, radio wave (including, but not limited to, mobile telecommunications service, cellular service, commercial mobile service and commercial mobile radio service (see 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d)(1) and Part 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations), personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other similar services regardless of radio spectrum used), or any other similar facilities.

S. “Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” and “water corporation” shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, and 241, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the state except, “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation” and “water corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency, broker/marketer, person or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power, gas or water to a service user. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.030 Telephone users tax.

A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other than a telephone corporation, water corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation, using telephone communication services, including intrastate and interstate telephone communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of all charges made for such telephone communication services. There is a rebuttable presumption that telephone communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. Charges for mobile telecommunications services are subject to taxation under this chapter if the customer’s place of primary use is in the city, regardless of where the mobile telecommunications service may originate, terminate, or pass through.

B. As used in this section, the term “telephone communication services” shall not include “private mobile radio service,” as defined in Part 20 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or “private mobile service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d)(3). The tax imposed under subsection (A) of this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using telecommunication services to the extent that, pursuant to Sections 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code, or Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Tax Code, the amounts paid for such communication services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code or the California Revenue and Tax Code. In the event that the federal excise tax on “communication services” as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this section and in CMC 3.14.020(R) to such law, including any related federal regulations, private letter rulings, case law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any judicial or administrative decision interpreting such federal excise tax law which is published or rendered after the date of repeal.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. “Charges” shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of the tax due.

D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services that are subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this chapter, or increase an existing tax. An administrative ruling shall not constitute a new tax or an increase in an existing tax if such administrative ruling is:

1. Consistent with the existing ordinance language; and

2. Merely reflects a change in, clarification to, or new rendition of:

a. The definition, interpretation, or application of substantial nexus by a court of competent jurisdiction or by preemptive state or federal law, for purposes of taxation; or

b. The definition, interpretation, or application of the federal excise tax rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to “communications services” (Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code) by the Internal Revenue Service, or by a state or local agency that assumes an interpretative role of those rules, regulations, and laws in the event that the federal excise tax on telecommunications is repealed.

E. To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication service, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

F. The tax on telephone communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.040 Electricity users tax.

A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than a telephone corporation, water corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation, using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the end user, which are provided by a service supplier or nonutility supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility service supplier, or its billing agent.

B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (a) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or (b) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1. Energy charges;

2. Distribution and transmission charges;

3. Metering charges;

4. Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar minimum charges for services;

5. Customer charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fee, franchise surcharge, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and

6. Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line-item basis on the customer billing.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.

D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section.

E. As used in this section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency.

F. The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier or an electric utility not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in CMC 3.14.060. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of the tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; provided, that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.050 Gas users tax.

A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person other than a telephone corporation, water corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation using gas in the city, which is transported through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation, and delivery of such gas.

B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1. The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;

2. Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges);

3. Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;

4. Capacity or demand charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, administrative charges, marketing charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and

5. Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line-item basis on the customer billing.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.

D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section.

E. The following shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed:

1. Charges made for natural gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes;

2. Charges made for natural gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency;

3. Charges made by a gas utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of business of gas public utilities;

4. Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of motor vehicles, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, utilizing natural gas; and

5. Charges made for gas used by a nonutility supplier to generate electrical energy for its own use or for sale to others provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with CMC 3.14.060.

F. The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in CMC 3.14.060. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; provided, that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.060 Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.

A. Any service user subject to the tax imposed by CMC 3.14.040 or 3.14.050, which produces gas or electricity for self-use, or which receives gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or which otherwise is not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city that is directly billed and collected by the service supplier or its billing agent, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the tax administrator within 30 days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within 30 days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the pattern payment of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity; provided, that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

B. The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax, in the opinion of the city, is excessive, the city may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used had been provided by the service supplier, which is the primary supplier of gas or electricity. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.070 Water users tax.

A. There is imposed a tax upon every person, other than a telephone corporation, water corporation, electrical corporation, or gas corporation, using water in the city which is transported and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such water and shall be collected from the service user by the water service supplier, or its billing agent.

B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (a) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or (b) currently or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1. Water commodity charges (potable and nonpotable);

2. Distribution or transmission charges;

3. Metering charges;

4. Customer charges, later charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; and,

5. Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line-item basis on the customer billing.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services.

D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the water service suppliers in the city to identify the various unbundled billing components of water retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency as a condition of providing such water service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or (2) currently or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section.

E. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district in the conduct of the business of such department, utility or district.

F. The tax on water service imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the water service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.080 Constitutional and statutory exemptions.

A. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to:

1. Any person or service user if imposition of such tax upon that person or service user would be in violation of a federal or state statute or the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California, or otherwise exempted by this chapter; and

2. The city.

B. Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name, or is a service user of telephone communication services that has received a federal excise tax exemption certificate for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or nonutility supplier, or their billing agents, shall provide a list of names and addresses of those customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax. With respect to a service user of telephone communication services, a service supplier of such telephone communication services doing business in the city shall, upon request of the tax administrator, provide a copy of the federal or state exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the city that is served by such service supplier.

C. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to CMC 3.14.190. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city manager pursuant to CMC 3.14.190 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

D. The city council reserves the power to, by order or resolution, establish classes of persons or classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or services shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax.

E. Following application and approval of any exemption by the city, the tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.090 Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.

For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.100 Duty to collect – Procedures.

The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:

A. The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the time and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user may be applied to the utility service charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to the taxes due, except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of the charges but notifies the service supplier of his or her refusal to pay the tax imposed on the charges.

B. The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.110 Filing return and payment.

Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he/she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and his or her agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information exempt from disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.120 Collection of penalties.

A. Taxes collected from a service user, or self-collected by a service user subject to CMC 3.14.060, are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on or before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on or before the following business day.

B. If a service supplier, or a service user subject to CMC 3.14.060, fails to remit any tax collected, on or before the due date, said person shall pay a penalty for such delinquencies at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council of the total tax that is delinquent in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

C. The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

D. For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.130 Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.

A. The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to collect or self-collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to collect and remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges.

B.1. The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city.

2. Within 14 calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city.

C. If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be held within 30 days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

D. At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to the person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to CMC 3.14.190. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city council pursuant to CMC 3.14.190 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

E. Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this section shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection.

F. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.140 Administrative remedy – Nonpaying service users.

A. Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter.

B. In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

C. The tax administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

D. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.150 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees and court costs. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.160 Additional powers and duties of tax administrator.

A. The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B. The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

C. Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to CMC 3.14.060) so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and are voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time.

D. The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to CMC 3.14.130 for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

E. Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days; provided, that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of three quarters of one percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

F. The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

G. The tax administrator or the city council, with the written approval of the city attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the portion of the claim proposed to be released is less than the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city and, with the approval of the city attorney and the city council, may compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is equal to or greater than the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city by the city council.

H. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.170 Records.

A. It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

B. The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver to the tax administrator copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date; provided, that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection.

C. The tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, may request from a person providing transportation services of gas or electricity to service users within the city a list of the names and addresses, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public Utilities Code.

D. If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (2) upon request of the tax administrator deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.

E. If any person subject to record keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of $500.00 on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.180 Refunds.

Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section:

A. The tax administrator or city council may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter; provided, that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim, under penalty of perjury, to the tax collector. The period for filing a claim for refund shall be one year from the time the tax was paid or erroneously or illegally collected; provided, however, that in no event shall the period to file such claim expire prior to the shortest period allowable for filing a tax refund claim under Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Section 911.2 of the California Government Code. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto, and must clearly set forth the facts and legal theories under which the claimant believes he or she has right to a refund. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city by the tax administrator or city council, city council approval shall be required.

B. It is the intent of the city that the one-year written claim requirement of this section be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the enactment of the one-year claims period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the tax administrator as provided in this subsection within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.

C. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user (whether due to overpayment or to erroneous or illegal collection of said tax) may refund such amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the tax administrator; provided, such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. The tax administrator shall determine the validity of the service user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.

D. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event the ordinance codified in this section is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city.

E. Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, a service supplier shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment whenever such overpayment has been received by the city within the three years next preceding a notice of tax deficiency or assessment by the tax administrator pursuant to CMC 3.14.130, during any year for which the service supplier, at the request of the tax administrator, has executed a waiver of the defense of the statute of limitations with regard to any claim the city may have for a utility users tax. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a credit against an underpayment pursuant to this subsection qualify a service supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the one-year written claim requirement of this section. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.190 Appeals.

A. The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to CMC 3.14.180), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to CMC 3.14.180), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).) Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

B. If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to CMC 3.14.180), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, he or she may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

C. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than 30 days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, the city council, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the city council shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the 14-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the fourteenth day.

E. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.200 No injunction/writ of mandate.

No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.210 Remedies cumulative.

All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.220 Notice of changes to chapter.

If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the chapter change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the chapter change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first-class mail, a copy of the chapter change to all collectors and remitters of the city’s utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.230 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.240 Future amendment to cited statute.

Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.250 Operative date.

This chapter shall become effective the first day of January 2004. It is noted that this chapter only provides clarifying provisions with respect to the imposition and collection of the city’s existing utility users tax, which current tax was confirmed to be approved by the voters of Covina on March 16, 1999, in accordance with California Propositions 62 and 218. This chapter does not increase or extend the life of the city’s current utility users tax. (Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


3.14.260 Sunset of tax.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall automatically be terminated, without further action by the city council, or the electors of the city, on March 16, 2029. As part of the yearly budget process, the city council shall conduct an annual review of the tax to determine potential downward adjustment. After March 16, 2029, the tax imposed by this chapter can only be continued or reestablished by a majority vote of the city council following required public hearings and a majority vote of Covina voters pursuant to California Propositions 62 and 218. (Ord. 17-05 § 1, 2017; Ord. 08-1956 § 1, 2008; Ord. 04-1899 § 1, 2004.)


Chapter 3.16 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX1

Sections:

3.16.010    Short title.

3.16.020    Definitions.

3.16.030    Imposition – Amount – Payment.

3.16.040    Exemptions.

3.16.050    Collection – Payment by operator prohibited.

3.16.060    Registration certificate – Contents.

3.16.070    Returns and remittances.

3.16.080    Payment – Original delinquency – Penalty.

3.16.090    Payment – Continued delinquency – Penalty.

3.16.100    Nonpayment due to fraud.

3.16.110    Nonpayment – Interest.

3.16.120    Nonpayment – Penalties merged with tax.

3.16.130    Amount determination – Collection action.

3.16.140    Decision appeal.

3.16.150    Operator – Records.

3.16.160    Refunds.

3.16.170    Collection – Action by city.

3.16.180    Violations – Penalty.


3.16.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city.” (1964 Code § 25.34.)


3.16.020 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

A. “Hotel” means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof.

B. “Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

C. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

D. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

E. “Tax administrator” means the director of finance.

F. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. (1964 Code § 25.35.)


3.16.030 Imposition – Amount – Payment.

For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10 percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 91-1727 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1528 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 25.36.)


3.16.040 Exemptions.

A. No tax shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person as to whom or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

2.  Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

3. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

B. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and, under penalty of perjury, upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (1964 Code § 25.37.)


3.16.050 Collection – Payment by operator prohibited.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (1964 Code § 25.38.)


3.16.060 Registration certificate – Contents.

Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A. The name of the operator;

B. The address of the hotel;

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 

(1964 Code § 25.39.)


3.16.070 Returns and remittances.

Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (1964 Code § 25.40.)


3.16.080 Payment – Original delinquency – Penalty.

Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. (1964 Code § 25.41.)


3.16.090 Payment – Continued delinquency – Penalty.

Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed. (1964 Code § 25.41.)


3.16.100 Nonpayment due to fraud.

If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in CMC 3.16.080 and 3.16.090. (1964 Code § 25.41.)


3.16.110 Nonpayment – Interest.

In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. (1964 Code § 25.41.)


3.16.120 Nonpayment – Penalties merged with tax.

Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of CMC 3.16.080 through 3.16.110 shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (1964 Code § 25.41.)


3.16.130 Amount determination – Collection action.

If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within 10 days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator, shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in CMC 3.16.140. (1964 Code § 25.42.)


3.16.140 Decision appeal.

Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (1964 Code § 25.43.)


3.16.150 Operator – Records.

It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (1964 Code § 25.44.)


3.16.160 Refunds.

A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (1964 Code § 25.45.)


3.16.170 Collection – Action by city.

Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter is a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city is a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (1964 Code § 25.46.)


3.16.180 Violations – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable therefor as provided in CMC 1.16.010.

Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due as required by this chapter to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (1964 Code § 25.47.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing a city to tax transient occupants, see Government Code § 51030. 


Chapter 3.18 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.18.010    Short title.

3.18.020    Operative date.

3.18.030    Purpose.

3.18.040    Contract with state.

3.18.050    Transactions tax rate.

3.18.060    Place of sale.

3.18.070    Use tax rate.

3.18.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.18.090    Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

3.18.100    Permit not required.

3.18.110    Exemptions and exclusions.

3.18.120    Amendments.

3.18.130    Enjoining collection forbidden.


3.18.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as “the city of Covina transactions and use tax ordinance of 2018.” The city of Covina hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.020 Operative date.

“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being November 6, 2018. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.030 Purpose.

This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, authorizing the city to adopt this tax chapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

B. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.

D. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and, at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.040 Contract with state.

Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.050 Transactions tax rate.

For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of 0.75 percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.060 Place of sale.

For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.070 Use tax rate.

An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 0.75 percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A. Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1. The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter;

3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a. Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

b. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

4. In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B. The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.100 Permit not required.

If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.110 Exemptions and exclusions.

A. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a. With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

b. With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, in which case the tax rate shall be the rate in effect in the city prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, in which case the tax rate shall be the rate in effect in the city prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5. For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C. There is exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, in which case the tax rate shall be the rate in effect in the city prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5. For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

6. Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

7. “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D. Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.120 Amendments.

All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


3.18.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.

No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 18-12 § 1, 2018.)


Chapter 3.20 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX1

Sections:

3.20.010    Short title – Adoption authority.

3.20.020    Imposition – Rate.

3.20.030    Payment.

3.20.040    Exemption – Debt instrument.

3.20.050    Exemption – Public agencies.

3.20.060    Exemption – Reorganization or adjustment conveyances.

3.20.070    Exemption – Securities and Exchange Commission order.

3.20.080    Exemption – Partnerships.

3.20.090    Administration.

3.20.100    Refunds.

3.20.110    Operative date.


3.20.010 Short title – Adoption authority.

This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the city.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (1964 Code § 25.48.)


3.20.020 Imposition – Rate.

There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. (1964 Code § 25.49.)


3.20.030 Payment.

Any tax imposed pursuant to CMC 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (1964 Code § 25.50.)


3.20.040 Exemption – Debt instrument.

Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (1964 Code § 25.51.)


3.20.050 Exemption – Public agencies.

The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (1964 Code § 25.52.)


3.20.060 Exemption – Reorganization or adjustment conveyances.

A. Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

1. Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

2. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subsection (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

3. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

4. Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

B. Subsection (A) of this section shall only apply if the making, delivering or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (1964 Code § 25.53.)


3.20.070 Exemption – Securities and Exchange Commission order.

Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

A. The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B. Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

C. Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (1964 Code § 25.54.)


3.20.080 Exemption – Partnerships.

A. In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B. If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C. Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of termination described in subsection (B) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (1964 Code § 25.55.)


3.20.090 Administration.

The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (1964 Code § 25.56.)


3.20.100 Refunds.

Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (1964 Code § 25.57.)


3.20.110 Operative date.

This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is the later. (1964 Code § 25.58.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose a documentary stamp tax on the sale of real property within the city, see Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 


Chapter 3.24 STATE GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND1

Sections:

3.24.010    Creation.

3.24.020    Source of funds.

3.24.030    Use of moneys.


3.24.010 Creation.

There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the state gas tax improvement fund. (1964 Code § 2.8.)


3.24.020 Source of funds.

All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the State Streets and Highways Code, Sections 180 to 207, for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the state gas tax improvement fund created by CMC 3.24.010. (1964 Code § 2.9.)


3.24.030 Use of moneys.

All moneys in the state gas tax improvement fund created by CMC 3.24.010 shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of Sections 180 to 207 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (1964 Code § 2.10.)1

For statutory provisions regarding highway users’ tax funds generally, see Streets and Highways Code § 2100 et seq. 


Chapter 3.25 VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEE FUNDING OF MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION MEASURES

Sections:

3.25.010    Intent and purposes.

3.25.020    Definitions.

3.25.030    Administration of vehicle registration fees.


3.25.010 Intent and purposes.

It is the intent of this chapter to provide for compliance with Chapter 7 of Part 5 of Division 26, Section 44220 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 91-1726 § 1, 1991.)


3.25.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be used and defined as follows:

“Fee administrator” means the finance director of the city or his designee.

“Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 91-1726 § 1, 1991.)


3.25.030 Administration of vehicle registration fees.

A. Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

B. Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate, interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds.

C. Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account.

D. Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account, including all interest, shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in CMC 3.25.020. Such revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of programs.

E. Audits. The city consents to an audit once every two years of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Section 44244 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 91-1726 § 1, 1991.)


Title 4 (RESERVED)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses

5.06    Rental Housing

5.08    Amusements, Exhibitions, Meetings and Shows

5.12    Repealed

5.16    Charitable and Religious Solicitations

5.18    Vending or Soliciting at Holiday Parade

5.20    Closing-Out Sales

5.24    Commercial Solicitations

5.28    Entertainment

5.32    Franchises

5.36    Massage Practitioners and Massage Establishments

5.38    Body Art Practitioners and Establishments

5.40    Patrol Operators and Special Guards

5.44    Taxicabs

5.50    Games for Charitable Purposes

5.60    Fortune-Telling

5.70    Shopping Cart Containment and Retrieval by Owners


Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES1

Sections:

Article I. Business Licenses Generally

5.04.010    Definitions.

5.04.020    Purpose.

5.04.030    Effect on other ordinances.

5.04.035    License – Revocation/modification.

5.04.040    Permit – Prerequisite to license issuance.

5.04.050    Permit – Suspension or revocation.

5.04.060    License – Required.

5.04.070    License – Separate required for branch establishments.

5.04.090    Evidence of doing business.

5.04.100    License tax – Exemptions – Enumerated.

5.04.110    License tax – Exemptions – Limitations.

5.04.120    License tax – Exemptions – Claim.

5.04.130    License – Issuance without tax payment.

5.04.140    License – Tax exemption revocation.

5.04.150    License – Contents.

5.04.160    License – Application – Contents.

5.04.165    Unlawful business.

5.04.170    License – Renewal.

5.04.180    License – Statement verification.

5.04.190    License – Information confidential.

5.04.200    License tax – Alternate determination – Appeal.

5.04.210    License – Determination appeal.

5.04.220    License – Transferability – Exemptions.

5.04.230    License – Replacement.

5.04.235    Business license application fee.

5.04.240    License – Posting and keeping.

5.04.250    License – Term – Tax payment.

5.04.260    License tax – Delinquent payment penalty.

5.04.270    License tax – Refunds.

5.04.280    Enforcement.

5.04.290    License tax a debt.

5.04.300    Remedies cumulative.

5.04.310    Limitations.

5.04.320    Violation a misdemeanor.

Article II. Business License Tax Rates

5.04.330    Generally.

5.04.340    Advertising – Outdoor advertising.

5.04.350    Advertising – Benches.

5.04.360    Advertising – Searchlights.

5.04.370    Advertising – Vehicles.

5.04.380    Amusement and vending machines.

5.04.400    Bowling alleys or billiards and similar devices.

5.04.410    Carnivals, circuses and similar exhibitions.

5.04.420    Contractors.

5.04.430    Dancing and entertainment.

5.04.440    Delivery/service vehicles.

5.04.445    Fortune-telling.

5.04.450    Hospitals.

5.04.460    Laundromats.

5.04.470    Manufacturers, wholesalers and industrial businesses.

5.04.480    Pawnbrokers.

5.04.490    Professions.

5.04.500    Rental accommodations.

5.04.510    Retail, services and general businesses.

5.04.520    Rubbish and junk collectors.

5.04.530    Shoeshining stands.

5.04.540    Skating rink.

5.04.550    Solicitors and peddlers.

5.04.560    Taxicabs.

5.04.570    Theaters – Generally.

5.04.580    Theaters – Motion picture makers.

Article III. Shoppers Lane Parking Improvement Area

5.04.590    Establishment.

5.04.600    License tax – Subject businesses.

5.04.610    License tax – Imposition.

5.04.620    License tax – Computation.

5.04.630    Business licensing.

5.04.640    License tax – Payment – Procedure.

5.04.650    License tax – Payment – Refusal.

5.04.660    License tax – Contributions by exempt businesses.

5.04.670    License tax – Disposition.

5.04.680    Fund – Created.

5.04.690    Fund – Expenditures.

Article I. Business Licenses Generally


5.04.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. Average Number of Persons Employed. The average number of persons employed daily in the applicant’s business during the previous year within the city shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by all employees of the applicant within the city during the previous year and dividing the total number of hours of service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a year’s work of one full-time employee according to the custom or laws governing such employment. In computing the average number of persons employed, fractions of numbers shall be excluded;

B. “Business” means professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit;

C. “Collector” means the city finance director or other city officer charged with the administration of this chapter;

D. “Employee” means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as member of the owner’s family, agent, manager, solicitor, and any and all other persons employed or working in the business. For purposes of computing tax based on employees, the average number of employees, as defined in subsection (A) of this section, will be used;

E. “Fixed place of business” means the premises within the city where a business is continuously conducted from day to day and regularly kept open for the purposes of such business. “Regular place of business” has the same meaning as “fixed place of business”;

F. “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (1964 Code § 15.1.)


5.04.020 Purpose.

The provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. (1964 Code § 15.2.)


5.04.030 Effect on other ordinances.

Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (1964 Code § 15.3.)


5.04.035 License – Revocation/modification.

A. Any license obtained by fraud or misrepresentation shall, upon proof of such fraud or misrepresentation as provided in subsection (C) of this section, be revoked.

B. The city council may revoke, amend, modify, or impose such other or further terms, conditions or restrictions on the terms, conditions or restrictions theretofore placed in said license as the council finds reasonable or necessary to ensure that the business enterprise, occupation or event will not be contrary to, inimical to or jeopardize the preservation of the public peace, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants or to be detrimental to other properties or businesses in the vicinity. For purposes of this subsection, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a business enterprise, occupation or event is contrary to, inimical to or jeopardizes the preservation of the public peace, safety or welfare if there have been at least six verified calls for response made to either the Covina police department or any other law enforcement agency pertaining to any criminal assault, battery, personal injury, vandalism or destruction of property, disturbance of the peace, or disorderly conduct which has occurred at the business enterprise, occupation or event, within any 90-calendar-day period. 

C. Prior to any modification or revocation of license, the city manager shall, by his order, give the licensee notice of intent to modify or revoke such license, stating the grounds therefor. The matter shall be set for hearing before the city council and the licensee shall be notified in writing of said hearing not less than 15 days prior thereto. If the council finds upon substantial evidence that such license was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation or that subsection (B) of this section is applicable, the council shall order the license revoked or modified. From and after the making of such order, such license shall be null and void or modified in accordance with the terms imposed by the council.   

D. Upon any modification or revocation of license, no refund of any license tax shall be made and the tax shall be forfeited to the city. 

E. No business shall be conducted or operated in any manner during any period of license revocation. (Ord. 07-1937 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1689 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1513 § 1, 1982.)


5.04.040 Permit – Prerequisite to license issuance.

No license shall be issued to engage in any business when the provisions of this code or any other law of this city require a permit to be obtained as a prerequisite to engaging in such business until such permit is first obtained. Any license issued in violation of this section is void. (1964 Code § 15.4.)


5.04.050 Permit – Suspension or revocation.

A. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this code may be by the city council revoked or suspended as in its discretion may seem just and equitable, or for any reason for which the granting of such permit may be lawfully denied, including but not limited to the operation of a permitted business, occupation or event in a disorderly manner. For purposes of this subsection, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any permitted business, occupation or event is being operated in a “disorderly manner” if there have been at least six verified calls for response made to either the Covina police department or any other law enforcement agency pertaining to any criminal assault, battery, personal injury, vandalism or destruction of property, disturbance of the peace, or disorderly conduct which has occurred at the permitted business, occupation or event, within any 90-calendar-day period.

B. Such revocation or suspension shall be made only upon a hearing granted to the holder of a permit before the city council after not less than five days’ written notice to such permit holder, stating the ground of the complaint and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. In the event of such revocation or suspension, any license or other certificate issued in connection with the granting of such permit shall, by the holder thereof, be surrendered to the finance director. Such hearing may, by the city council, be continued over from time to time and its findings shall be final and conclusive upon the matter. Such revocation or suspension of any permit shall be in addition to other penalties more specifically provided in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (Ord. 07-1937 § 2, 2007; 1964 Code § 15.5.)


5.04.060 License – Required.

There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580.

This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 15.6.)


5.04.070 License – Separate required for branch establishments.

A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (1964 Code § 15.7.)


5.04.090 Evidence of doing business.

When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book or newspapers advertise, hold out or represent that he is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the city, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he is conducting a business in the city after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting a business in the city. (1964 Code § 15.9.)


5.04.100 License tax – Exemptions – Enumerated.

No license tax shall be required for, of or from the following:

A. Those exempt from municipal license taxes by virtue of the Constitution and the laws of this state or the United States;

B. Any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual; nor shall any license tax be required for any enterprise or entertainment when the receipts derived therefrom are to be apportioned to any church or school or to any religious, benevolent or charitable purpose within the city;

C. Upon written recommendation of a regularly licensed and practicing physician or welfare agency in Los Angeles County, dated within one year of the application to the effect that the applicant is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and stating the nature of physical infirmity, a person may apply for partial or complete exemption from tax liability for the current license period;

D. Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license provided for in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 upon the grounds that he is an honorably discharged or released soldier, sailor or marine of the United States or Confederate States who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and who is a qualified elector of the state, as provided by Section 16001 of Business and Professions Code or other law of this state, shall, in addition to any other information required by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 also file with the collector a certificate of a regularly licensed and practicing physician dated within one year of the application, to the effect that the applicant is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and stating the nature of the incapacitation; provided, that no exempt license shall be issued except in cases where the veteran applying therefor is actively engaged in the management and conduct of the business for which the exemption is requested;

E. Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license provided for in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 upon the grounds that such license casts a burden upon his right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states or conflicts with the regulations of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce shall file a verified statement with the collector disclosing the interstate or other character of his business entitling such exemption. Such statement shall contain the name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and his address, the kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered, the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state, the method of delivery, the name and location of the residence of the applicant and any other facts necessary to establish the identity of applicant and such claim of exemption. A copy of the order blank, contract form or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be attached to the sworn statement for the information of the collector;

F. Any person under the age of 18 who is in business for himself; provided, that the gross income of the minor does not exceed $1,500 per year. (Ord. 1203 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 15.10.)


5.04.110 License tax – Exemptions – Limitations.

Nothing in CMC 5.04.100 or any subsection thereof shall exempt any person from complying with any of the regulatory measures or provisions of this code save and except the payment of license taxes required hereby. (1964 Code § 15.11.)


5.04.120 License tax – Exemptions – Claim.

Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to CMC 5.04.100 and 5.04.110 shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. (1964 Code § 15.12.)


5.04.130 License – Issuance without tax payment.

The city council shall, upon the proper showing contained in the sworn statement, direct the finance director to issue a license to such person claiming exemption under CMC 5.04.100 through 5.04.120 without payment to the city of the license tax required by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 15.13.)


5.04.140 License – Tax exemption revocation.

The city council shall revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of CMC 5.04.100 through 5.04.130 upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 15.14.)


5.04.150 License – Contents.

Every person required to have a license under the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the collector of the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, and if the collector is satisfied that the premises and operations therein conform to the provisions of this code and other regulatory ordinances of the city, the collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following information:

A. The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

B. The business licensed;

C. The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

D. The date of the expiration of such license;

E. Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this code. The license issued by the collector for the purpose of posting in places of business shall contain no reference to the amount of license tax paid. (1964 Code § 15.15.)


5.04.160 License – Application – Contents.

A. Upon a person’s making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information:

1. The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested;

2. The place where such business is to be carried on;

3. The names and places of residence for those owning the business;

4. In the event that an application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof;

5. If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the average number of employees, such application shall set forth the average number of employees for the applicable period;

6. A certification that the business will be operated in accordance with all applicable federal, state and city laws and regulations;

7. Any further information which the collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license applied for.

B. If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicants is measured by average number of employees, he shall estimate the average number of employees for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, that the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only and such person shall, within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the collector with a sworn statement showing the actual number of employees during such period and pay any additional amount of license tax due at that time.

C. Where application is made for a license to do business in the city, the collector may require approval of such application from the police, fire, health, building and planning departments showing that the premises and operations therein conform to the provisions of this code and other regulatory ordinances of the city.

D. A business license may be issued to an applicant showing only the address of a place of residence in those cases where the city requires the applicant to have a business license for business being conducted elsewhere in the city and the applicant can provide no other business address; provided, however, no business may be conducted at such place of residence. (Ord. 06-1933 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1429 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 15.16.)


5.04.165 Unlawful business.

No license issued pursuant to this title shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any unlawful business or the provision or sale of any service or product that is illegal under the laws of the United States, the laws of the state of California, or any ordinance of the city. Licenses issued to unlawful businesses or businesses providing or selling illegal services or products shall be subject to revocation in accordance with CMC 5.04.035. This section is declaratory of existing law. (Ord. 06-1933 § 2, 2006.)


5.04.170 License – Renewal.

In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant a sworn statement, upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 15.17.)


5.04.180 License – Statement verification.

No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, his deputies or authorized employees of the city, who are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license tax due. (1964 Code § 15.18.)


5.04.190 License – Information confidential.

The statement filed pursuant to the information required by the collector in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid shall be deemed confidential in character, and shall not be subject to public inspection; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A. The disclosure to or the examination of records and equipment by another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

B. The disclosure of information to or the examination of records by federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena;

C. The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city;

D. The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect to the taxpayer himself or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;

E. The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued and the general type or nature of their business;

F. The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;

G. The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (1964 Code § 15.19.)


5.04.200 License tax – Alternate determination – Appeal.

If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the collector he fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 fails to apply for a license, the collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.

If the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he may determine the amount of any license tax due by means of any information he may be able to obtain.

If such a determination is made, the collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Covina, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within 15 days before the city council. The collector shall give at least 10 days’ notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (1964 Code § 15.20.)


5.04.210 License – Determination appeal.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Covina, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provisions of this code. (1964 Code § 15.21.)


5.04.220 License – Transferability – Exemptions.

No license issued pursuant to CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved; provided further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; 1964 Code § 15.22.)


5.04.230 License – Replacement.

A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any license previously issued under CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing statement of such fact and at the time of filing such statement paying to the collector a duplicate license fee as established by the city council on occasion by resolution. (Ord. 04-1906 § 1, 2004; 1964 Code § 15.23.)


5.04.235 Business license application fee.

An application for a business license to be issued under CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall be accompanied by a fee for processing as established by the city council on occasion by resolution. (Ord. 04-1906 § 2, 2004.)


5.04.240 License – Posting and keeping.

A. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

B. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued.

C. Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment kept in use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is issued.

D. No person shall fail to affix, as required in this section, any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment for which it has been issued at the location designated by the collector, or to give away, sell or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to another person, or to permit its use by another person. (1964 Code § 15.24.)


5.04.250 License – Term – Tax payment.

All licenses, unless otherwise expressly stated in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, shall be annual licenses and shall be payable in advance in lawful money of the United States to the collector on the first day of January of each year, and all such licenses shall expire on December 31st of each year; provided, that license taxes covering new operations commenced after the first day of July may be prorated for the balance of the license period to be 75 percent of the annual license tax prescribed for such business, and new operations commenced after the first day of October may be prorated for the balance of the license period to be 50 percent of the annual license tax prescribed for such business.

Licenses for any shorter period of time shall be payable in advance as issued and shall expire at the close of the period of which the same may be issued. No greater or lesser amount shall be charged or received than is provided in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, and no license shall be issued for any period of time other than as provided in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (Ord. 1447 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 15.25.)


5.04.260 License tax – Delinquent payment penalty.

For failure to pay a license tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of 20 percent of the original license tax on the first day of each month after the due date thereof; provided, that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed 100 percent of the amount of the license tax due. (Ord. 1447 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 15.26.)


5.04.270 License tax – Refunds.

Refund of any amount, penalty or interest which has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or computed may be allowed by the finance director with the approval of the city treasurer; provided, that a written claim stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded has been filed with the finance director within six months after the overpayment was made. Failure to file a claim within the time prescribed constitutes a waiver of any demand against the city on account of any of the foregoing. If a refund is approved, the overpayment shall be credited on any amount then due from the payor under this article, and the balance shall be refunded to the payor or his successors, administrators or executors. If disallowed, notice of disallowance shall be served by the finance director on the claimant personally or by mail. If by mail, service shall be made pursuant to Section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state and shall be addressed to the claimant at his address as it appears in the records of the finance director. (Ord. 1193 § 2, 1972; 1964 Code § 15.27.)


5.04.280 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the collector and he is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, and the police chief shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector or the city council.

The collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 have been complied with.

The collector and each and all of his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein and demand an exhibition of its license. Any person having such license theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this code. The collector and each and all of his deputies or duly authorized assistants and any police officer are authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 by means of arrest of, including the issuance of a written notice to appear, or by causing a complaint to be filed against, any and all persons found to be violating any of said provisions. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code § 15.28.)


5.04.290 License tax a debt.

The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 is a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. (1964 Code § 15.29.)


5.04.300 Remedies cumulative.

The conviction and fine or imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. All remedies prescribed under CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 15.30.)


5.04.310 Limitations.

Neither the adoption of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 nor their superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.

Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by the city and the tax paid for the business for which the license has been issued under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for such business by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. (1964 Code § 15.31.)


5.04.320 Violation a misdemeanor.

Any person violating any of the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any authorized officer of the city any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1964 Code § 15.32.)

Article II. Business License Tax Rates


5.04.330 Generally.

The amount of license tax to be paid to the city by any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business designated in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 is fixed and established as provided in CMC 5.04.340 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 15.33.)


5.04.340 Advertising – Outdoor advertising.

Every person engaged in the business of constructing, erecting, installing, maintaining or operating outdoor advertising, advertising structures, billboards, advertising signs, painted signs on structures, signboards or similar devices shall pay a license tax of $60.00 per year for each advertising structure so used; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to signs affixed to the building in which a licensed business is being operated, which signs refer only to such business, nor to “for sale” or “for rent” signs on real estate. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.34.)


5.04.350 Advertising – Benches.

Every person engaged in the business of erecting or maintaining any bench upon which any kind of advertising matter is placed or displayed shall pay a license tax of $60.00 per year for the first advertising bench, plus $7.00 per year for each additional bench. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; Ord. 1390 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1304 § 1, 1975; Ord. 1287 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 15.35.)


5.04.360 Advertising – Searchlights.

Every person engaged in the business of operating any wheeled vehicle equipped with a searchlight for attracting attention shall pay a license tax of $5.00 per day for each vehicle so used. (1964 Code § 15.36.)


5.04.370 Advertising – Vehicles.

Every person engaged in the business of operating and who operates upon public streets or property any vehicle equipped with a musical device, loudspeaker, sign or other advertising matter and devices for attracting attention shall pay a license tax of $10.00 per day for each vehicle so used. (1964 Code § 15.37.)


5.04.380 Amusement and vending machines.

A. Vending and amusement machines shall be taxed as follows:

1. Every person who permits, upon premises over which that person has control, either as a business or in connection with any business, the use or operation of any pinball machine, or any mechanical, electric or electronic amusement or game machine or device, or other similar apparatus, the operation or use of which results from, or is permitted or allowed by, the insertion of any coin, slug or token of value into the machine, device, game or apparatus, or into any device or receptacle attached thereto, or by the payment of any fee or fees, shall pay a business license tax therefor of $75.00 per year or fractional part thereof for each such machine, device, game or apparatus.

2. Every person renting, leasing, owning or maintaining as a business, or in connection with any business, any jukebox or any other similar mechanical, electric, or electronic apparatus for the playing of records or music, any vending machine, or any washing machine or dryer, the operating or use of which results from, or is permitted or allowed by, the insertion of any coin, slug, or token of value into such apparatus or into any receptacle attached thereto, or by the payment of any fee or fees, shall pay a license tax therefor based upon the gross receipts derived within the city limits directly attributable to the machines located within the city in the amount of $30.00 for the first $5,000 or fractional part thereof, plus $1.50 for each additional $1,000 or fractional part thereof in excess of $5,000. The city may demand an audit of any such licensee and require him to submit a copy of the state sales and use tax returns filed relative to such machines.

B. Every coin- or token-operated device or contraption of any kind, including amusement machines, music boxes, and vending machines, shall have securely affixed thereto in a conspicuous location a statement of the name, address and telephone number of the person maintaining, operating or supplying same and shall be provided by the owner or operator of the machine at his expense.

C. Each person owning or operating such machines shall file with the license collector a complete list of all such machines or devices owned by him or under his control and operated within the city, including the kind of machine or device, its serial number, the location where each machine or device is to be operated, and such other information as the license collector deems necessary, and shall keep such list updated as machines are added or replaced. The owner or person in control of the business establishment wherein the machine or device, as described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, is located shall be responsible for the full amount of the business license tax required hereunder if the owner of the machine or device has not paid the license tax due and payable thereon; however, penalties shall not accrue against the business owner until the month following his original billing.

D. The license collector shall seal the coin opening or slots in a manner which will render inoperative the coin-operating device upon any vending machine or any mechanical amusement device which is available to the public for operation and to which no city identification is attached as required by this code. A filing and processing fee in the amount of $10.00 shall be paid to the license collector by the owner or operator of any such machine so sealed for the removal of any such seal. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any machine so sealed, without first submitting evidence to the license collector that a valid business license is in effect, and that the filing and processing fee has been paid. It is unlawful for any person other than the license collector to break or remove any such seal.

E. No license tax or identification shall be required for the maintenance or operation of any postage stamp machine, newsrack, as defined in CMC 11.32.020, or from machines vending items for $0.10 or less.

F. No license tax or identification shall be required for any vending machine which is entirely owned and supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where installed or his employees and is maintained solely for the convenience of employees, visitors or customers and from which profit is not derived by him or the business, either directly or indirectly.

The license taxes prescribed in this section for the first unit of gross receipts shall be due and payable at the time the application for the license is filed. Within 30 days after the end of the calendar year for which the license is issued or at the time an application is filed for the renewal of the license, whichever is earlier, the licensee or applicant, as the case may be, shall file a declaration under penalty of perjury specifying the total amount of gross receipts received from the operation of the machine during the license period. If any additional taxes are due upon the basis of the gross receipts from any such machine, the additional tax shall be paid at the time the declaration is filed and before any renewal license is issued.

As used in this section, “gross receipts” means the total number of dollars actually removed from the machine during the license period without any deduction whatsoever. (Ord. 1554, 1983; Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; Ord. 1527 §§ 1, 2, 1982; Ord. 1456 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1447 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 15.38.)


5.04.400 Bowling alleys or billiards and similar devices.

Every person engaged in a business where billiards or pool are played, or bowling or tenpin alleys, shuffleboard, table shuffleboards, skee-ball or any similar device not operated by the insertion of any coin, slug, or token into any receptacle attached thereto, shall pay a license tax of $40.00 per year for the first table, alley or device, plus $12.00 per year for each additional table, alley or device, and such license shall include the right to sell tobacco, confections, soft drinks and lunches. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.40.)


5.04.410 Carnivals, circuses and similar exhibitions.

Every person conducting, managing, or carrying on any transient fair, carnival, circus, theatrical performance or other similar exhibition shall pay a license tax of $190.00 per day while same is in operation. No license shall be issued under this section until an application has been made and a permit issued and in full force and effect as required by CMC Title 17. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.41.)


5.04.420 Contractors.

A. Every person engaged in the business of general engineering contractor or general building contractor and licensed as such by the state shall pay a license tax of $70.00 per year.

B. Every person engaged in the business of specialty contractor, including, but not limited to, electrical, plumbing, painting, roofing, etc., and licensed as such by the state, shall pay a license tax of $60.00 per year.

C. No license shall be required from an owner of property who builds or improves structures thereon or appurtenances thereto and does such work himself for his own use and occupancy, but shall be required when any building which is being constructed is intended or offered for sale or constructed as a business venture with the purpose of gain or profit. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.42.)


5.04.430 Dancing and entertainment.

A. Every person engaged in the business of conducting, maintaining or operating a public dance or cafe dance open to the public, with or without charge, shall pay an annual license tax of $150.00.

B. Every person engaged in the business of conducting a dance hall, night club, restaurant, hotel, cafe, coffee shop, cabaret, club, barroom, beer tavern, or beer garden, in which entertainment as defined in Chapter 5.28 CMC is conducted, shall pay an annual license tax of $100.00.

C. No license shall be issued under this section until an application has been made and a permit issued and in full force and effect as required by Chapter 5.28 CMC. (1964 Code § 15.43.)


5.04.440 Delivery/service vehicles.

Every person not having a fixed place of business in the city who makes retail deliveries in the city of any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by vehicle, or wholesale deliveries more frequently than twice each month, or who provides any service by the use of vehicles in the city and who serves regular customers on a regularly established route, shall pay an annual license tax of $45.00 per vehicle so used in the business in the city, except when a different license tax is specifically provided for by some other subsection of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.44.)


5.04.445 Fortune-telling.

Every person engaged in the business of fortune-telling as defined in Chapter 5.60 CMC shall pay a license tax of $300.00 per year. (Ord. 1609 § 3, 1985.)


5.04.450 Hospitals.

Every person engaged in the business of conducting, managing or operating a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, maternity home or any other place where care or treatment is provided shall pay a license tax of $50.00 per year, plus $4.00 per year for each bed. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.45.)


5.04.460 Laundromats.

Every person engaged in the business of operating a self-service laundry, laundromat or dry cleaners shall pay a license tax of $52.00 per year, plus $1.25 cents per year for each machine over 30. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.46.)


5.04.470 Manufacturers, wholesalers and industrial businesses.

Every person engaged in the business of manufacturing, warehousing or distributing any product, selling at wholesale or conducting any business considered to be of a manufacturing or industrial nature, unless otherwise expressly provided for elsewhere in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00, plus $5.00 per year for each employee of the first 24 employees in excess of one, plus $4.00 per year for each employee in excess of 25. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.47.)


5.04.480 Pawnbrokers.

Every person engaged in the business of pawnbroker shall pay a license tax of $150.00 per year. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.48.)


5.04.490 Professions.

All persons engaged in any business, profession or occupation hereinafter enumerated in this section, and other similar callings considered to be of a professional nature, shall pay an annual license tax based upon the average number of professional members and the average number of employees, computed as follows: for the first member of the firm practicing his profession, $52.00 per year, plus the sum of $30.00 per year for each additional professional, plus $8.00 per year for each of the first four employees, plus $6.00 per year for each additional employee. No license shall be required from a professional person under this section not having a fixed place of business within the city who is called upon to come to the city to render services on a nonrecurring basis:

A. Architects;

B. Attorneys;

C. Certificate public accountants;

D. Chiropractors;

E. Dentists;

F. Engineers (all types);

G. Funeral directors and morticians;

H. Ophthalmologists and oculists;

I. Optometrists;

J. Osteopaths;

K. Physicians and surgeons;

L. Podiatrists;

M. Psychiatrists;

N. Psychologists;

O. Public accountants;

P. Veterinarians. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.49.)


5.04.500 Rental accommodations.

Every person engaged in the business of conducting or operating a hotel, motel, rooming house, boardinghouse, lodging house, bungalow court, apartment house, inn, mobile home park, trailer court or any other accommodations for dwelling, sleeping or lodging in any place, whether occupied or not, shall pay an annual license tax of $38.00 for four or more rental units, plus $6.00 per year for each rental unit over four. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.50.)


5.04.510 Retail, services and general businesses.

A. Every person engaged in the business of selling to the general public at retail, goods, wares, merchandise or services, or conducting a business of a retail or service nature, unless otherwise expressly provided for in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 and 11.48.010, and all persons engaged in any business or occupation not specifically provided for elsewhere in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 and 11.48.010, shall pay an annual license tax of $52.00, plus $8.00 per year for each employee of the first four employees in excess of one, plus $6.00 per year for each employee in excess of five.

B. Every business vendor engaged in the business of selling to the general public at retail, goods, wares, merchandise or services at a city sponsored/cosponsored event may elect to pay a daily license tax of $15.00 as an alternative to subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 02-1890 § 3, 2002; Ord. 94-1774 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.51.)


5.04.520 Rubbish and junk collectors.

Every person engaged in the business of collecting, delivering, buying or selling or otherwise dealing in junk, salvage, rubbish, waste or garbage in the city from any premises in the city shall pay an annual license tax of $77.00 for the first vehicle, plus $64.00 per year for each additional vehicle so operated, and be subject to and governed by Chapter 8.08 CMC and any other regulatory laws or ordinances. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.52.)


5.04.530 Shoeshining stands.

Every person engaged in the business of operating a shoeshining or shoe-polishing stand shall pay a license tax of $15.00 per year. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.53.)


5.04.540 Skating rink.

Every person engaged in the business of operating any ice or roller skating rink shall pay an annual license tax of $180.00. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.54.)


5.04.550 Solicitors and peddlers.

A. Every person not having a fixed place of business in the city who engages in the business of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or services, or conducting surveys or polls, or any other form of activity involving canvassing, soliciting or peddling from house to house or place to place, or upon the streets and public places within the city, shall pay a license tax of $15.00 per day or $40.00 per calendar quarter, with no proration thereof, for each solicitor or peddler so engaged. No person shall be issued a license for carrying on the business set forth in this section unless a permit therefor, in full force and effect, has been issued by the finance director in accordance with the terms and provisions of Chapter 5.24 CMC.

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, the collector may issue a principal solicitor’s license to every person either employing or contracting with one or more individuals for solicitor’s services as hereinbefore defined. If a principal solicitor elects to use the provisions of this subsection, no principal solicitor’s license shall be issued until the applicant files with the collector a list of all solicitors employed or retained by the applicant or with whom the applicant has a contract, and unless the applicant executes an agreement that he will, within five days thereafter, notify the collector in writing of every change in personnel of those soliciting for him. In such an event, the solicitor’s license tax shall be included within the principal solicitor’s license tax, but each individual solicitor must obtain a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of Chapter 5.24 CMC. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to grant to a principal solicitor the privilege of soliciting unless there is maintained in full force and effect for each individual solicitor a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of Chapter 5.24 CMC. The license tax for a principal solicitor’s license shall be $200.00 annual tax, with no proration thereof. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.55.)


5.04.560 Taxicabs.

Every person operating any taxicab for carrying passengers for hire shall pay an annual license tax of $52.00 for the first vehicle so operated, plus $35.00 per year for each additional vehicle; provided, that no license shall be issued under this section until full compliance has been made and approval granted as required by Chapter 5.44 CMC. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.56.)


5.04.570 Theaters – Generally.

For conducting, managing or carrying on a motion picture theater or any other type theater or auditorium, the annual license tax shall be based on the number of spectator seats or car spaces as follows:

0 – 500 seats or spaces: $65.00

Over 500 seats or spaces: $0.20 each seat or space. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.57.)


5.04.580 Theaters – Motion picture makers.

Every person engaged in the business of taking motion pictures for professional or commercial use shall pay a license tax of $300.00 per day. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 15.58.)

Article III. Shoppers Lane Parking Improvement Area


5.04.590 Establishment.

A parking improvement area, denoted as “Shoppers Lane parking improvement area,” has been established by the ordinance codified in this article. (1964 Code § 17A.1.)


5.04.600 License tax – Subject businesses.

All businesses within the Shoppers Lane parking improvement area, except those exempt by law, are subject to the taxes imposed by this article. (1964 Code § 17A.2.)


5.04.610 License tax – Imposition.

There is imposed on all businesses within the Shoppers Lane parking improvement area a special business license tax, in addition to the business license tax required by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. The provisions of CMC 5.04.030 shall not relieve any business from the payment of the special business license tax provided for by this article, and the tax imposed hereby is in addition to any and all other taxes imposed by any other ordinance of the city. (1964 Code § 17A.3.)


5.04.620 License tax – Computation.

Taxes imposed by this article shall be computed according to the following rates and classifications: Each business within the Shoppers Lane parking improvement area shall pay an annual special business tax equal to one-half times the annual principal business license fee. (Ord. 1194 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code § 17A.4.)


5.04.630 Business licensing.

Businesses required to pay taxes under this article shall obtain licenses in accordance with the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (1964 Code § 17A.5.)


5.04.640 License tax – Payment – Procedure.

Taxes imposed by this article shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 and this article, in the same manner and at the same time as annual license fees. (1964 Code § 17A.6.)


5.04.650 License tax – Payment – Refusal.

No person shall fail or refuse to pay any tax imposed by this article, and all civil and criminal penalties and interest provided for in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580 shall apply to the taxes imposed by this article. (1964 Code § 17A.7.)


5.04.660 License tax – Contributions by exempt businesses.

Any business which is exempt by law from the payment of the tax or whose place of business is outside the Shoppers Lane parking improvement area may make a voluntary contribution to the parking improvement area for the purposes provided in this article. (1964 Code § 17A.8.)


5.04.670 License tax – Disposition.

The purposes for which the taxes imposed by this article shall be used, less the cost of collection, are the following: the construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the area. (1964 Code § 17A.9.)


5.04.680 Fund – Created.

There is created a special fund designated as the “Shoppers Lane parking improvement area fund” into which all revenues derived from taxes and contributions under this article, less the cost of collection, shall be placed, and such funds shall be used only for the purposes specified in CMC 5.04.670. (1964 Code § 17A.10.)


5.04.690 Fund – Expenditures.

The city council may annually approve a budget to include an estimate of expenditures to be made from the Shoppers Lane parking improvement area fund to carry out the purposes of CMC 5.04.670. (1964 Code § 17A.11.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to license for regulation and revenue all lawful businesses, see Government Code § 37101; for statutory provisions authorizing cities to license business in the exercise of the police power and for the purpose of regulation, see Business and Professions Code §§ 16000 – 16003. 


Chapter 5.06 RENTAL HOUSING

Sections:

5.06.010    Definitions.

5.06.020    Permit – Required.

5.06.030    Permit – Application.

5.06.040    Permit – Investigation.

5.06.050    Permit – Grant or denial.

5.06.055    Procedure for inspections.

5.06.060    Permit – Suspension or revocation – Grounds.

5.06.070    Appeal.

5.06.080    Violation and penalty.


5.06.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them:

A. “Boarding and rooming house” means a lodging house or other building or structure maintained, advertised, or held out to the public as a place where sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished to the whole or any part of the public, whether with or without meals. Such places shall include all buildings or structures which provide sleeping and living accommodations to three or more persons unrelated to the operator, which are not otherwise licensed under this title as an apartment house, hotel or motel.

B. “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed for residential purposes and approved by the city and improved with full utility services including connection to a public sewer or private septic tank. “Dwelling” includes single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings.

C. “Rental housing” means a building, dwelling, or structure advertised or held out to the public for rent or lease for sleeping or living accommodations. Rental housing includes boarding houses, rooming houses, apartment houses, dwellings, hotels and motels. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.020 Permit – Required.

Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, maintaining or conducting rental housing, regardless of the number of rental housing units, shall first obtain an annual inspection permit and pay an annual inspection and regulatory fee as established by resolution of the city council. The annual inspection and regulatory fee shall be in addition to and separate from any business license tax otherwise due pursuant to Chapter 5.04 CMC and shall be used solely to finance the cost of registration, inspection and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.030 Permit – Application.

Applications shall be submitted upon forms furnished by the finance director and shall be signed by the applicant. In addition to any other information which may reasonably be required by the finance director, the applicant shall show the true name of the applicant, his/her fictitious name or names, if any, his/her present residence address, his/her proposed business address in the city, the name under which the applicant conducted any similar business, if any, and the place of his/her residence at such time. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.040 Permit – Investigation.

The building official, health officer, police chief, fire chief and city planner, within the jurisdiction and duties of their particular departments, shall ascertain whether or not the premises to be used comply with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations concerning such premises. A report of the investigations required hereby along with the application and any recommendations made shall be referred to the finance director for action thereon. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.050 Permit – Grant or denial.

A. The finance director shall review the application, investigation reports and recommendations and shall deny the permit if he or she finds any of the following to be true:

1. That any of the information on the application has been deliberately falsified.

2. That the required inspection and regulatory fee has not been paid.

3. That the premises do not comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations concerning such premises.

B. If the finance director finds that there are no grounds for denial, he or she shall issue the permit. He or she may attach to such permit any conditions which are reasonably related to the grant in order to ensure that the public health, safety and general welfare are protected.

C. A rental housing inspection permit shall not preclude and the city may conduct subsequent inspections from time to time after issuance of a permit to ensure that the premises continue to be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Such inspections may be conducted pursuant to a regular inspection schedule or upon complaint received by the city. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.055 Procedure for inspections.

The following procedures shall be followed for all initial and subsequent inspections: 

A. Exterior Inspection. The city may inspect the exterior of rental housing at any time and without notice to the owner or tenants, provided the inspection is limited to what may be observed from the public right-of-way or from any property accessible to the general public (i.e., front yard).

B. Pre-Inspection Notice for Inspection of Interior Common Areas. Where the exterior inspection provided for in this chapter reveals evidence of possible violations within an interior common area of rental housing, the city may make an inspection of the interior common area. Prior to conducting an inspection of the interior common areas of rental housing (those areas generally limited to the owner, tenants, and their guests), the city shall give not less than five calendar days’ prior written notice to the owner and to the tenants of the date and time of the inspection. The city may provide written notice to the owner and tenants by mail or by the posting of the official notice in a common area of the premises. Prior notice to inspect shall not be required if (1) the inspection is based upon a complaint lodged with the city or (2) to determine whether a violation of this code exists which poses an immediate threat to public health or safety. Such inspection may include, but not be limited to, all hallways, stairways, lobbies, utility rooms, laundry rooms, storage rooms, recreation rooms, grounds, refuse areas, parking areas, building extensions, signs and other areas designated as common areas for the purpose of locating any violations of state or city laws, ordinances and regulations.

C. Pre-Inspection Notice for Interior Inspection of Rental Housing Units. Where the exterior or interior common area inspection provided for in this chapter reveals evidence of possible interior violations within a rental housing unit, the city may make an interior inspection of the unit. If the unit is occupied, the city official shall first present proper credentials to the tenant/occupant and request consent to enter, explaining the reasons for the interior inspection. If the unit is unoccupied, the city official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, occupant, or other person having charge or control of the unit and, if found, request consent to enter, explaining the reasons for the interior inspection. The city shall be authorized to inspect the interior of any rental housing unit for the purpose of enforcing state or city laws, ordinances and regulations only if:

1. Such inspection is at the request of or with the consent of the owner (if unoccupied) or tenant/occupant (if occupied);

2. Pursuant to an inspection warrant or other court order; or

3. Reasonable cause exists that the rental housing unit is so hazardous, unsafe, substandard or dangerous as to require immediate inspection without consent or a warrant to safeguard the public health or safety.

D. Post-Inspection Notice After Interior Inspection of Rental Housing Units. If an interior inspection of a rental unit is conducted, the city shall provide written notice to the tenant/occupant in each rental housing unit inspected pursuant to this chapter which, at a minimum, shall state that an inspection occurred and shall provide the address and telephone number where the tenant/occupant can get further information about the inspection. This notice may be provided by leaving it in the unit, by posting it at the premises, or by mailing by first class mail to the tenant/occupant or, if the unit appears unoccupied, to the owner. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.060 Permit – Suspension or revocation – Grounds.

A. Based upon evidence provided to the finance director, the city shall suspend or revoke a permit if it finds any of the following:

1. That the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions attached to the permit.

2. That the permittee has violated any of the standards or regulations of this title.

3. That the permittee, or premises involved, is in violation of applicable sections of state law or this code relating to the conduct of his or her business or maintenance of the premises.

B. No permit shall be revoked until after a hearing has been held before the city manager to determine just cause for such revocation; provided, however, that the finance director may order any permits suspended pending such hearing, and it is unlawful for any person to operate rental housing until the suspended permit has been reinstated by the city manager.

C. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five calendar days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such permit or against the business being conducted at the permitted premises, and shall state the time and place where such hearing will be held.

D. The notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering the same to such person or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the permit holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. In the event the permit holder cannot be found and the service of such notice cannot be made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at his place of business or residence, at least five calendar days prior to the date of such hearing. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.070 Appeal.

A. Any person aggrieved by the grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a permit may appeal that decision by filing a written notice of such appeal and the grounds therefor with the city clerk within 10 calendar days after the decision. Upon receipt of the appeal, the matter shall be set for review by the city council. No rights shall be exercised under any permit until the city council’s decision.

B. In considering and ruling upon any appeal of the petitioner, the city council shall judge the merits of the appeal based upon those grounds set forth in CMC 5.06.050 and 5.06.060.

C. The city council may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any decision, determination, or requirement of the finance director and city manager and may make such decisions or determinations or impose such conditions as the facts warrant, and may order that a permit be granted, denied, suspended or revoked in accordance with their ruling. The decision of the city council shall be final. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


5.06.080 Violation and penalty.

A. Every person who engages in the business of maintaining or conducting a rental housing unit without first obtaining a permit and paying an annual fee to do so to the city or who violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Any rental housing unit operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such rental housing unit and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining rental housing contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1980 § 1, 2012.)


Chapter 5.08 AMUSEMENTS, EXHIBITIONS, MEETINGS AND SHOWS1

Sections:

5.08.010    Permit – Required.

5.08.020    Permit – Application – Contents.

5.08.030    Permit – Application – Processing procedure.

5.08.040    Permit – Application – Distribution of copies.

5.08.050    Permit – Application – Investigation generally.

5.08.060    Permit – Application – Investigation reports.

5.08.070    Permit – Application – Council action.

5.08.080    Permit – Issuance prerequisites.

5.08.090    Bond or surety required.

5.08.100    Permit – Term – Nontransferability.

5.08.110    Permit – Suspension or revocation – General provisions – Notice.

5.08.120    Permit – Suspension or revocation – Appeal.

5.08.130    Hours of operation.

5.08.140    Use of public ways.

5.08.150    Lighting requirements.

5.08.160    Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.

5.08.170    Compliance with codes.

5.08.180    Prohibited acts.


5.08.010 Permit – Required.

No person shall establish, set up, maintain, exhibit, participate in, conduct or carry on in the city any boxing or wrestling exhibition, carnival, circus, fair, ferris wheel, marathon, menagerie, merry-go-round, museum, rodeo, trained animal show, traveling show, wild animal show, wild west show, revivals, tent shows and meetings or any other similar or related type of activity or parade, in whole or in part within the city, with or without a charge being made therefor, except in accordance with a permit to do so issued as provided in this chapter and in full force and effect. (1964 Code § 4.1.)


5.08.020 Permit – Application – Contents.

Any person desiring a permit authorizing any activity regulated by this chapter shall make application therefor to the city manager not less than 15 days prior to any regular city council meeting preceding the proposed date of first conducting such activity. The application shall be upon a form furnished by the city manager and shall set forth:

A. The name and address of the applicant;

B. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal corporate officers and the state of incorporation;

C. The name and address of the person to be in immediate charge of the place of activity at all times during its operation;

D. The name of any sponsoring organization and the names and addresses of the principal officers of such organization;

E. The dates of proposed showing or operation;

F. The location in which it is proposed to conduct the place of activity. A plot plan of the location and the surrounding streets to the nearest intersections shall be attached to the application bearing a scale of not more than one inch to 10 feet, and shall show the location of all residences, commercial structures, industrial structures, railroad tracks, streets, washrooms, toilets, seating arrangements, exits, the location of any liquefied petroleum gas installation and such other facilities relating to the public health, welfare and safety;

G. The names of the last three cities or other places in which the activity has been shown, operated or conducted immediately prior to the filing of the application;

H. The time and route of any parades proposed by the applicant within the city;

I. A list and a general statement of the content, operation, facilities and format of each type of entertainment, ride, game, exhibit or show to be carried on in connection therewith, and of any booth or facility for the sale or dispensing of food, drink or articles of any kind;

J. A statement that the applicant will directly control and supervise each activity proposed to be authorized under the permit sought and will be responsible for the conduct, operation and management thereof;

K. The name and address of a person who can be readily contacted in regard to the operation of the activity and who is able to contact the proposed applicant at all times;

L. A statement that the applicant has standard liability insurance policies with an insurance company or exchange authorized to do business in the state in the amounts of not less than $100,000/$300,000 public liability and $25,000 property damage;

M. A description of public washrooms and toilet facilities which will be available for use by employees and patrons and their numbers and locations;

N. Such other data as the city manager may reasonably require in the interests of public health, welfare or safety;

O. A statement certifying on penalty of perjury the correctness of the information given on the application and agreeing on behalf of the proposed applicant that there shall be full compliance of the applicant with all state and city laws in the conduct of the activities for which a permit may be granted;

P. Any permits required by this code or other ordinances of the city or the state laws. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 4.2.)


5.08.030 Permit – Application – Processing procedure.

An application for a permit required by this chapter shall be processed as provided in CMC 5.08.040 through 5.08.080. (1964 Code § 4.3.)


5.08.040 Permit – Application – Distribution of copies.

The city manager shall send copies of the application to the following city departments or to the governmental agency authorized to perform the appropriate services for the city:

A. Police;

B. Engineering;

C. Fire;

D. Building;

E. Planning;

F. Field operations;

G. Public recreation. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 1978; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 4.3.)


5.08.050 Permit – Application – Investigation generally.

Each department or governmental agency to which is referred a copy of the application shall inspect the same and shall thereafter be responsible for taking the steps reasonably required to ensure compliance by the applicant with applicable state laws and this code or any other city ordinances as well as other applicable rules and regulations pertaining to public health, welfare, peace and safety at all times while any permit subsequently issued is in force. (1964 Code § 4.3.)


5.08.060 Permit – Application – Investigation reports.

Each department or governmental agency referred to by CMC 5.08.050 shall report to the city manager. Such report shall disclose any discrepancies which appear in the application or any failure of a proposed operation to comply with applicable state or city laws and shall mention any problems which the proposed activity may reasonably be expected to pose for the people or government of the city. Such report shall further make recommendations for protecting the public peace, health, safety and welfare in the event a permit be issued. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 4.3.)


5.08.070 Permit – Application – Council action.

The city manager shall, as soon as practicable, submit his report and the report of the various departments to the city council, which shall consider the same as soon as practicable at any meeting occurring thereafter. The city council shall not grant any permit unless the conduct or maintenance of such amusement activity at the proposed location will not, in the reasonable judgment of the city council, endanger public peace, health, safety or welfare. In granting any permits, the council shall impose such conditions or requirements as it deems necessary to protect public peace, health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 4.3.)


5.08.080 Permit – Issuance prerequisites.

If the application is approved, the applicant shall file bonds and insurance policies or certificates thereof as required by this chapter and shall pay the appropriate business license tax of the city prior to the issuance of any permit. (1964 Code § 4.3.)


5.08.090 Bond or surety required.

The applicant for a license required by this chapter shall, in addition to payment of business license fees or taxes and permit fees established by the city, deposit with the city not later than 48 hours prior to the first day of conducting any activity and shall maintain for a period of 180 days after the termination of activities under such permit as may be issued by the city, a cash bond in the sum of $1,000 lawful money of the United States, or in lieu thereof shall post and maintain in full force and effect during such period a surety bond in the amount of $1,000. Such bond shall be issued by a surety company approved by the city attorney and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. Such bond shall, by its terms:

A. Insure payment to the city for any damage to city property occasioned by the operation of such activity or parade, including damages occasioned by the entrance into or exit from the city of the applicant or of the equipment, facilities or personnel of such activity as shall be permitted by the permit;

B. Insure the cleaning of the premises used for such activity and of the immediate surrounding properties and streets of such litter and debris as may result from the operation thereof, to return the lot to its original condition or better, unless otherwise agreed between the property owner and owner of the place of amusement;

C. Insure the removal, within 48 hours after the applicant leaves the city, of any signs, placards or advertising matter placed upon any property within the city by authority of any applicant or by any employee, agent of the applicant or by any person conducting or engaged in any activity covered by such permit;

D. Insure payment of any fines levied against the applicant for violation of this code or any other ordinance of the city or any state law while conducting activities in the city. (1964 Code § 4.4.)


5.08.100 Permit – Term – Nontransferability.

Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issue, unless otherwise provided by this code or any other applicable ordinances, and shall be nontransferable. (1964 Code § 4.5.)


5.08.110 Permit – Suspension or revocation – General provisions – Notice.

Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the city council at any time that it appears that the proposed or actual operation of the activity regulated by such permit will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance or to endanger public peace, health, safety or welfare, or in the event any permit required by law is revoked or suspended. Any such permit may be suspended in whole or in part at any time that the activity is conducted contrary to the permit or to any state or city law, or when any such activity or portion thereof is conducted so as to constitute a public nuisance or to disturb the peace or to be injurious to the public peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension shall become effective immediately upon delivery of written notice to the person in immediate charge of the activity or portion thereof affected by suspension, or if no such person is found upon the premises, immediately upon the posting of such notice in three prominent places near the entrances to the premises occupied, or the portion thereof affected, by an official representative of the city manager, city council or fire, police, health or building departments. Such posting shall be carried out in all cases and shall give notice of such suspension. Such notice shall, in general terms, state the reason for such suspension. Any person invoking such suspension shall immediately notify the city manager thereof. The city manager may, for good cause, cancel any suspension; but in all cases he shall promptly take such steps as are necessary to inform related city officials of the action taken and of the reason or reasons therefor. Upon delivery or posting of such notice of suspension in the manner specified, it is a misdemeanor for any person to operate, engage or participate in, except as a patron, any such activity as may be ordered suspended by such notice of suspension. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 4.6.)


5.08.120 Permit – Suspension or revocation – Appeal.

The city council shall decide all appeals by a permittee under this chapter from the suspension or revocation of a permit and shall hold a hearing on the appeal. At such hearing the permittee shall have an opportunity to show cause why such suspension or revocation should not be continued or made permanent and the decision of the city council shall be made within 48 hours after the conclusion of such hearing. (1964 Code § 4.7.)


5.08.130 Hours of operation.

No activity regulated by this chapter shall operate between midnight and 8:00 a.m. of the following morning. (1964 Code § 4.8.)


5.08.140 Use of public ways.

No activity regulated by this chapter or any equipment used in connection therewith shall be operated or located upon a public street, alley or easement; except, that a parade operating under specific authority from the city, in accordance with all terms and conditions of any permit granted for the same, may operate on public streets and alleys according to the terms of such permit. (1964 Code § 4.9.)


5.08.150 Lighting requirements.

The area around and between tents, facilities and equipment of any activity regulated by this chapter shall be well lighted at all times during the operation of such activity or any part thereof. An emergency lighting system approved by the building department to provide adequate lighting for orderly evacuation in event of disaster or emergency shall be provided by the permittee. The operation of any activity at any time when such requirements are not being fully met is prohibited. All lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from any adjoining residential property. (1964 Code § 4.10.)


5.08.160 Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.

No permittee under this chapter or other person shall sell or maintain for sale on the premises occupied for any activity regulated by this chapter any form of alcoholic beverage whatsoever, nor shall any permittee permit the sale, maintenance for sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on any premises while any activity regulated by this chapter is being operated or conducted thereon, unless specifically authorized to do so by the terms of a city permit. (1964 Code § 4.11.)


5.08.170 Compliance with codes.

Every permittee under this chapter shall comply with the building and fire codes of the city, this code and any other ordinances of the city and shall be responsible for compliance with such codes and ordinances by every activity carried on pursuant to such permit. Upon request the permittee shall furnish proof to the city that all equipment, rides, tents and structures utilized in connection with the activity have been inspected and are in compliance with applicable state and city laws and regulations, and shall cooperate with the inspection thereof by local police, fire, building, health or other public officials and personnel. (1964 Code § 4.12.)


5.08.180 Prohibited acts.

No person, including corporations, their officers, directors, agents or employees, shall engage in any activity prohibited by this chapter, or fail to perform any act required by this chapter, or conduct any activity contrary to the terms of any permit or contrary to any requirement or prohibition of this chapter, or knowingly make any materially false statement on any application for a permit required by this chapter. (1964 Code § 4.13.)1

For statutory provisions regarding the authority of cities to license shows, exhibitions and games, see Government Code § 37101. 


Chapter 5.12 BILLIARD PARLORS, BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES

(Repealed by Ord. 15-2046)


Chapter 5.16 CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS1

Sections:

5.16.010    Definitions.

5.16.020    Permit required – Exemptions.

5.16.030    Permit – Application.

5.16.040    Permit – Application – Fee.

5.16.050    Processing applications.

5.16.060    Permit – Decision.

5.16.070    Certificate – Application.

5.16.100    Solicitations permit – Form – Grant is not endorsement.

5.16.110    Time limits.

5.16.120    Permit – Nontransferable – Return.

5.16.130    Agents and solicitors for solicitation permit holders.

5.16.140    Permit – Revocation.

5.16.150    City council decision.

5.16.160    Report required.

5.16.170    Use of fictitious name – Fraudulent misrepresentation – Misstatements prohibited.

5.16.180    Renewals.


5.16.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them:

A. “Charitable” means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.

B. “Contributions” means and includes the words alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.

C. “Manager” means the city manager.

D. “Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, or joint-stock organization, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof.

E. “Promoter” means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign or solicitation.

F. “Religious” and “religion” as used in this chapter shall not mean and include the word “charitable” as defined in this section, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions and shall include the tenets and doctrines of churches and nonprofit corporations organized for religious purposes.

G. “Solicit” and “solicitation” means the request directly or indirectly of money, pledges, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, pledge, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this chapter. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, pledge, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea of representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as defined in this chapter:

1. Any oral or written request;

2. The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or publication;

3. The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith;

4. The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.020 Permit required – Exemptions.

A. No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable or religious purpose within the city without a permit or certificate authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary gain of any person, if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person.

B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the solicitation or collection of gifts, contributions, donations or subscriptions, or the promotion of any bazaar, sale or exhibition, or other act of appeal to the public for a charity, made by members of any religious or charitable organization for such religious or charitable organization which has been in existence and which has regularly maintained headquarters or a place of worship in the city for a period of at least five years next preceding the date on which such activity is begun. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.030 Permit – Application.

An application for a permit to solicit for charitable purposes shall be made to the city manager upon forms provided by the city. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the manager at least 30 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the manager may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:

A. The name, address, or headquarters of the person applying for the permit;

B. If applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant’s principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitations, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant’s records;

C. The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;

D. The names and addresses of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed;

E. The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;

F. An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations, including, if applicable, the specific location of any special or particular event such as a sale or bazaar;

G. The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation;

H. The estimated cost of the solicitation;

I. The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons;

J. An audited financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, said statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof, and the most recent Form 990, Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax and Form CT-2, Periodic Report to Attorney General of California, (if a tax exempt organization.) For good cause shown the manager may waive the requirement for an audited financial statement;

K. A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant;

L. A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement of the city or by any department or officer thereof;

M. A list of other cities or counties where similar permits have been applied for in the past two years, and whether each such permit was granted or denied or has ever been revoked;

N. Such other information of similar nature as may be reasonably required by the manager in order for him to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation;

O. In addition, any application for a permit to solicit for charitable purposes shall contain a statement that the actual cost of solicitation will not exceed 25 percent of the total amount to be raised, or if the cost will exceed said 25 percent an explanation of such excess and an estimate of the probable percentage;

P. The name, driver’s license number, addresses, date of birth and complete physical description of the field solicitors;

Q. The address of the location where the applicant’s financial books and records will be maintained;

R. The name, branch and address of the applicant’s bank. 

If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.040 Permit – Application – Fee.

Any application for a permit to solicit for charitable purposes shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city council on occasion by resolution. The fee shall be payable to the city treasurer. Where no investigation is required to ascertain the truth of the facts set forth in the application or whether the solicitation would be a fraud on the public, the fee may be waived. (Ord. 04-1906 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.050 Processing applications.

Applications that are not complete in every respect will be returned to the applicant without further processing and will not be approved until such time as all required information is submitted. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.060 Permit – Decision.

A. If the city manager finds that all of the information required in CMC 5.16.030 has been submitted and that he has no facts on which to conclude that any of the statements so submitted are false, he shall approve the application.

B. The city manager shall send to the applicant by certified mail the decision on the application within five days after the application is approved by the city. If the city manager denies the application, the decision shall be final unless a written appeal to the city council has been filed by the applicant with the city clerk within 15 days after the date on which the letter from the city manager has been deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.070 Certificate – Application.

An application for a certificate to solicit for religious purposes shall be made to the city manager either upon the form provided by the city or by any other written instrument. Such application shall be in the form of an affidavit and shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the time when the certificate applied for is intended to become effective; provided, that the city manager may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than 30 days prior to the effective date applied for. Said application shall contain the following information or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished or is not applicable:

A. The name, address and headquarters of the person applying for the certificate;

B. The church, church group, or other religious organization represented by applicant;

C. The religious purposes for which such certificate is requested;

D. The extent, if any, to which such solicitation is for a charitable purpose as defined herein;

E. The name and address of the person, or persons, who will be in direct charge of the conduct of the solicitation and of those who will be doing the actual soliciting;

F. The general outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation;

G. The time during which such solicitation shall be conducted, giving the beginning and ending dates;

H. The estimated cost of the solicitation;

I. A general statement of the basis for the applicant’s claim to be a religious organization or to be soliciting for a religious purpose;

J. A statement that the certificate requested will not be used as an endorsement by the city of the solicitation. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.100 Solicitations permit – Form – Grant is not endorsement.

Permits issued under this chapter shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the field solicitation is to be made, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city or by any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose of the solicitation, and the actual cost of solicitation (in percentage) for charitable purposes for the applicant’s last preceding fiscal year as determined from applicant’s audited financial statement or, if such statement is not available, the estimated cost of the proposed solicitation (in percentage). All permits must be signed by the manager. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.110 Time limits.

A. No certificate to solicit for religious purposes shall grant the right to solicit longer than 90 days from its date, but the manager may extend any such permit for not more than 60 additional days upon a showing that unnecessary hardship would be created by a failure to extend the original period for such additional days.

B. No permit to solicit for charitable purposes shall grant the right to solicit for such purpose for more than 60 days during any calendar year. (Ord. 1550 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.120 Permit – Nontransferable – Return.

Any permit issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable and shall be returned to the city, within two days of its date of expiration, together with all facsimile copies thereof. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.130 Agents and solicitors for solicitation permit holders.

All persons to whom permits or certificates have been issued under this chapter shall furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such solicitation. Such credentials shall include the name of the holder, the date, a statement describing said holder’s charitable or religious activity, a description of the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of the permit holder or of the holder’s chief executive officer, and the name, address, age, sex and signature of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued and the specific period of time during which said solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder. A copy of such proposed credentials must be filed with the manager when the application for a permit or certificate is filed and must be approved by him after investigation of the individuals involved before the permit or certificate may be issued. The manager may for cause, after hearing applicant, disapprove particular field solicitors and condition the issuance of any permit or certification thereon. No person shall solicit under any certificate or permit granted under this chapter without the credentials required by this section and a facsimile copy of said permit in his possession. Said credentials and said facsimile copy of the permit must be shown to all persons solicited and, upon request, to any peace officer of the city.

No agent or solicitor shall solicit contributions for any charitable or religious purpose for any person unless such person has been granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.140 Permit – Revocation.

Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the city manager if he determines that the permittee is not conducting the solicitation in accordance with the application upon which the permit was issued. The revocation shall be made by certified letter directed to the address of the applicant as stated on the application and shall include the reasons for revocation. The permit shall become null and void on the fifth day after the date on which the letter is deposited in the United States mail unless a written appeal to the city council has been filed by the applicant with the city clerk. If an appeal is timely filed, the permit shall remain in effect unless revoked by the city council. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.150 City council decision.

At its next regular meeting at least five days after an appeal has been filed by the applicant to a denial or revocation of a permit, the city council shall conduct a public hearing thereon. Immediately upon the conclusion of such hearing, it shall take any action upon an application that the city manager could have taken, or it shall approve or disapprove the revocation of the permit based on whether the permittee is conducting the solicitation in accordance with the application upon which the permit was issued. The time limits herein may be extended by the mutual agreement of the applicant and city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.160 Report required.

It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits for charitable solicitations under this chapter to furnish to the manager within 30 days after the solicitation has been completed, a detailed report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commission, and expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation. This report shall be available for public inspection at the manager’s office at any reasonable time; provided, however, that the manager may extend the time for the filing of the report required by this section for an additional period not to exceed 90 days upon proof that the filing of the report within the time specified will work unnecessary hardship on the permit holder. The permit holder shall make available to the manager, or to any person designated in writing by the manager as his representative for such purpose, all books, records, and papers whereby the accuracy of the report required by this section may be checked. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.170 Use of fictitious name – Fraudulent misrepresentation – Misstatements prohibited.

No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence; no person shall make or perpetrate any false statement, misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this chapter. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)


5.16.180 Renewals.

Whenever any renewal or extension is required and conditions are substantially the same as the previous application, such renewal may be applied for by attaching a statement to the existing application of the time required and any change in conditions. Such renewal application shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1983.)1

For statutory provisions regarding penalties for making false statements in reference to charitable solicitations, see Penal Code § 532d. Prior history: Ord. 1217, 1964 Code §§ 7.1 – 7.6. 


Chapter 5.18 VENDING OR SOLICITING AT HOLIDAY PARADE

Sections:

5.18.010    Definitions.

5.18.030    Holiday parade vendor/solicitor permit.

5.18.040    Limitation on number of permits.

5.18.050    Supplemental rules and regulations.


5.18.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Holiday parade” means the annual Covina Holiday Invitational Parade conducted in the month of December, sponsored by the city and occurring on certain designated streets within the city.

B. “Parade committee” means the committee of individuals, created by resolution by the city council, that is responsible for planning, promoting and conducting the holiday parade.

C. “Permit” means a valid holiday parade vendor/solicitor permit issued by the city.

D. “Vending” means the selling of or offering to sell any item of personal property, including foodstuffs and services.

E. “Solicitation” means the appeal to the public for gifts, contributions, donations or subscriptions. (Ord. 1423 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1358 § 1, 1977.)


5.18.030 Holiday parade vendor/solicitor permit.

Every person desiring a permit for the current year shall, on or before October 15th of each year, submit to the finance director an application for a holiday parade vendor/solicitor permit, which application:

A. Shall clearly identify the name and address of the applicant, shall state whether the applicant is an unincorporated association or a corporation, and shall set forth such other information pertaining to the organization as the finance director may require;

B. Shall be made in writing and addressed to the parade committee;

C. Shall set forth the proposed items to be sold and the area where such sales or solicitations are to be made; and

D. Shall set forth the number of persons who will be engaged in the sales or solicitations and shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of the supervisory person who shall be responsible for the applicant’s members actually engaged in vending or soliciting activities.

The finance director shall present all such applications, together with his recommendations, to the parade committee not later than the thirty-first day of October. Applicants shall be notified by the finance director of the granting or rejection of their applications for permits not later than November 5th of that calendar year. Any person aggrieved by decision of the parade committee may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. (Ord. 1423 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1358 § 1, 1977.)


5.18.040 Limitation on number of permits.

The parade committee shall have the right to limit the number of permits in order to ensure compatibility with the overall activities involved in the holiday parade event. The parade committee shall also have the right to limit the number of persons permitted to engage in vending or solicitation for each organization. The parade committee shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria in its consideration and granting of such permits:

A. The necessity of ensuring the public safety, health and general welfare;

B. The necessity of maintaining and ensuring traffic and crowd control in order that the holiday parade may progress unimpeded with an opportunity for all members of the public to view and enjoy the event; and

C. The necessity to ensure that the public is adequately served. (Ord. 1423 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1358 § 1, 1977.)


5.18.050 Supplemental rules and regulations.

Vendors and solicitors shall not be on the streets along the parade route where the holiday parade is actually in progress. No items shall be sold that might endanger the general welfare of the public or parade participants such as, but not limited to, peashooters, noisemakers, and horns. All pressurized balloon vessels shall be secured. The parade committee shall have the right to establish additional rules and regulations to be followed by vendors and solicitors on the day of the holiday parade in order to promote an orderly sales process, to prevent litter in the public streets, and to promote the general welfare of the city. Such rules and regulations shall be furnished to each applicant at the time it makes an application for a permit. (Ord. 1423 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1358 § 1, 1977.)


Chapter 5.20 CLOSING-OUT SALES

Sections:

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    Permit – Required.

5.20.030    Exemptions.

5.20.040    Permit – Application – Contents.

5.20.050    Permit – Issuance conditions.

5.20.060    Permit – Conditions.

5.20.070    Permit – Revocation.

5.20.080    Decision appeal.

5.20.090    Business license surrender required.

5.20.100    Violation – Misdemeanor and nuisance declaration.


5.20.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them:

A. “Close-out sale” means any sale, offer to sell or advertising for sale to the public or any part thereof of goods, wares or merchandise when such sale is anticipatory of the termination, liquidation, revision, wind-up, discontinuance, removal, relocation, dissolution, closing or abandonment of a business conducted at any location, including any sale or offer to sell or advertising for sale to the public or any part thereof of goods, wares or merchandise in stock which have been involved in any business failure or have been derived from any business which has been adjudicated bankrupt, has been closed, discontinued, liquidated or placed in receivership.

B. “Fire sale” means any sale, offer to sell or advertising for sale to the public or any part thereof of goods, wares or merchandise in stock which has been damaged or altered as the result of contact with or exposure to fire, smoke or water. (1964 Code § 9.1.)


5.20.020 Permit – Required.

It is unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a close-out sale or fire sale, as defined in CMC 5.20.010, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the license collector of the city in the manner hereinafter provided. (1964 Code § 9.2.)


5.20.030 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons:

A. Persons acting in their official capacities as public officials;

B. Persons acting pursuant to process issued by a court of competent jurisdiction;

C. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other periodical or publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that compliance has not been had with the provisions of this chapter. (1964 Code § 9.3.)


5.20.040 Permit – Application – Contents.

Any person desiring to advertise and conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall make a written application therefor, under oath, accompanied by a fee in an amount that may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council to the city license collector at least 15 days prior to the commencement of such sale. The application shall contain the following information:

A. Street address and type of building where such sale is to be held;

B. The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership, lease or sublease, and if by lease or sublease, the effective date of the termination of such tenancy and the name of the owner and sublessor, if any;

C. A copy of all advertisements proposed to be used in connection with such sale and a statement of the means or methods of advertising to be used in advertising such sale;

D. The facts in regard to the insurance, bankruptcy, insolvency, assignment, mortgage foreclosure, administration, receivership, trusteeship, removal, executorship removal or other cause advertised to be the reason for the proposed sale;

E. If the same implies that the business is closing, a statement that the applicant intends to close and remove from the premises and the time he intends to do so;

F. If the applicant has goods, wares or merchandise on order prior to 30 days preceding the date of application, proof of order must be attached. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; 1964 Code § 9.4.)


5.20.050 Permit – Issuance conditions.

A. The license collector shall not issue the permit if any of the following are found to exist:

1. That the applicant was granted a permit hereunder for a close-out sale within one year preceding the date of filing of the application;

2. That the applicant was granted a permit hereunder for a fire sale as a result of the same fire or catastrophe;

3. That either subsections (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section are true with respect to a business substantially in the same ownership as that applied for at the same premises;

4. That any representation made in the application is false;

5. That the applicant has not operated as a retail merchant at that location for at least 90 days prior to date of sale;

6. That the advertising set forth is false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect;

7. That the methods to be used by the applicant in conducting the sale are such as will work a fraud upon the purchaser.

B. The license collector may refuse a permit because of insufficiency of the information set forth in the application, but in such event the license collector shall grant the applicant permission to file an amended application. (1964 Code § 9.5.)


5.20.060 Permit – Conditions.

All permits granted under this chapter shall be conditional as follows:

A. That such permit shall be valid only for a period of 60 days from the date of issuance;

B. That such sale shall be held in strict conformity to any advertising or holding out relating thereto;

C. All advertising shall include:

1. The permit number issued to applicant;

2. The final date of such permitted sale;

D. That only goods, wares or merchandise may be sold which are physically located on the licensed premises on the date of application for the permit or on order prior to 30 days preceding the date of application for the permit to qualify as not being ordered in anticipation of such sale. (1964 Code § 9.6.)


5.20.070 Permit – Revocation.

The city license collector or the chief of police shall have the power to revoke at any time any permit granted under this chapter whenever any such sale is being conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or in such a manner as to deceive or defraud the public, or if:

A. The holder of any such permit has been guilty of any fraudulent practice in the conduct of the sale authorized by such permit;

B. The holder of any such permit has added or caused or permitted to be added goods, wares or merchandise not physically located on the licensed premises at the date of application or on order prior to 30 days preceding the date of application for the permit, and has offered such additions for sale under such permit;

C. The holder of any such permit has violated any of the provisions contained in this chapter or any conditions of his permit. (1964 Code § 9.7.)


5.20.080 Decision appeal.

Any administrative decision made pursuant to this chapter by the license collector or chief of police may be appealed in writing within five days thereafter to the city council which may affirm, modify or reverse the same. Until the city council decides, however, the administrative decision shall remain in effect. If no appeal is taken to the city council within five days, the administrative decision shall be final. (1964 Code § 9.8.)


5.20.090 Business license surrender required.

Prior to issuance of a close-out sale permit under this chapter, the permittee shall surrender to the city license collector without refund all other business licenses he may then hold applicable to the location and goods covered by such permit. (1964 Code § 9.9.)


5.20.100 Violation – Misdemeanor and nuisance declaration.

The violation of this chapter or any provision hereof is a misdemeanor, and the conduct or advertising of any sale regulated under this chapter without a valid permit is a public nuisance subject to abatement under law. (1964 Code § 9.10.)


Chapter 5.24 COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS

Sections:

5.24.010    Commercial solicitor defined.

5.24.020    Permit – Required.

5.24.030    Permit – Exception.

5.24.040    Permit – Application.

5.24.050    Permit – Investigation – Issuance.

5.24.060    Permit – Grant conditions.

5.24.070    Permit – Fees.

5.24.090    “No Solicitors” sign – Compliance required.

5.24.100    Permit – Duration – Renewal.

5.24.110    Permit – Transferability.

5.24.120    Permit – Exhibition.

5.24.130    Other requirements.

5.24.140    Decision appeal.

5.24.150    Permit – Suspension or revocation – Appeal.


5.24.010 Commercial solicitor defined.

“Commercial solicitor” means any person who engages in the business or occupation of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or services, or conducting surveys or polls, or any other form of activity involving canvassing, soliciting or peddling from house to house or place to place, or upon the streets and public places within the city. “Commercial solicitor” includes peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors, and all similar forms of commercial activity, but excludes charitable and religious solicitations and appeals. (1964 Code § 7.50.)


5.24.020 Permit – Required.

It is unlawful for any commercial solicitor to engage in such business activity within the city without first receiving a permit therefor from the finance director. (1964 Code § 7.51.)


5.24.030 Permit – Exception.

No permit shall be required for soliciting orders at wholesale in other than a residential zone or for making deliveries other than as a commercial solicitor to regular customers on regularly established routes. (1964 Code § 7.52.)


5.24.040 Permit – Application.

Before any permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, an application for such permit shall be filed with the finance director, shall be signed and verified by the applicant and accompanied by the fee required and shall set forth the following:

A. The name and address of the applicant;

B. The name and address of the person by whom employed, if any;

C. The nature of the business for which a permit is requested;

D. The place or areas where such business is to be conducted;

E. A brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be used in such business;

F. A personal description of the applicant;

G. Evidence of the identity of the applicant of such character as the police chief may require;

H. Fingerprints and thumbprints of the applicant;

I. Four small snapshots of the applicant;

J. Such other information in respect to the character and past and proposed activity of the applicant to enable the finance director and police chief to make a full and complete investigation. (1964 Code § 7.53.)


5.24.050 Permit – Investigation – Issuance.

The police chief and such other department heads as may be requested, within a reasonable time after the filing of an application, shall conduct such investigation as they may deem necessary concerning the application and the business proposed to be conducted and report their findings to the finance director. After such investigation and report, the finance director shall issue such permit if he finds the following to be true:

A. That all material facts in the application have been truthfully stated;

B. That the applicant has not previously been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude;

C. That the commercial solicitation will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or welfare, either by reason of the character of the applicant, the nature of the solicitation or the manner in which it is proposed to be conducted.

If he finds the above to be untrue, he shall deny such permit. (1964 Code § 7.54.)


5.24.060 Permit – Grant conditions.

The finance director may attach such terms and conditions to the grant of such permit as are not in conflict with any paramount law and as may be necessary or expedient to protect the public health, safety, morals or welfare. (1964 Code § 7.55.)


5.24.070 Permit – Fees.

The fee for issuing any permit under this chapter and the fee which shall be submitted with the application for permit under this chapter shall be established by the city council on occasion by resolution. The fees provided for herein shall be in addition to any license tax provided for in CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580. (Ord. 04-1906 § 4, 2004; 1964 Code § 7.56.)


5.24.090 “No Solicitors” sign – Compliance required.

It is unlawful for any solicitor within this chapter to ring the bell or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, flat, or apartment, or attempt to gain admittance to any building whereon a sign bearing the words “No Solicitors,” “No Solicitors or Peddlers” or words of similar import indicating that solicitors are not wanted on such premises is painted, affixed or exposed to public view. (1964 Code § 7.58.)


5.24.100 Permit – Duration – Renewal.

Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be of the same duration as the business license issued to such person or business. Any permit issued under this chapter may be renewed upon the filing of an application for the renewal with the finance director. Such application for renewal shall be in the same form as any application for an original permit and shall be issued or denied in a like manner as the original permit. (1964 Code § 7.59.)


5.24.110 Permit – Transferability.

No license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used by or assigned to any other person. (1964 Code § 7.60.)


5.24.120 Permit – Exhibition.

Any permit issued to any person who goes from place to place in the city for the purpose of carrying on the business permitted shall carry such permit at all times he is conducting such business and shall exhibit the same worn upon an outer garment in a conspicuous place. (1964 Code § 7.61.)


5.24.130 Other requirements.

Compliance with this chapter shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a business license so required by CMC 5.04.010 through 5.04.580, and any license issued contrary to this section shall be void. Compliance with this chapter shall not preclude the necessity of obtaining any other permits or licenses required by this code, any other ordinance of the city or other applicable law. (1964 Code § 7.62.)


5.24.140 Decision appeal.

In the event any person is aggrieved by any decision or action (other than revocation or suspension) of the finance director, such person may appeal such decision to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within 10 days from the date of such decision or action. If such an appeal is filed, the city council, within a reasonable time, shall review the matter and, after such hearing thereon as the council may require, it shall have the right to grant or refuse such permit based on the standards of CMC 5.24.050. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive, and there shall be no right of appeal therefrom. In the event that no appeal is filed within 10 days from a decision or action of the finance director, the aggrieved party shall have waived such right to appeal and the finance director’s action shall be final. (1964 Code § 7.63.)


5.24.150 Permit – Suspension or revocation – Appeal.

A. When any permit is issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter, such permit shall be revoked or suspended at any time thereafter by the finance director if he finds that any of the following are true:

1. That the continuance of the operations of the permittee are contrary to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;

2. That the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this code;

3. That the permittee has violated any terms or conditions of his permit;

4. That the permittee has misrepresented any material fact in obtaining the permit;

5. That the permittee has suffered conviction of any public offense involving moral turpitude.

B. Such revocation or suspension shall be by delivering a notice of revocation or suspension with the reasons therefor to the applicant by mailing the same to the address of the permittee as set forth in his application. CMC 5.24.140 notwithstanding, such revocation or suspension shall be effective and final within five days following the date of mailing, unless within such period of time the applicant files with the city clerk an appeal from such revocation or suspension. Whether or not there is an appeal, the permit shall immediately be returned to the finance director, together with all facsimile copies thereof.

C. If an appeal under this section is timely filed, the city council shall set for hearing the revocation or suspension of such permit and at the conclusion of such hearing may uphold such revocation or suspension or may reinstate the permit, based on the standards of this section. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive and there shall be no right of appeal therefrom. (1964 Code § 7.64.)


Chapter 5.28 ENTERTAINMENT

Sections:

Article I. Entertainment Permit

5.28.010    Purpose and intent.

5.28.020    Definitions.

5.28.030    Entertainment permit required.

5.28.040    Exemptions from the entertainment permit requirement.

5.28.050    Entertainment permit – Application and contents thereof.

5.28.060    Entertainment permit – Investigation and action thereon.

5.28.070    Entertainment permit – Duration.

5.28.080    Entertainment permit – Nontransferable.

5.28.090    Entertainment permit – Modification, suspension, or revocation.

5.28.100    Entertainment permit – Appeals.

5.28.110    Effect of denial and revocation of an entertainment permit.

5.28.120    Issuance of subsequent entertainment permit.

5.28.130    Service of notices and orders.

5.28.140    Operating standards.

5.28.150    Indemnification.

5.28.160    Permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.

5.28.170    Violations and penalties.

5.28.180    Cumulative remedies, procedures, and penalties.

Article II. Event Promoter

5.28.200    Event promoter permit required.

5.28.210    Exceptions from the event promoter permit requirement.

5.28.220    Event promoter permit – Application and contents thereof.

5.28.230    Event promoter permit – Investigation and action thereon.

5.28.240    Event promoter permit – Duration.

5.28.250    Event promoter permit – Nontransferable.

5.28.260    Event promoter permit – Modification, suspension, or revocation.

5.28.270    Event promoter permit – Appeals.

5.28.280    Effect of denial and revocation of an event promoter permit.

5.28.290    Issuance of subsequent event promoter permit.

5.28.300    Event promoter contract required.

5.28.310    Operating regulations and conditions.

Article I. Entertainment Permit


5.28.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the operation of establishments that provide or otherwise allow entertainment (including live and nonlive entertainment) for the public health, safety, and welfare. All permittees will be held responsible for controlling patron conduct in and around the establishments, making adequate provisions for security and crowd control, protecting the city’s youth from criminal activity and minimizing disturbances as a result of the operation of the entertainment.

It is the intent of this chapter to provide options to the chief of police in regulating the variety of businesses and events that provide or otherwise allow entertainment. The city council of the city of Covina finds that the imposition of conditions tailored to the particular establishment will allow the business or event to flourish while meeting the city’s public health and safety needs. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the words, terms, and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended.

Words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter that are not specifically defined shall be construed according to their context and the customary usage of the language.

A. “ABC license” means a license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages.

B. “Business day” means any day, Monday through Thursday, excluding city-observed holidays, during which all city departments are regularly open for business.

C. “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of Covina and his or her duly authorized designee.

D. “City” means the city of Covina.

E. “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Covina and his or her duly authorized designee.

F. “Dance” and “dancing” mean movement of the human body, accompanied by music or rhythm.

G. “Disorderly conduct” means any of the following: consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property, public drunkenness, obstruction of the free passage of pedestrians over public sidewalks, obstruction of the free passage of vehicles within the public right-of-way, littering, fighting, excessive noise in violation of Chapter 9.40 CMC, the operation of automobile audio systems in a manner that violates Chapter 9.40 CMC, and any other conduct that constitutes a public nuisance or violation of law.

H. “Entertainment” means any single event, a series of events, or an ongoing activity or business, occurring alone or as part of another business, to which persons (including patrons and guests) are invited or allowed to watch, listen, or participate or that is conducted for the purposes of holding the attention of, gaining the attention of, or diverting or amusing guests or patrons. Entertainment shall include both live entertainment and nonlive entertainment, as defined by this chapter.

I. “Entertainment establishment” means any building, structure, or premises where entertainment occurs.

J. “Entertainment permit” means a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing entertainment to be presented or allowed at an entertainment establishment.

K. “Event” means any activity requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter.

L. “Event promoter” and “promoter” mean any person who:

1. Is directly or indirectly responsible for the promotion of an event as evidenced by activities such as, but not limited to, contracting with the permittee or other person providing entertainment to serve as a promoter, selecting entertainment, advertising, or otherwise holding out the event to members of the general public, inviting participants to the event, or renting or controlling the event site; and

2. In exchange for engaging in the promotion of the event as explained in subsection (L)(1) of this section, directly or indirectly receives or shares in any of the following:

a. Admission or entrance fees paid by participants or spectators;

b. Compensation, consideration, or other revenue from sponsors, private donors or managers, and/or owners of the event site; or

c. Revenues from concessions or other sales at the event.

An “event promoter” and “promoter” shall not include any of the following:

3. A print, broadcast, or Internet medium that is paid solely for page space or broadcast time to advertise an event, but exercises no other financial or promotional responsibilities in connection with the event;

4. A ticket seller who sells admission tickets to an event from its own place of business, off site and in advance of such an event, but exercises no other financial or promotional responsibilities in connection with the event;

5. An entertainer or performer who is paid solely for his or her performance at an event;

6. An agent of an entertainer or a performer who is compensated solely for negotiating his or her client’s contract to perform at an event;

7. Any person who is permitted pursuant to this article that engages in event promoter activities for events that the person’s permit authorizes;

8. Any person that solely works for, or is exclusively employed by, any person permitted pursuant to this article, who in the course of his or her employment promotes events that are authorized under the permit issued to his or her employer;

9. An agent, officer, or employee of the city of Covina who engages in event promoter activities exclusively for the city of Covina in the course of his or her position as an agent, officer, or employee of the city.

M. “Hearing officer” means the city employee or other representative appointed by the city manager, or a designee thereof, to hear all timely appeals set forth in this chapter.

N. “Live entertainment” means every form of live performance – whether a single event, a series of events, or an ongoing activity or business, occurring alone or as a part of another business, to which persons (including patrons and/or guests) are invited or allowed to watch, listen, or participate or that is conducted for the purposes of holding the attention of, gaining the attention of, or diverting or amusing guests or patrons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance. Live entertainment shall include, but shall not be limited to:

1. Presentations by single or multiple performers, such as hypnotists, pantomimes, comedians, musical song or dance acts (including karaoke performances), plays, concerts, any type of contest; sporting events, exhibitions, carnivals, rodeos, or circus acts; demonstrations of talent; shows, revues; and any other similar activities.

2. Presentation of recorded music played on equipment that is operated by an agent or contractor of the entertainment establishment, commonly known as a “disc jockey” or “DJ.”

3. Dancing to live or recorded music (whether by performers, patrons, or guests).

O. “Manager” means any person performing the type of duties generally performed by a general manager or supervisor, an assistant manager or supervisor, or a security manager or supervisor, including, but not limited to, the following: supervising employees or agents of the permittee; making business decisions about the permittee’s public entertainment business, including, but not limited to, hiring, disciplining or firing employees, and contracting with agents or other persons; making decisions regarding the resolution of significant operational issues that arise during the permittee’s hours of operation; making final decisions about the scheduling of the permittee’s employees or agents; having primary responsibility for the opening or closing of the permittee’s entertainment establishment; and being a person to whom permittee’s employees and agents direct any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this code for responses to directives, questions, or requests for information.

P. “Nonlive entertainment” includes any form of entertainment that is not defined as “live entertainment.” Nonlive entertainment shall include, but shall not be limited to, jukeboxes, MP3 players, billiard tables, arcade or other electronic gaming devices, pinball machines, and televisions.

Q. “Patron” means any person present at the entertainment establishment, whether such person is a paying customer or guest. “Patron” does not include owners or employees of the entertainment establishment.

R. “Permittee” means the holder of an entertainment permit and any persons required to be permitted under the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such persons are actually so permitted.

S. “Performer” means any person who performs any live entertainment.

T. “Person” means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons.

U. “Premises” means the location of an entertainment establishment.

V. “Reasonable efforts” means the adoption, posting, and enforcement of operating policies that are consistent with the requirements of this code and any permits, license, and approvals for an entertainment establishment, the documented training of employees and contractors in the carrying out of the establishment operating policies, the provision of adequate number of licensed security personnel at the entertainment establishment, notifying the Covina police department of apparent criminal activity at the entertainment establishment, and the taking of all additional measures, consistent with sound business judgment, necessary to accomplish the required result.

W. “Responsible person” means the permittee (including any person for whom information was required to be provided for an entertainment permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 and an event promoter permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.220), owner, proprietor, manager, assistant manager, promoter, or other person exercising control over the operation of an entertainment establishment, whether or not that person is a named permittee.

X. “Special event” means entertainment conducted on private property where all of the following circumstances exist:

1. The premises or location where the entertainment is to be conducted is not the subject of an existing entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

2. The person sponsoring or offering the entertainment is not in the business of regularly offering entertainment to the public;

3. Entertainment will only be offered for a limited period of time, not to exceed five calendar days;

4. The entertainment is not a recurring or regularly scheduled event or celebration. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.030 Entertainment permit required.

Unless exempted pursuant to CMC 5.28.040, it is unlawful for any person to provide, permit, allow, or otherwise suffer any form of entertainment without a current and valid entertainment permit for said form of entertainment, issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.040 Exemptions from the entertainment permit requirement.

A. The following types of entertainment and events are exempt from the entertainment permit required by this chapter. However, an exemption does not relieve any person providing or allowing entertainment from complying with all other applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those regulating occupancy loads, noise levels, disturbances of the peace, and other public nuisances.

1. The presentation of ambient or incidental recorded music played on radio, stereo, music recording machine, MP3 player, or other similar device without a disc jockey, so long as no other entertainment (including dancing) as defined in this chapter is provided or allowed and that there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

2. Entertainment provided for those guests individually invited and admitted to a private event (such as a wedding, reception, recital, or celebration) at a residence where there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment, and where the entertainment is not audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the premises upon which the entertainment is occurring.

3. Performances at educational institutions as defined by the California Education Code where such performances are part of an educational or instructional curriculum or program. This does not exempt such institutions from any other approval, permit, or license otherwise required by law.

4. An adult-oriented business, as defined in Chapter 9.30 CMC, that has and is operating in accordance with a current and valid adult-oriented business regulatory permit issued pursuant to Chapter 9.30 CMC.

5. Nonamplified entertainment, excluding any form of dancing (whether by performers, patrons, or guests), conducted in any establishment or venue with a maximum occupancy of 49 or fewer persons, so long as the actual occupancy does not exceed 49 persons and there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

6. Entertainment consisting of five or fewer televisions (with the sound emanating solely from the internal speakers of said televisions) in any establishment or venue with a maximum occupancy of 49 or fewer persons, so long as the actual occupancy does not exceed 49 persons, where there is no other form of entertainment provided at said entertainment establishment (including, but not limited to, dancing by performers, patrons, or guests), and there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

7. Amusements, exhibitions, meetings, and shows operating pursuant to and in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.08 CMC.

8. Entertainment sponsored by the city of Covina or any agency of the city of Covina. The leasing or subleasing of the real property to an entertainment establishment does not constitute sponsorship of the entertainment by a public agency.

B. Any person providing or sponsoring the following entertainment shall not be exempt from the requirement for an entertainment permit, however, shall be exempt from payment of the entertainment permit fee. Said person shall not be exempt from payment of any fees associated with fingerprinting unless otherwise exempt by law.

1. Entertainment conducted or sponsored by any corporation, organization, bona fide club, society or association that is exempt from taxation pursuant to United States Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) and that holds meetings in the city other than for such entertainment at regular stated intervals; when all proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used exclusively for the benevolent, charitable, religious, literary, or educational purposes of such organization, club, society, or association. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.050 Entertainment permit – Application and contents thereof.

A. Every person wishing to provide or allow entertainment as defined in this chapter shall file an application with the chief of police on forms approved by the chief of police at least 60 calendar days prior to the commencement of the offering of such entertainment. Such application shall, at a minimum, set forth the following information:

1. The name (if applicable) and address of the particular place for which the entertainment permit is desired;

2. The name(s), residence(s), business address, and telephone number(s) of the applicant(s), and, if the applicant(s) is/are a corporation, limited liability company, general or limited partnership, or any other fictitious entity, the name(s), residence(s), and telephone number(s) of:

a. All directors and officers of the corporation or limited liability company;

b. All persons who own or hold 10 percent or more of an ownership interest in the corporation or limited liability company;

c. All persons who are members or managers of the limited liability company;

d. All persons who are partners in the general partnership;

e. All persons who are general partners in the limited partnership;

3. A fully dimensioned, scaled and detailed floor/site plan of the premises where the entertainment will be provided or allowed. The floor/site plan must adhere to any ABC license, all land use regulations, including any conditions of any applicable conditional use permit or other land use entitlement applicable to the entertainment establishment or premises whereon the entertainment will be presented, and shall depict, at a minimum, the following:

a. The location of primary entrances and exits for patron use;

b. The location of all emergency exits;

c. The location and dimensions of any area used for entertainment (including, but not limited to, stage, dance floor, amusement machines, pool tables, televisions, etc.);

d. The location and dimensions of any fixed and/or mobile bar(s);

e. The location and square footage of the alcohol storage area;

f. The location of all restrooms and dressing rooms;

g. The location and seating capacity of all areas where tables and/or chairs will be placed for patron use;

h. The maximum occupancy for all areas as approved by the city building official;

i. The location of the parking area provided for patrons;

j. The location of the designated queuing area (interior and exterior, as applicable), including the location of any stanchions or other barriers;

k. The posting locations of any required security guards;

l. The location of all security cameras; and

m. Such other information as the chief of police deems necessary for the proper processing and review of the floor/site plan, for fulfilling the goals of this chapter, and/or for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare;

4. The proposed opening date and hours of operation of the entertainment establishment;

5. A detailed description of the specific type(s) of proposed entertainment, and the dates and times when the entertainment will be provided or allowed;

6. For special events, as defined by this chapter, the date or dates, hours, and location of the proposed entertainment;

7. A statement as to whether an event promoter will participate in the entertainment establishment;

8. The name, permanent address, and a copy of a valid government issued identification card for any event promoter organizing, overseeing, or otherwise promoting an entertainment event;

9. A statement as to whether food or alcoholic beverages or both are to be served or permitted upon the premises and, if so, the type and provisions for dispensing same for all hours of operation. A copy of the menu listing the food and/or alcoholic beverages that are served during all hours of operation will be sufficient for compliance with this subsection;

10. A security plan (subject to the approval of the chief of police) that shall address, at a minimum, the following items:

a. The name, address, telephone number, and copy of Covina business license for who will be providing required security services. If security services will be provided by a private patrol operator (as defined by California Business and Professions Code Section 7582.1), applicant must provide a copy of the Covina private patrol operator permit as issued pursuant to Chapter 5.40 CMC);

b. A description and/or photograph of the uniform/clothing to be worn by the security personnel. Said uniform/clothing shall be approved by the chief of police and shall not resemble a uniform of any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the city;

c. Procedures for management of queuing lines;

d. Procedures for counting the number of occupants entering and exiting the entertainment establishment for purposes of complying with and enforcing approved occupancy limits;

e. The method for establishing a reasonable ratio of employees to patrons, based upon activity level, in order to ensure adequate staffing levels to monitor beverage sales and patron behavior;

f. Procedures for verifying the age of patrons for purposes of alcohol sales;

g. Procedures for ensuring that servers monitor patrons to ensure that drinking limit/potential intoxication is not exceeded. This procedure should include a description of the procedure the server would use to warn, or refuse to serve, the patron;

h. Procedures for handling obviously intoxicated persons;

i. Procedures for the provision of alternate transportation services to patrons. This may include procedures for access to a telephone, the provision of a list of taxi services, or other service that will ensure the safe travel of any patron, particularly those who are intoxicated, in leaving the entertainment establishment;

j. Procedures for handling patrons involved in fighting, arguing, disruptive behavior, or loitering about the entertainment establishment and/or the immediate adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented, or used under agreement by the permittee;

k. Procedures for contacting the Covina police department regarding observed or reported criminal activity; and

l. Such other information as the chief of police deems necessary for the proper processing and review of the security plan, for fulfilling the goals of this chapter, and/or for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare;

11. The proposed security arrangements for the safety and control of patrons (including within all adjacent rights-of-way and parking areas);

12. The name or names of the person or persons managing or supervising the proposed entertainment, or any business or premises wherein the entertainment is proposed to be located;

13. A statement indicating whether the applicant and/or any person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this section has ever had a permit for the same or any similar business denied, suspended, or revoked anywhere, and, if so, the circumstances, time and place of such denial, suspension, and/or revocation. The denial, suspension, revocation, or cancellation of any ABC license shall be considered as included for purposes of this subsection;

14. A statement indicating whether the applicant and/or any person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this section has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony and, if so, the details of such conviction;

15. The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which it is proposed to provide or allow entertainment;

16. Written consent for the proposed entertainment on the premises from the owner of the real property on which the entertainment is to be conducted;

17. Such other information as the chief of police deems necessary for the proper processing and review of the application, for fulfilling the goals of this chapter, and/or for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare; and

18. The signature, under penalty of perjury, of the applicant and of all persons for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section.

B. Each application submitted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee that shall be established (and modified from time to time) by resolution of the city council.

C. The applicant and all persons for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to subsections (A)(2) and (A)(12) of this section shall submit a complete set of fingerprints to the chief of police in a manner and form approved by the chief of police. Any fees for the fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.060 Entertainment permit – Investigation and action thereon.

A. Determination of Completeness. The chief of police shall, within 15 calendar days, review the submission of any application for an entertainment permit and supporting documents to determine if the application contains all of the requisite information set forth in CMC 5.28.050. Any application that is missing information required pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 or that is not accompanied by the requisite fee shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed by the chief of police. In such case, the chief of police shall issue a notice of incompleteness to the applicant specifying the information that is missing resulting in the incomplete application.

B. Investigation. Upon receipt of a complete entertainment permit application (and requisite fees), the chief of police shall conduct a thorough investigation of the application. The chief of police may request supplemental investigation, information, reports, and/or recommendations pertaining to relevant zoning, building, health, safety, fire, law enforcement, or other factors from any appropriate department of the city or other appropriate agency.

Among other things, the chief of police shall be required to check local and state summary criminal history information, including CLETS/NCIC, and to certify whether disqualifying criminal history has been discovered. Accordingly, pursuant to Penal Code Sections 11105 and 13300, the city council explicitly authorizes the chief of police to obtain such information as it relates to disqualifying convictions or conduct related to the crimes and offenses described in this chapter.

C. Approval. The chief of police shall, within 60 calendar days of the submission of a completed application for an entertainment permit (including payment of applicable fees), approve the issuance of an entertainment permit, subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (E) of this section, unless he or she determines:

1. Except for permits issued pursuant to CMC Title 14, other approvals, permits, licenses, or inspections are required for the activities at the subject premises or real property for which the permit is sought and the applicant and/or owner of the subject real property have not yet acquired same;

2. The issuance of the permit and conduct of the entertainment at the proposed location is inconsistent with federal, state, and/or local laws, rules, regulations, and/or any existing permit or land-use entitlement;

3. That issuance of the permit at the proposed location will constitute an undue burden on the neighborhood because of its proximity to residences, inadequate parking, or other neighborhood circumstances and, irrespective of reasonable conditions that could be imposed thereon, will otherwise interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the neighborhood by its residents and guests;

4. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 has, within the past seven years, been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor crime involving moral turpitude or which is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a proprietor, manager, or other responsible person for an entertainment establishment;

5. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 has a history of committing, permitting, or failing to prevent significant violations of federal, state, or local law, or of any license or permit, in connection with an entertainment establishment in any jurisdiction for which he or she was an owner, operator, or otherwise responsible person;

6. Based upon the information before the chief of police, the applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 has knowingly provided false or misleading information, or has otherwise omitted information in the application or in any amendment or report required to be made under this chapter;

7. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 has had an entertainment permit denied or revoked within the 12 months preceding the current application;

8. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 owes the city of Covina a fee authorized by CMC 5.28.050(B), an administrative penalty resulting from a violation of any provision of this chapter or of a condition of any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other fee related to the business establishment (including, but not limited to, false alarm fines, fees, or later charges authorized pursuant to Chapter 8.20 CMC); and/or

9. The application is otherwise incomplete.

D. Denial. In the event the chief of police does not approve an entertainment permit, the chief of police shall issue a written notice of denial to the applicant notifying the applicant of the denial and the reasons therefor within 60 calendar days of the submission of a completed application for an entertainment permit (including payment of applicable fees). The notice of denial shall also advise the applicant of the applicant’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal) as set forth in CMC 5.28.100.

E. Conditions of Approval. Entertainment permits shall be subject to conditions in order to ensure compliance with this chapter, applicable federal, state, and local law, and otherwise to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

1. If the applicant or any person for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 has been issued an ABC license, conditional use permit, other special permit, or land-use entitlement applicable to the entertainment establishment or the entertainment sought to be provided or allowed, conditions placed thereon shall constitute additional conditions of the entertainment permit issued under authority of this chapter.

a. The chief of police may require an applicant for an entertainment permit to demonstrate compliance with applicable conditions of existing ABC license, conditional use permit(s), other special permit(s), and/or land-use entitlement(s) prior to the issuance of the entertainment permit or may issue the permit conditioned on the applicant obtaining any other additional necessary special permit or other city, county, or state approval.

2. The operating standards set forth in CMC 5.28.140 shall constitute conditions of any entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

3. The acquisition of any permit required under CMC Title 14 for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, modification, or demolition of any building, structure, electrical system, mechanical system, or plumbing system, or any part(s) thereof, that facilitates the entertainment being authorized under the entertainment permit shall be a condition of approval for any entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

4. The chief of police may, based upon specific and articulable facts reasonably related to ensuring the public health, safety, and welfare, impose conditions upon an entertainment permit (including the security plan) relating to the operation of the entertainment establishment including, but not limited to:

a. The days, hours and locations of operation;

b. Restrictions designed to prevent minors from obtaining alcoholic beverages, such as separate entrances, exits, and restroom facilities on the premises;

c. The number and age of persons allowed on the premises;

d. Whether licensed security guards are required, and, if so, how many;

e. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly conduct within the entertainment establishment, parking areas, and adjacent public rights-of-way;

f. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to remove trash attributable to the establishment or its patrons in and around the entertainment establishment, the surrounding neighborhood, and the adjacent public rights-of-way;

g. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to prevent the entertainment and its patrons from disturbing the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood;

h. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to prevent its patrons from engaging in disorderly conduct in the surrounding neighborhood;

i. Whether the chief of police must receive advance notice of the date of a particular event if that event is not held as part of the regularly scheduled events of the business; or

j. Other matters related to the public health, safety, and welfare;

5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the chief of police to place conditions upon the permit that are more restrictive than the conditions of any applicable conditional use permit, special permit, or land-use entitlement, or of any applicable operating standard;

6. No condition may be imposed upon any entertainment permit that conflicts with federal, state or local law, or that conflicts with the permittee’s ABC license; however, nothing in this subsection is intended to prevent the chief of police from imposing any condition related to the age of patrons inside an entertainment establishment with an ABC license if the ABC license does not address that issue. The intent of this subsection is to allow the sale and service of food to minors in a bona fide eating establishment (ABC license types 41, 47, and various club licensed premises) with reasonable conditions imposed to prevent curfew violations and to protect minors from alcohol and other criminal activity;

7. Conditions shall be listed on, or attached to, the entertainment permit;

8. The imposition of any conditions other than those imposed by subsections (E)(1), (2), and (3) of this section is subject to appeal in accordance with the time constraints and provisions set forth in CMC 5.28.100. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.070 Entertainment permit – Duration.

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, entertainment permits issued pursuant to this chapter are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.

B. An entertainment permit issued for a special event is valid for the term stated in the permit, but in no event for a period greater than one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.080 Entertainment permit – Nontransferable.

No person shall assign or transfer any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter to another person or another location, and any attempt to assign or transfer any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall render the entertainment permit null and void and shall be immediately surrendered to the chief of police. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.090 Entertainment permit – Modification, suspension, or revocation.

A. General. The chief of police may modify the conditions of an entertainment permit or may suspend or revoke any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the chief of police makes any of the following findings and/or determinations:

1. There exists any ground for denial of the entertainment permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.060;

2. The permittee or other responsible person has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted a material fact in the application for the entertainment permit or any report or records required to be filed by law;

3. Entertainment has been conducted at the entertainment establishment in a manner contrary to the entertainment permit or conditions thereof;

4. The permittee or other responsible person has failed to comply with one or more conditions of the permit, or any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency (including any conditions of an ABC license);

5. The permittee or other responsible person has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of the city, county of Los Angeles, state of California, or the United States of America, in the course of exercising any rights under the entertainment permit;

6. The permittee or other responsible person has operated an entertainment establishment or otherwise caused or allowed entertainment in violation of any notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation issued pursuant to this chapter;

7. The permittee or other responsible person has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance resulting from any act performed in exercising any rights under the entertainment permit; and/or

8. The continued operation under the entertainment permit (and any applicable conditions) would endanger, disrupt, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city, its residents or guests, and/or the general public, or would otherwise constitute a public nuisance.

B. Order of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation. Where the chief of police has determined that the conditions of an entertainment permit shall be modified or that an entertainment permit shall be suspended or revoked, the chief of police shall provide written notice of his or her decision to the permittee.

1. Order of Modification. The chief of police shall serve a written order of modification upon the permittee stating the grounds for the modification, the specific modifications being imposed upon the entertainment permit, the effective date of the modified conditions, and the permittee’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal).

2. Order of Suspension. The chief of police shall serve a written order of suspension upon the permittee stating the grounds for the suspension, the length of the suspension, the effective date of the suspension, and the permittee’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal).

a. An entertainment permit may be suspended for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days per violation, and no more than 90 calendar days per suspension.

3. Order of Revocation. The chief of police shall serve a written order of revocation upon the permittee stating the grounds for the revocation, the effective date of the revocation, and the permittee’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal).

C. Effective Date of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation.

1. General. Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, any order of modification, suspension, or revocation issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become effective, and the permittee shall adhere to such order, after the expiration of 10 calendar days following service of the order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation.

a. Every person to whom a permit has been issued under this chapter shall immediately surrender his or her permit to the chief of police upon the effective date of its revocation.

2. Summary Modification, Suspension, or Revocation. The chief of police may summarily and immediately modify, suspend, or revoke an entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if the chief of police determines that any ground for modification, suspension, or revocation set forth in subsection (A) of this section exists to the extent or degree that it creates an imminent peril or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of the patrons, guests, or general public. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C)(1) of this section, any modification, suspension, or revocation pursuant to this subsection shall be effective immediately; however, a written order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation as set forth in subsection (B) of this section must be served upon the permittee within three business days of the summary action.

a. Where the chief of police has taken summary action pursuant to this subsection (C)(2), he or she may also require the immediate closure of the entertainment establishment and dispersal of all patrons for the remainder of that day’s operations.

b. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with any directive issued by the chief of police under authority of this subsection (C)(2).

c. Pursuant to CMC 5.28.100(C), a summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to this section is not stayed pending an appeal. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.100 Entertainment permit – Appeals.

A. Request for Appeal. Any applicant for an entertainment permit that has received a notice of denial, any permittee that has received an entertainment permit subject to conditions of approval pursuant to CMC 5.28.060(E), and any permittee that has received an order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal said notice or order by filing a request for an appeal with the city clerk, and tendering a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council, within 10 calendar days of service of the notice, order, or conditions of approval. The request for an appeal must be made in writing and must contain, at a minimum, the following information:

1. The name of all appellants and the address of the applicable entertainment establishment where the appellant was authorized (or was seeking to be authorized) to provide or allow entertainment pursuant to the entertainment permit (or entertainment permit application) subject to the notice or order;

2. The date of the imposition of conditions, or of denial, modification, suspension, or revocation by the chief of police;

3. A statement as to all grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable a hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy; however, a permittee may only appeal a summary modification, suspension, or revocation based upon the grounds for the modification, suspension, or revocation and not the chief of police’s determination that such grounds existed to the extent or degree that it creates an imminent peril or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of the patrons, guests, or general public;

4. The signature of each appellant under penalty of perjury as to the contents of the request for appeal.

B. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal and payment of the appeal fee(s) constitutes a waiver of the right to contest the imposition of conditions, a notice of denial or order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation, and such conditions, notice and/or order shall be deemed final and binding.

C. Stay of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation. Where a request for an appeal has been timely filed (and all fees therefor timely tendered), any modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit imposed pursuant to CMC 5.28.090(A) and (B) shall be stayed pending the resolution of the appeal by the hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. However, the filing of an appeal shall not stay any summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit imposed pursuant to CMC 5.28.090(C)(2).

D. Upon timely receipt of a request for an appeal and applicable fees, the city clerk shall set this matter for consideration before the hearing officer no later than 30 calendar days from receipt of the request and payment of applicable fees. The city clerk shall issue written notice to the appellant(s) of the date, time, and location of the appeal hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing.

1. If the request for an appeal seeks to challenge a summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit, the city clerk shall set the matter for consideration before the hearing officer no later than 10 business days from receipt of the request and payment of applicable fees. The city clerk shall issue written notice to the appellant(s) of the date, time and location of the appeal hearing at least five calendar days prior to the hearing.

E. Any request by an appellant to continue an appeal hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than two business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause or on his/her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar days without stipulation by all parties.

1. Notwithstanding this subsection (E), if the appeal seeks to challenge a summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit, the hearing officer may not continue the hearing on his/her own motion for more than five business days without stipulation by all parties.

F. Appeal Hearing. Appeal hearings conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the following:

1. The appeal hearing shall proceed solely on those issues or defenses raised in the request for an appeal filed by the appellant(s), and all matters not contested in said request shall be deemed admitted into evidence;

2. The chief of police shall have the burden to establish the grounds for the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, or revocation that has been contested by the appellant by a preponderance of the evidence. The notice of denial and/or the orders of modification, suspension, and/or revocation (and all documents or reports relied upon and/or prepared in relation to the notice or order) shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the grounds for the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, or revocation. The chief of police will have the right to present additional written and/or oral evidence in support of the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, and/or revocation subject to the appeal;

3. The appellant(s) may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the office of the city clerk at least three business days prior to the hearing. If the appellant(s) elects to appear at the hearing by written declaration, the chief of police shall not be required to attend or participate at the hearing, and may instead submit a written response to the hearing officer to be considered at the time of the hearing;

4. The appellant, if present at the hearing, shall be given an opportunity to testify and to present written and/or oral evidence relating to the matters raised in the appellant’s request for an appeal, and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine any documents and witnesses presented by the chief of police in support of the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, and/or revocation subject to the appeal. The chief of police will also have the right to examine and cross-examine any documents and witnesses presented by the appellant(s). The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing. If additional evidence is presented at the hearing by any party, the hearing officer may continue a hearing on his or her own motion if additional time is required for the review or presentation of evidence, or to otherwise ensure due process to all parties;

5. The city, at its discretion, may record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording;

6. If the appellant(s) fails to appear, or to otherwise submit a written declaration or any admissible evidence contesting the existence of all grounds for the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, or revocation subject to the appeal, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the appellant(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the initial conditions of approval, notice, or order is deemed final and binding;

7. After exhaustion of all administrative remedies, judicial review of a final administrative action is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 et seq. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.110 Effect of denial and revocation of an entertainment permit.

A. If an application for an entertainment permit is denied or revoked by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no application for an entertainment permit submitted by the same applicant or any person for whom information was required to be provided for the denied or revoked entertainment permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.050 shall be considered by the chief of police for a period of 12 months from the date of denial or revocation.

B. If an application for an entertainment permit is revoked by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no application for an entertainment permit at the same premises as named in an application or entertainment permit shall be considered by the chief of police for a period of 12 months from the date of denial or revocation.

C. Exception. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the chief of police may consider an application for an entertainment permit in less than the stated period if the application is accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the previous application no longer exist. This exception does not apply to permits that have been revoked. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.120 Issuance of subsequent entertainment permit.

Applications for a new entertainment permit for the same location as authorized in a current and valid entertainment permit shall be submitted and processed in the same manner and time frames as set forth in CMC 5.28.050 and 5.28.060. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.130 Service of notices and orders.

A. Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice or order required by this chapter may be served upon any responsible person by personal delivery or by first class mail. The date of service shall be the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle.

1. Any order of suspension or order of revocation, in addition to being served upon a responsible party in accordance with subsection (A) of this section, shall also be posted at or upon the main entry of the entertainment establishment subject to the order.

B. Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice or order issued by mail to a responsible person shall be sent to the mailing address listed on the application for an entertainment permit or a request for an appeal (or any other address provided by the responsible person for purposes of receiving mail). Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.140 Operating standards.

Unless otherwise exempt from the requirement for an entertainment permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, all entertainment establishments shall strictly adhere to the following operating standards:

A. Hours of Operation.

1. Except as otherwise provided in an approved entertainment permit, all entertainment establishments shall be closed and all patrons shall vacate the premises between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

2. Except as otherwise provided in an approved entertainment permit, all live entertainment at an entertainment establishment shall cease at least 30 minutes prior to the scheduled closing time for the establishment or 1:30 a.m., whichever is earlier.

B. Posting and Exhibition of Entertainment Permit.

1. The permittee holding an entertainment permit shall keep a copy of the entertainment permit (along with all applicable conditions thereon) posted in a conspicuous location at the entertainment establishment named in the entertainment permit.

2. Any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be kept in a readily accessible place and shown upon request to any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code.

C. Security. Responsible persons for an entertainment establishment shall maintain on the premises of the entertainment establishment and shall strictly adhere to a written security plan submitted in accordance with CMC 5.28.050(A)(10) and approved by the chief of police.

1. Unless otherwise set forth in the approved security plan or as a condition of an entertainment permit, responsible persons for an entertainment establishment shall provide at least one uniformed, state licensed security guard for every 50 persons on the premises of an entertainment establishment and within any queue to enter the establishment (a) commencing at least 30 minutes prior to scheduled entertainment or 9:00 p.m., whichever is earlier, and (b) lasting until all activity at the entertainment establishment has ceased and all patrons have cleared the establishment and parking area.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no responsible person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any security personnel to, and no security personnel shall, be in possession of any firearm while on duty at the entertainment establishment.

3. Unless otherwise set forth in the approved security plan or as a condition of an entertainment permit, in addition to any security required pursuant to an approved security plan, an entertainment permit, and/or this section, each entertainment establishment shall provide a minimum of one parking lot attendant with a reflective vest or other clothing/uniform approved by the chief of police to monitor activities commencing at least 30 minutes prior to scheduled entertainment and lasting until all activity at the entertainment establishment has ceased and all patrons have cleared the establishment and parking area.

4. Each responsible person (including security personnel) shall use reasonable efforts to cause the orderly dispersal of individuals in the vicinity of the entertainment establishment (including the parking area and rights-of-way adjacent to the establishment) at closing time, and shall not allow individuals to congregate within 50 feet of the establishment in a disorderly fashion.

5. No responsible person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer, and no security personnel shall, sit at the bar, consume alcoholic beverages or any controlled substance, be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any controlled substance, or engage in any other violations of law while on duty at the entertainment establishment.

6. Each entertainment establishment shall install, use, and maintain in good working condition a video security system capable of viewing and recording events at the entertainment establishment as approved by the chief of police. The video security system must be clearly identified and approved within the security plan submitted in accordance with CMC 5.28.050(A)(10). The video security system shall be on and operating at all times during business hours and until all activity at the entertainment establishment has ceased and all patrons have cleared the establishment and parking area. The video security system shall be of such to provide images of such a resolution as to clearly identify individuals for later identification.

a. The entertainment establishment shall ensure that at least one employee or other person is present on the premises during normal business hours with the necessary knowledge and skill to operate the video security system so that he or she is able to provide the Covina police department copies of video recordings immediately upon request.

b. Responsible persons shall preserve the video security system’s recorded information of each business day for a period of not less than 10 business days thereafter for the Covina police department’s review in connection with a criminal or other investigation.

D. Queues. Queuing lines shall be managed in an orderly manner and all disruptive and intoxicated persons shall be denied entry. Any queue located on the exterior of a building shall not obstruct the entry or exit doors of adjacent businesses and residences, and shall be located in such a manner that the adjacent sidewalk has at least three feet of unobstructed clearance. All requisite city approvals and permits shall be obtained prior to placing or using any stanchions, rope, balusters, or similar barriers for queues.

E. Alcoholic Beverages on Premises. No person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any alcoholic beverage at an entertainment establishment unless otherwise authorized pursuant to and in compliance with a current and valid ABC license (unless otherwise exempt from such license).

1. All responsible persons for the entertainment establishment shall be responsible for verifying the age of those persons desiring to purchase and/or consume alcoholic beverages at the establishment in order to ensure compliance with state law restricting the age of the sale and consumption of alcohol to those 21 years of age and older. This verification process may include such techniques as the manual checking of identification by a trained employee, the use of an identification scanner or similar device, or other method as approved in the security plan.

F. Nuisances. Responsible persons shall not cause, allow, permit, or suffer any nuisance condition at the entertainment establishment, parking area, or adjacent public right-of-way. Such nuisances include, but are not limited to, disorderly conduct, disturbances of the peace, public drunkenness, consumption of alcohol in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, loitering, public urination, lewd conduct, and possession, use, or sales of controlled substances.

G. Graffiti. Any graffiti painted or marked upon the premises of an entertainment establishment or any adjacent area under the ownership, possession, or control of the responsible person for the entertainment establishment shall be removed or painted over within 24 hours of its application.

H. The premises shall not be operated as an adult-oriented business as defined in Chapter 9.30 CMC.

I. There shall be no public telephones located on the exterior of the premises of an entertainment establishment. All interior pay phones shall be designed to allow outgoing calls only.

J. Maximum Occupancy. A sign indicating the maximum occupancy as approved by the city shall be posted as directed by the city building official. No responsible person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any person to enter or remain in the entertainment establishment (or any area thereof) in excess of the approved maximum occupancy.

K. Reporting Requirement. Responsible persons shall notify the chief of police, in writing, within five calendar days of:

1. Any enforcement action either proposed or actually taken by Alcohol Beverage Control against the entertainment establishment or any responsible person in connection with the entertainment establishment. As used herein, “enforcement action” includes, but is not limited to, the issuance of any “309 Letters,” the issuance of a criminal citation to an officer/member, employee, or agent of the responsible persons for alleged violations of law at the entertainment establishment, as well as the initiation of an administrative or civil action against the entertainment establishment or responsible persons for alleged violations of law at the entertainment establishment. “Violations of law” as used herein includes failures to comply with regulations that govern liquor licenses and the premises for which they are issued;

2. Any conditions at the entertainment establishment that substantially affect the public safety which the responsible persons (including any manager and security personnel) know or reasonably should know exist at the time of occurrence;

3. Any incidents of disorderly conduct as defined by this chapter, including any possession, use, or sale of controlled substances, that have been brought to the attention of responsible persons, or that otherwise the responsible persons know or reasonably should know to have occurred at the entertainment establishment.

L. Event Promoters. No responsible person shall use, hire, employ, or avail himself or herself of the service of an event promoter, as defined in this chapter, for an entertainment establishment unless the event promoter has a current and valid event promoter permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Article II of this chapter (commencing with CMC 5.28.200).

1. Responsible persons shall maintain a copy of any contracts or agreements between the entertainment establishment or responsible persons and the event promoter on file at the entertainment establishment for a period of not less than two years. The two-year period shall commence on the later of the last day of operation of the specific event being promoted or the contract’s/agreement’s expiration date.

M. Responsible persons shall provide consent for and access by any person responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code to enter any portion of the entertainment establishment, without charge, at any time during normal business hours or during which any operations are occurring at the entertainment establishment in order to verify compliance with any entertainment permit (including an approved security plan and ABC license), the provisions of this chapter or any other portion of this code, or any other applicable law or regulation.

1. A permittee and all responsible persons shall fully cooperate with any investigation conducted in order to verify compliance with any entertainment permit (including an approved security plan and ABC license), an event promoter permit, the provisions of this chapter or any other portion of this code, or any other applicable law or regulation. Cooperation shall include, but shall not be limited to, allowing investigators the immediate opportunity upon request to review any video, writing, or other record required pursuant to the provisions of an entertainment permit or other applicable license or permit, this chapter, or any other provision of law, and providing a copy of said video, writing, or other record within 72 hours.

N. A permittee and responsible persons shall be responsible for all activities occurring on the premises of an entertainment establishment (including parking areas), including those conducted by employees, managers, event promoters, and other persons acting for the benefit of the entertainment establishment, as well as by the patrons. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.150 Indemnification.

Permittees and all responsible persons shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims, actions or damages suffered by any person or persons by reason of or resulting from any negligence of the permittee or its agents, employees, or patrons or on account of any act or omission of the permittee in its exercise of its entertainment permit or use of any premises in connection with such permit. In the event any suit or action is brought against the city, the permittee and all responsible persons shall, upon notice of the commencement thereof, defend the same, at no cost or expense to the city, and promptly satisfy any final judgment adverse to the city or to the city and the permittee jointly; provided, that in the event the city determines that one or more principles of governmental or public law are involved, the city retains the right to participate in such action. The above liability shall not be diminished by the fact, if it be a fact, that any such death, injury, damage, loss, cost or expense may have been, or may be alleged to have been, contributed to by the negligence of the city or its officers, employees, or agents; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the permittee to indemnify the city against liability for damages arising out of bodily injury to persons or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of the city, or its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.160 Permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.

Unless an earlier expiration date is specified in the terms or conditions of the permit itself, any permit for dance and/or entertainment in the city or for any billiard parlor or billiard or pool tables in the city issued before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be valid for one year from the effective date of this section and shall terminate thereafter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, all permits issued for dance or entertainment in the city or for a billiard parlor or billiard or pool tables in the city before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be subject to suspension, modification, or revocation pursuant to the provisions of CMC 5.28.090. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.170 Violations and penalties.

A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any order or notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

B. Any person who defaces, alters, or removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

C. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city attorney or city prosecutor from prosecuting a violation of this chapter as an infraction, at his/her discretion, as set forth in Chapter 1.16 CMC.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city attorney or city prosecutor from bringing a civil action, at his/her discretion, to seek the abatement of any violation of this code or any nuisance activity at an entertainment establishment.

E. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any city enforcement officer from issuing an administrative citation for violations of the provisions of this chapter, as set forth in Chapter 1.26 CMC.

F. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.

G. Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, any condition or activity caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision, restriction, or requirement of this chapter or any notice, order, or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city by any and all means (civil, administrative, and/or equitable) as provided by law or in equity. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.180 Cumulative remedies, procedures, and penalties.

Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies, procedures, and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to any others available under city, state, or federal law. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)

Article II. Event Promoter


5.28.200 Event promoter permit required.

Unless exempted pursuant to CMC 5.28.210, it is unlawful for any person to be an event promoter or to engage in event promotion activities in the city without first having obtained an event promoter permit from the chief of police. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.210 Exceptions from the event promoter permit requirement.

An event promoter permit shall not be required for any person promoting entertainment that is otherwise exempt from an entertainment permit as provided in Article I of this chapter. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.220 Event promoter permit – Application and contents thereof.

A. Every person wishing to be an event promoter or engage in the activities of an event promoter in the city shall file an application with the chief of police on forms approved by the chief of police at least 30 calendar days prior to the commencement of the engaging in such activities. Such application shall, at a minimum, set forth the following information:

1. The name(s), residence(s), business address, and telephone number(s) of the applicant(s), and, if the applicant(s) is/are a corporation, limited liability company, general or limited partnership, or any other fictitious entity, the name(s), residence(s), and telephone number(s) of:

a. All directors and officers of the corporation or limited liability company;

b. All persons who own or hold 10 percent or more of an ownership interest in the corporation or limited liability company;

c. All persons who are members or managers of the limited liability company;

d. All persons who are partners in the general partnership;

e. All persons who are general partners in the limited partnership;

2. A copy of a current and valid government issued driver’s license or identification card for each person providing information pursuant to this section;

3. A copy of the applicant’s current and valid Covina business license to engage in the activities of an event promoter;

4. The name and address of the venue(s) for which the applicant will be engaging in the activities of an event promoter;

5. A copy of the current and valid entertainment permit for the venue(s) for which the applicant will be engaging in the activities of an event promoter;

6. The name(s) of any person(s) who will be managing or supervising the event and/or venue for which the applicant will be serving as an event promoter;

7. Whether the applicant and/or any person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this section has ever had a permit for the same or any similar business denied, suspended, or revoked anywhere, and, if so, the circumstances, time and place of such denial, suspension, and/or revocation;

8. Whether the applicant and/or any person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this section has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony and, if so, the details of such conviction;

9. The signature, under penalty of perjury, of the applicant and of all persons for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to this section;

10. Such other information as the chief of police deems necessary for the proper processing and review of the application, for fulfilling the goals of this chapter, and/or for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. Each application submitted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee that shall be established (and modified from time to time) by resolution of the city council.

C. The applicant and all persons for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to this section shall submit a complete set of fingerprints to the chief of police in a manner and form approved by the chief of police. Any fees for the fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.230 Event promoter permit – Investigation and action thereon.

A. Determination of Completeness. The chief of police shall, within 10 calendar days, review the submission of any application for an event promoter permit and supporting documents to determine if the application contains all of the requisite information set forth in CMC 5.28.220. Any application that is missing information required pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 or that is not accompanied by the requisite fee shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed by the chief of police. In such case, the chief of police shall issue a notice of incompleteness to the applicant specifying the information that is missing resulting in the incomplete application.

B. Investigation. Upon receipt of a complete event promoter permit application (and requisite fees), the chief of police shall conduct a thorough investigation of the application. The chief of police may request supplemental investigation, information, reports, and/or recommendations pertaining to relevant zoning, building, health, safety, fire, law enforcement, or other factors from any appropriate department of the city or other appropriate agency.

Among other things, the chief of police shall be required to check local and state summary criminal history information, including CLETS/NCIC, and to certify whether disqualifying criminal history has been discovered. Accordingly, pursuant to Penal Code Sections 11105 and 13300, the city council explicitly authorizes the chief of police to obtain such information as it relates to disqualifying convictions or conduct related to the crimes and offenses described in this chapter.

C. Approval. The chief of police shall, within 30 calendar days of submission of a completed application for an event promoter permit, approve the issuance of an event promoter permit, subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (E) of this section, unless he or she determines:

1. Other approvals, permits, licenses, or inspections are required in order for the applicant to engage in the activities of an event promoter as set forth in the application, including, but not limited to, an entertainment permit for the venue for which the applicant will be serving as an event promoter;

2. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 has, within the past seven years, been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor crime involving moral turpitude or which is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a proprietor, manager, or other responsible person for an entertainment establishment;

3. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 has a history of committing, permitting, or failing to prevent significant violations of federal, state, or local law, or of any license or permit, in connection with an entertainment establishment for which he or she was an owner, operator, or otherwise responsible person;

4. Based upon the information before the chief of police, the applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 has knowingly provided false or misleading information, or has otherwise omitted information in the application or in any amendment or report required to be made under this chapter;

5. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 has had an event promoter permit denied or revoked within the 12 months preceding the current application;

6. The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 owes the city of Covina a fee authorized by CMC 5.28.220(B) or an administrative penalty resulting from a violation of any provision of this chapter or of a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and/or

7. The application is otherwise incomplete.

D. Denial. In the event the chief of police does not approve an event promoter permit, the chief of police shall issue a written notice of denial to the applicant notifying the applicant of the denial and the reasons therefor within 30 calendar days of the submission of a completed application for an event promoter permit. The notice of denial shall also advise the applicant of the applicant’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal) as set forth in CMC 5.28.270.

E. Conditions of Approval. Event promoter permits shall be subject to conditions in order to ensure compliance with this chapter, applicable federal, state, and local law, and otherwise to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

1. The conditions imposed upon any entertainment permit, ABC license, conditional use permit, other special permit, or land-use entitlement applicable to the entertainment establishment for which the applicant shall be engaging in the services of an event promoter shall constitute conditions of the event promoter permit issued under authority of this chapter.

a. The chief of police may require an applicant for an event promoter permit to demonstrate compliance with applicable conditions of existing entertainment permit, ABC license, conditional use permit(s), other special permit(s), and/or land-use entitlement(s) prior to the issuance of the event promoter permit or may issue the permit conditioned on the applicant obtaining any other additional necessary special permit or other city, county, or state approval.

2. The operating regulations and conditions set forth in CMC 5.28.310 shall constitute conditions of any event promoter permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

3. The chief of police may, based upon specific and articulable facts reasonably related to ensuring the public health, safety, and welfare, impose conditions upon an event promoter permit relating to the operation of the entertainment establishment including, but not limited to:

a. The days, hours and locations of entertainment being provided;

b. Restrictions designed to prevent minors from obtaining alcoholic beverages, such as separate entrances, exits, and restroom facilities on the premises;

c. The number and age of persons allowed on the premises;

d. Whether licensed security guards are required, and, if so, how many;

e. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly conduct within the entertainment establishment, parking areas, and adjacent public rights-of-way;

f. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to remove trash attributable to the establishment or its patrons in and around the entertainment establishment, the surrounding neighborhood, and the adjacent public rights-of-way;

g. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to prevent the entertainment and its patrons from disturbing the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood;

h. Specific measures the permittee must undertake to prevent its patrons from engaging in disorderly conduct in the surrounding neighborhood;

i. Whether the chief of police must receive advance notice of the date of a particular event if that event is not held as part of the regularly scheduled events of the business; or

j. Other matters related to the public health, safety, and welfare.

4. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the chief of police to place additional conditions upon the event promoter permit that are more restrictive than the conditions of any applicable entertainment permit, conditional use permit, special permit, or land-use entitlement, or of any applicable operating regulation and condition.

5. No condition may be imposed upon any event promoter permit that conflicts with federal, state or local law.

6. Conditions shall be listed on, or attached to, the event promoter permit.

7. The imposition of any conditions other than those imposed by subsections (E)(1) and (2) of this section is subject to appeal in accordance with the time constraints and provisions set forth in CMC 5.28.270. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.240 Event promoter permit – Duration.

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, event promoter permits issued pursuant to this chapter are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.

B. An event promoter permit issued for a special event is valid for the term stated in the permit, but in no event for a period greater than one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.250 Event promoter permit – Nontransferable.

No person shall assign or transfer any event promoter permit to any other person issued pursuant to this chapter, and any attempt to assign or transfer any event promoter permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall render the event promoter permit null and void and shall be immediately surrendered to the chief of police. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.260 Event promoter permit – Modification, suspension, or revocation.

A. General. The chief of police may modify the conditions of an event promoter permit or may suspend or revoke any event promoter permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the chief of police makes any of the following findings and/or determinations:

1. There exists any ground for denial of the event promoter permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.230;

2. The permittee or other responsible person has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted a material fact in the application for the event promoter permit or any report or records required to be filed by law;

3. The permittee or other responsible person has failed to comply with one or more conditions of the event promoter permit, or any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency (including any conditions of an entertainment permit or ABC license) issued for the venue for which the permittee is serving as an event promoter;

4. The permittee or other responsible person has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of the city, county of Los Angeles, state of California, or the United States of America, in the course of exercising any rights under the event promoter permit or the entertainment permit issued for the venue for which the permittee is serving as an event promoter;

5. The permittee or other responsible person has engaged in the activities of an event promoter in violation of any conditions of approval, notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation issued pursuant to this chapter;

6. The permittee or other responsible person has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance resulting from any act performed in exercising any rights under the event promoter permit or the entertainment permit issued for the venue for which the permittee is serving as an event promoter; and/or

7. Continued activities under the event promoter permit (and any applicable conditions) would endanger, disrupt, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city, its residents or guests, and/or the general public, or would otherwise constitute a public nuisance.

B. Order of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation.

1. Where the chief of police has determined that the conditions of an event promoter permit shall be modified or that an event promoter permit shall be suspended or revoked, the chief of police shall provide written notice of his or her decision to the permittee in the same manner as that set forth for the modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.090.

2. The effective date of a modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an event promoter permit shall be the same as that set forth for the modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.090. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.270 Event promoter permit – Appeals.

A. Request for Appeal. Any applicant for an event promoter permit that has received a notice of denial, any permittee that has received an event promoter permit subject to conditions of approval pursuant to CMC 5.28.230, and any permittee that has received an order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an event promoter permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal said notice or order by filing a request for an appeal with the city clerk, and tendering a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council, within 10 calendar days of service of the notice, order, or conditions of approval. The procedures and timelines for an appeal shall be the same as those set forth for an appeal of a modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.100. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.280 Effect of denial and revocation of an event promoter permit.

A. If an application for an event promoter permit is denied or revoked by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no application for an event promoter permit submitted by the same applicant or any person for whom information was required to be provided for the denied or revoked event promoter permit pursuant to CMC 5.28.220 shall be considered by the chief of police for a period of 12 months from the date of denial or revocation.

B. Exception. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the chief of police may consider an application for an event promoter permit in less than the stated period if the application is accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the previous application no longer exist. This exception does not apply to permits that have been revoked. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.290 Issuance of subsequent event promoter permit.

Applications for a new event promoter permit for the same promoter providing services for the same location as authorized in a current and valid event promoter permit shall be submitted and processed in the same manner as set forth in CMC 5.28.220 and 5.28.230. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.300 Event promoter contract required.

A. No event promoter shall promote an event except pursuant to a written contract executed between the event promoter and the person hiring the event promoter which may include, but is not limited to, the owner, manager, lessee, or renter of the entertainment establishment or premises where the event is scheduled to occur.

B. The contract shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

1. The complete name, address, telephone number, and date of birth for the event promoter;

2. A photocopy of the event promoter’s government issued driver’s license or identification card;

3. The event promoter’s event promoter permit number and Covina business license number;

4. A photocopy, or other legible reproduction, of the event promoter’s event promoter permit and Covina business license;

5. The address and name (if applicable) of the entertainment establishment where the entertainment will occur;

6. The number of the entertainment permit, ABC license, and any other license or permit required for the event;

7. A photocopy, or other legible reproduction, of the entertainment permit, ABC license, and any other license or permit required for the event;

8. The legally authorized maximum occupancy limit of the event site, including each room, floor, or other area where the event is scheduled to occur;

9. A telephone number for the event promoter at which the event promoter will respond for the duration of the event and for two hours before and after such time as the event is scheduled to occur;

10. The time(s), date(s), and length of the event(s);

11. A list naming all entertainers and performers who are scheduled to perform during the event;

12. A general description of the methods that will be used for the promotion, marketing, and advertising of the event;

13. The complete name of each employee, agent, or other representative of the event promoter that will be present at the event and the general description of their respective duties;

14. Language prohibiting the placement of signs in the city of Covina without all requisite city approvals, permits, and inspection, or within the public right-of-way.

C. A copy of the contract required by this section shall be kept and maintained at the entertainment establishment for the duration of the event (as well as for two hours before and after such time as the event is scheduled to occur), and shall be made available by the event promoter and any responsible person for inspection and copying upon request of the chief of police or any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this code.

D. If the parties to the contract make any changes to the terms or provisions thereof between the time the contract is executed and the time when the event occurs, those changes shall be reflected in an amended contract which shall comply with the requirements set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


5.28.310 Operating regulations and conditions.

All event promoters shall strictly adhere to the following operating regulations and conditions. Event promoters shall be jointly responsible for any violations of these operating regulations and conditions, which shall not relieve any other responsible person of any obligations set forth in this chapter.

A. Event promoters shall comply with the following:

1. Conditions of any applicable event promoter permit, entertainment permit (including approved security plan), conditional use permit, or other special permit or land-use entitlement;

2. All applicable federal, state, county, and city laws, ordinances, rules, and/or regulations.

B. Recordkeeping. Each event promoter shall maintain on file, for a period of not less than two years from the later of the last day of operation of the specific event being promoted or the contract’s expiration date, complete and accurate records of all business activities related to events for which the event promoter has performed any services or activities that are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

1. All contracts required by this chapter, as well as any contracts with performers.

a. Contracts with performers shall contain, at a minimum, the true name of the performer along with any fictitious/stage name under which the performer is being promoted; and

2. Records of advance ticket sales, tickets sold at events, other admission or entrance fees or donations, or any other fees, charges, or donations collected at such events.

The records required by this section shall be made available for inspection by the chief of police or any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this code. Clear and legible copies of such records shall be provided within 72 hours of any request by the chief of police or any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this code.

C. On-Site Presence During Event. The event promoter or agent thereof (at least 21 years of age or older) shall be on site for the entire duration of the event he or she is promoting, as well as for one hour before the event is scheduled to occur and 30 minutes after the conclusion of the event (unless the business establishment closes prior thereto).

D. Advertising. Event promoters shall ensure that all promotional materials, including, but not limited to, handbills, dodgers, circulars, booklets, cards, pamphlets, sheets, other written or printed notices, and/or any sample products, any of which advertise the event being promoted, contain plainly printed or stamped on the first page thereof, or on the front thereof, in a space free of other matter, the number of the applicable event promoter permit.

E. Cooperate fully with the chief of police or any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this code with any inquiry, inspection, reasonable request, or investigation necessary or appropriate to implement the requirement of this code or to enforce any other federal, state, county, or city law.

F. Immediately report to the Covina police department and, if necessary, emergency medical services at 911 any conditions which the event promoter (or his or her designated representative) knows, or reasonably should know, exist at the event and could result or could have resulted in harm or an immediate threat of harm to the health, safety, and general welfare of the spectators of the event or any member of the public. (Ord. 15-2046 § 3, 2015.)


Chapter 5.32 FRANCHISES1

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

5.32.005    Requirements generally.

Article II. Cable System Franchises

5.32.010    Short title.

5.32.020    Definitions.

5.32.030    Franchise purposes.

5.32.040    Franchise required.

5.32.050    Term of the franchise.

5.32.060    Franchise territory.

5.32.070    Federal or state jurisdiction.

5.32.080    Franchise nontransferable.

5.32.090    Geographical coverage.

5.32.100    Nonexclusive franchise.

5.32.110    Multiple franchises.

5.32.120    Franchise modification.

5.32.130    Filing of franchise applications.

5.32.140    Applications – Contents.

5.32.150    Consideration of initial applications.

5.32.160    Franchise renewal.

5.32.170    Other requirements.

5.32.180    Franchise fee.

5.32.190    Security fund.

5.32.200    Cable system construction.

5.32.210    Construction of equipment by additional franchises.

5.32.220    Applicable technical standards.

5.32.230    Noncompliance with standards.

5.32.240    Costs of technical assistance.

5.32.250    Hold harmless.

5.32.260    Insurance.

5.32.270    Records required.

5.32.280    Annual reports.

5.32.290    Opinion survey.

5.32.300    Review of system performance.

5.32.310    Special review.

5.32.320    Remedies for franchise violations.

5.32.330    Liquidated damages.

5.32.340    Procedure for remedying franchise violations.

5.32.350    Grantor’s power to revoke.

5.32.360    Appeal of finding of revocation.

5.32.370    Force majeure – Grantee’s inability to perform.

5.32.380    Abandonment or removal of franchise property.

5.32.390    Restoration by grantor – Reimbursement of costs.

5.32.400    Extended operation and continuity of services.

5.32.410    Receivership and foreclosure.

5.32.420    Reservation of grantor rights.

5.32.430    Waiver.

5.32.440    Rights of individuals.

5.32.450    Privacy.

Article III. CATV Consumer Protection

5.32.500    Title.

5.32.510    Intention.

5.32.520    Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act.

5.32.530    Video Customer Service Act.

5.32.540    Definitions.

Article IV. Regulation of State-Issued Cable Television and Video Franchises

5.32.550    Applicability of chapter to state video services franchisees.

5.32.560    Regulation of state video services franchisees.

5.32.570    State video franchise and PEG fees. 

5.32.580    Audit authority.

5.32.590    Customer service penalties under state video franchises.

5.32.600    City response to state video franchise applications.

5.32.610    Notice to adjacent property owners prior to installation of video services facilities.

5.32.620    Savings clause. 

Article I. General Provisions


5.32.005 Requirements generally.

It is unlawful for any person to erect any telegraph, telephone, electric, or other poles in the streets or highways or to string any wires thereon, except for the purpose of repairing existing lines, or to lay or construct any railroad line or tracks or to exercise any similar privileges whatsoever within the city without first obtaining a franchise for that purpose in the manner specified by the city council or this chapter, or unless erected pursuant to state law. (Ord. 03-1893 § 1, 2003; 1964 Code § 1.18.)

Article II. Cable System Franchises


5.32.010 Short title.

This article shall constitute the “Cable System Regulatory Ordinance” of the city of Covina and may be referred to as such. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given the same meaning as in the Cable Act, if one exists, and otherwise shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

A. “Basic cable service” means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

B. “Cable Act” means the 1984 Cable Act as amended by the 1992 Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act and by the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

C. “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons who:

1. Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or

2. Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system.

D. “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of:

1. Video programming; or

2. Other programming service; and

3. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

E. “Cable system” or “system” means:

1. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:

a. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

b. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way;

c. A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;

d. An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Communications Act;

e. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

2. “Cable system” or “system” also means “community antenna television system” (as that term is used in Section 53066 of the Government Code of the State of California), or “CATV system.”

F. “Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

G. “City council” means the city council of the city of Covina.

H. “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any other license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city.

I. “Franchise agreement” means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.

J. “Franchise fee” means any tax, fee, or assessment payment or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee or a subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

1. Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);

2. Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;

3. Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or

4. Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.

K. “Grantee” means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.

L. “Grantor” or “city” means the city of Covina as represented by the city council or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.

M. “Gross annual cable service revenues” means all revenue, determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (hereafter “amounts”), received by grantee or by any affiliate of the grantee that is a cable operator from operation of the cable system to provide cable services to subscribers in the franchise area, specifically including, but not limited to: (1) amounts received for the provision of any video programming service, including basic cable programming, premium, per-channel, and per-program services; and (2) amounts received for installation, disconnection, reconnection, change-in-service, repair, maintenance, late fees, and rental or sale of equipment needed to receive cable service; and (3) amounts received for advertising; and (4) amounts received for carriage of any leased access programming on the cable system (including amounts for advertising); and (5) amounts received for carriage of home shopping channels; and (6) amounts received for studio and production equipment rental and personnel fees in the service area; and (7) amounts received for cable modem or Internet access service, to the extent this service is considered a cable service under federal law, or to the extent that the city is authorized to collect a fee on such services for use of the rights-of-way under applicable federal or state law. Such phrase shall not include: (1) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability collected by the grantee from subscribers for pass-through to a government agency, including the FCC user fee; (2) unrecovered bad debt; and (3) the value of any free service or services required under a franchise agreement.

N. “Installation” means the connection of the cable system to subscribers’ terminals.

O. “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions that are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

P. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, limited liability company or governmental entity.

Q. “Public, educational or government access facilities” or “PEG access facilities” means the total of the following:

1. Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and

2. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

R. “Service area” or “franchise area” means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.

S. “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged.

T. “State” means the state of California.

U. “Public rights-of-way” means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others, and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property.

V. “Subscriber” means a person who lawfully receives cable service over the cable system with grantee’s express permission. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003; Ord. 1419 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 12A.1.)


5.32.030 Franchise purposes.

A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes:

A. To permit the grantee to construct, operate and maintain a cable system and to provide cable service within the designated service area;

B. To permit the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across public rights-of-way and other public property owned by the city within the designated service area;

C. To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said cable system;

D. To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.040 Franchise required.

It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, operate, or maintain a cable system in the city within any public rights-of-way or public property owned by the city without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.050 Term of the franchise.

A. A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor’s adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise.

B. A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.060 Franchise territory.

Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.070 Federal or state jurisdiction.

This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.080 Franchise nontransferable.

A. Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the city council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied, withheld or delayed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prior consent of the city council shall not be required for an intra-corporate or intra-company transfer from one wholly-owned subsidiary to another wholly-owned subsidiary. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the city council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation or by assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system in order to secure indebtedness, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section.

B. The requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. A “change in control” will be deemed to have occurred whenever there is a change in control of more than 25 percent ownership interest of the grantee or a change in actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

C. Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable system of the grantee within the city or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said cable system. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply.

D. Grantee shall inform the city of any pending sale, transfer, lease, assignment, hypothecation, placing in trust or change in control, except as excluded in subsection (A) of this section. Transferor and transferee must file an application for the city’s consent to transfer control of or assign the franchise as set forth in subsections (H) and (I) of this section. Such applications shall be signed by duly authorized representative(s) of grantee. Additionally, to the extent allowed and provided for under state or federal law, grantor may require grantee to reimburse grantor for grantor’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the proposed transfer of the franchise, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses.

E. Grantee shall file with director a certified copy of the duly executed instrument of such sale, transfer, assignment, lease, hypothecation, trust or change in control within 30 days of the effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment, lease, hypothecation, trust or change in control. If such duly executed instrument is not filed with the city within 30 days after the effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment, lease, hypothecation, trust or change in control, then upon the expiration of said 30 days the franchise shall be subject to forfeiture and the city may, after notice and hearing, by ordinance repeal the franchise.

F. As a condition to the granting of consent to such sale, transfer, assignment, lease, hypothecation, trust or change in control, the city shall require an express and unconditional written acceptance of the terms and conditions of the existing franchise, as a condition to the transfer, accompanied by such guarantees as meet the requirements of CMC 5.32.240 and may impose such additional terms and conditions upon the franchise and upon the grantee or assignee which the city council deems to be in the public interest; provided, however, any such terms and conditions so attached shall be related to the legal, technical and financial ability of the prospective transferee or controlling party to operate the franchise in compliance with the franchise agreement.

G. Consent to any such transfer or change of control shall be refused if the city finds:

1. That the grantee is in material noncompliance with terms and conditions of the franchise; and/or

2. The transferee lacks (or in the case of a change in control, that the “grantee,” following the close of the proposed transaction, would no longer have) the legal, technical or financial ability to operate, maintain and/or (to the extent applicable) construct the cable system in a manner fully consistent with the terms and conditions of the existing franchise; and/or

3. The transferee’s record with other local cable franchise authorities, within the past three years, demonstrates that the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with its material obligations under applicable law and the franchise; and/or

4. Approval of the transfer or change in control consent request would have a material negative effect on streets or other public rights-of-way or other public property within the franchise area that would be used by the applicant’s cable system; and/or

5. Approval of the transfer or change in control would cause a substantial disruption, degradation and/or cessation of cable services; and/or

6. Approval of the transfer or change in control would reduce competition in the provision of cable service within the franchise area.

H. Transferor’s (assignor’s) application shall include:

1. A fully completed FCC Form 394.

2. Identification and ownership of transferee. In its application for consent, transferor shall identify the transferee and its ownership in the same detail as if transferee were an applicant for an initial grant.

3. A copy of the complaint record as identified in CMC 5.32.270.

4. Financial statements. Current financial statements showing the financial condition of the franchise as of the date of the application. Upon request, transferor shall also agree to submit financial statements showing the condition of franchise as of the closing. Said financial statements shall have been audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant, and shall be submitted within 90 days of the request; provided, however, that if grantee’s financial books and records are not maintained in a manner that allows for the preparation of financial statements at the franchise level, then grantee shall present pro forma financial statements for the franchise prepared by an independent certified public accountant (as of the application date and closing) identifying all assumptions used in making allocations to create the pro forma financial statements for the franchise and the factual basis for those assumptions.

5. The submittal of an accounting and report of franchise fees set forth in Chapter 5.32 CMC within 30 days of the effective date of approval of transfer/assignment of the franchise, or of the date of close of the transfer/assignment. The transferee shall be responsible for any underpayment, and shall be entitled to a credit for any overpayment.

I. Transferee’s (assignee’s) application shall include:

1. A specific and complete response to the criteria set forth in CMC 5.32.140 (contents of application) in as complete a form as if transferee were applying for an initial franchise.

2. A statement explaining how the sources of capital set forth in the financial statements demonstrate that transferee has all the financial resources necessary to complete the proposed transaction, carry out all of the terms and conditions of the franchise, remedy any and all defaults and violations of the provisions of this chapter and the ordinance granting the franchise in the transferor’s past and present operations, make such other improvements and additions as may be required or proposed in the services and facilities, including but not limited to upgrading, rebuilds, and extensions of facilities and equipment.

3. Detailed financial information showing the effect of the transfer, sale or change of control on rates and services to subscribers.

4. If applicable, a summary of the plans and commitments of the transferee to remedy the specific defaults and violations in the operations of the cable operator (transferor) under the existing franchise.

J. Effect of Unauthorized Action. The taking of any action to transfer any interest or cause any change in control without the prior consent of the city shall be null and void, unless later ratified by the city, and shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. If the city denies its consent to any such action and such action has nevertheless been effected, the city may revoke and terminate the franchise unless control of the cable system is promptly restored to its status prior to such unauthorized action or to a status acceptable to the city. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.090 Geographical coverage.

A. Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to have the capability to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement.

B. Business and commercial facilities shall be passed and/or served if required by the provisions of the franchise agreement.

C. After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables and any nodes within any portion or portions of the service area, grantee shall provide cable service to any requesting subscriber within the service area within 30 days from the date of request; provided, that the grantee is able to secure all easements, rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend cable service to such subscriber within such 30-day period on reasonable terms and conditions, and subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement as well as other exceptions stated in this chapter, the franchise agreement or other applicable law. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.100 Nonexclusive franchise.

Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law; provided, that if the grantor grants an additional franchise, then the material provisions of any such additional franchise shall be reasonably comparable to the terms and conditions in the initial grantee’s franchise and no more favorable or less burdensome than those applied to prior grantees, so that all grantees are accorded competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory treatment and equal protection under the law. Additional franchises shall also be granted in accordance with Section 53066.2 of the California Government Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantor may require insurance or surety in excess of that required of other grantees in recognition of such a particular grantee being either a new entrant or because of the construction requirements specified in that grantee’s agreement with grantor. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.110 Multiple franchises.

A. Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:

1. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage;

2. The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service;

3. The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way.

B. Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed underground, grantor shall give each grantee serving the franchise area within which the area where utilities are to be placed underground at least 30 days’ prior written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee’s installation of conduit, pedestals and vaults. On request of the grantor or developer, the grantee shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new construction with underground utilities shall provide cable operators holding a franchise for the area an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility or right-of-way use, any underground cable equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each person in the development.

C. Grantor may require that any new entrant or nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor’s opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.120 Franchise modification.

The grantee may be required to pay any costs incurred by the grantor in processing a grantee request for franchise modification, lease or hypothecation of franchise, subject to the provision for such costs under state or federal law. Such allowable costs may include the costs incurred for hiring consultants to assist in evaluating the request. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.130 Filing of franchise applications.

Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable, nonrefundable initial application fee established by the city shall accompany the initial franchise application to cover all validly documented reasonable costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented reasonable costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.140 Applications – Contents.

An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, where applicable:

A. A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area;

B. A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field;

C. A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation;

D. A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;

E. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;

F. A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city;

G. Proposed construction and service schedule;

H. Any reasonable relevant additional information that the city deems applicable. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.150 Consideration of initial applications.

A. Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the city council.

B. A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within 60 days after the close of the hearing, the city council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.160 Franchise renewal.

Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.170 Other requirements.

A. All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work, come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers’ premises shall carry a photo identification card or other information which includes the name of grantee, name of the individual, and a telephone number which can be called to verify that the individual is a contractor of grantee. Upon request by grantor, grantee shall provide a sample of the photo identification card within five business days. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee.

B. Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance adopted by the city council at a duly noticed meeting in accordance with applicable state or federal law. A verified and continuing pattern of significant noncompliance with material terms of this chapter or the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise; provided, that grantee shall receive due process in accordance with CMC 5.32.340 prior to any sanction being imposed. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.180 Franchise fee.

A. Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual cable service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement.

B. The grantor, on a quarterly basis, shall be furnished a statement within 90 days of the close of the calendar quarter, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual cable service revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon 30 days’ prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee’s gross annual cable service revenue and franchise fee records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five percent or more, the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable documented costs of such audit.

C. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.

D. In the event that any undisputed franchise fee payment or payment of any undisputed adjustment to any franchise fee is not received on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay an interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the highest of the most recently published prime lending rate of any of the five largest member banks of the New York Clearing House Association, plus one percent during the period for which payment was due.

E. Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.190 Security fund.

A. Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund shall be established based on the extent of the grantee’s obligations under the terms of the franchise.

B. The security fund shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a breach of the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in this chapter and the franchise agreement.

C. If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than 30 days after receiving written confirmation from the bank where such security fund is deposited that grantor has made a draw against the security fund. Failure to replenish the security fund after receipt of a written notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure may be deemed a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.200 Cable system construction.

A. Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor or other responsible public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the issuance of a permit.

B. In those areas of the city where transmission lines and distribution facilities of cable systems and the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground.

C. In those areas of the city where the grantee’s cables are located on the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee’s cost. Certain of grantee’s equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed aboveground, may continue to remain in aboveground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.

D. Grantee shall obtain all required permits before beginning any work in, upon, along, across, under or over the public rights-of-way or any other public property, except for emergency work as provided in subsection (G) of this section. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof.

E. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations.

F. In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way or on other city-owned public property is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor’s reasonable satisfaction said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall, within two years (or, in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor’s reasonable satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the grantor and made applicable to all users of the public rights-of-way.

G. Prior to commencing any work on the cable system in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the cable system in the public rights-of-way is required, the grantee shall with all due diligence seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency work.

H. There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property.

I. If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay or relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.

J. The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 20 business days’ prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes.

K. The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee’s wires, cables and other equipment. To the extent that grantee trims trees under this authority, the grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee.

L. Grantee shall be subject to any and all lawful, generally applicable requirements established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of aboveground facilities located in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.210 Construction of equipment by additional franchises.

A. The grantor reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchise applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant’s risk, with no recourse against the grantor in the event the pending franchise application is not granted. The grantor may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable at the applicant’s cost.

B. If the grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate within the municipal limits of the city, it may do so on condition that such new cable system entrant indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse the existing grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities and all other costs including those of existing grantee, the city and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area; and the existing grantee may be required to be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to such new entrant cable system. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.220 Applicable technical standards.

A. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of the grantee’s two most recent proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines.

B. Should the FCC no longer require proof of performance tests, the grantee shall make and submit proof of performance tests and reports in response to a written request from the grantor. The form of the report shall be subject to the good faith negotiations and agreement of the grantor and grantee. Such report shall be submitted to the grantor within 30 days of issuance of the grantor’s request. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.230 Noncompliance with standards.

Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified FCC technical standards may constitute a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.240 Costs of technical assistance.

Grantor may require grantee to pay the costs incurred by grantor for obtaining any technical assistance deemed necessary by grantor for obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all franchise-imposed standards, subject to the provisions and application of state and federal law. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.250 Hold harmless.

Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.260 Insurance.

A. On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall furnish to grantor certificates of insurance for commercial general liability, automobile liability, workers’ compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, which shall be admitted in the state. The certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and will not be canceled or materially modified without 30 days’ prior written notice to grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form reasonably satisfactory to grantor.

B. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise a commercial general and automobile liability insurance policy which shall:

1. Include grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds with respect to liability arising from grantee’s operations;

2. Provide coverage for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to:

a. Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and/or

b. Use of motor vehicles; and/or

c. The strict liability of grantee;

3. Provide a combined single limit for commercial general liability and automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement.

C. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise a policy of workers’ compensation insurance which shall comply with the laws of the state of California.

D. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise a policy of property insurance which shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance.

E. The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following information:

1. The policy number;

2. The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire;

3. First named insureds and any additional insureds required by the franchise agreement and this chapter;

4. Type of insurance; and

5. The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies.

F. The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section.

G. In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect or provide proof of new or renewed coverage following notice to grantor pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, grantor shall, upon 10 days’ notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. In order to account for increases in consumer prices, no more than once during any five-year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance provided in the franchise agreement. Such order may be made by grantor after conducting a duly noticed public hearing. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon current prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks.

H. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, grantee may elect to self-insure the insurance requirements contained herein in a manner consistent with the risk management program in effect from time to time after submitting verifiable proof of adequate financial capability and with the prior written approval of grantor in grantor’s reasonable discretion. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.270 Records required.

A. Grantee shall at all times maintain:

1. A written or computer-stored record of all service interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years; provided, that such incidents result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber’s right of privacy;

2. A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system components installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber’s homes;

3. If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls for subscribers in the city, on a monthly basis;

4. If requested by grantor, a written or computer-stored record of subscriber complaints in a form kept in the ordinary course of business for the preceding 12 months for subscribers in the city;

5. A full and complete record of rates for programming services, equipment sales or rentals, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic cable service tier, tiers of service beyond basic cable service, premium service, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber’s premises.

B. The grantor may request inspection of additional records and documents kept in the normal course of business by grantee; provided, the items to be inspected reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement.

C. Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours and subject to necessary confidentiality arrangements, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all:

1. Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area and customer call facilities which may be within or outside the service area, as necessary to enable grantor to carry out grantor’s regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement;

2. All records kept in the normal course of business relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.280 Annual reports.

A. No more often than once per year, within 90 days after the end of the calendar year, upon grantor’s written request, grantee shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:

1. A summary of the previous year’s (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, cable services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, if applicable;

2. A list of grantee’s officers and members of its board of directors which may be provided in the form of an annual report;

3. A list of shareholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in grantee;

4. An indication of any residences which cannot be connected to the cable system in grantee’s service area, and a schedule for providing cable service;

5. Information as to:

a. The number of homes passed,

b. Total subscribers, and

c. The number of basic and pay subscribers;

6. A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber’s homes and exclusive of confidential or proprietary information that would be open for public review under the California Public Records Act. It is the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of plans and record drawings. After the initial submission of a complete set of drawings, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings that have changed;

7. Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request and which is relevant to its regulatory responsibilities as set forth in this chapter and the franchise agreement.

B. Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports, which are nonroutine in nature and which will materially affect its cable system within the franchise area.

C. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence and protected by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee may provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor.

D. Upon grantor’s request, if grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee’s annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within 45 days of the publication of such reports.

E. All reports required under this chapter, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor’s offices during normal business hours.

F. All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.

G. The willful refusal, failure, or willful negligence of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within 30 days after receipt of written notice of noncompliance, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement.

H. Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.290 Opinion survey.

Upon written request of the grantor, but not more than once every two years, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee’s invoice for cable services. The results of such survey shall be provided to the grantor on a timely basis. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.300 Review of system performance.

A. Not more often than every two years throughout the term of the franchise, if reasonably requested by prior written notice from grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee’s response to those complaints shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within 30 days after the conclusion of such a review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the grantee’s franchise compliance and quality of service.

B. If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement, grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to:

1. Correct the area(s) of noncompliance within the period specified therefor; or

2. Commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter; or

3. Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect;

may be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy specified in this chapter or the franchise agreement for such breach. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.310 Special review.

The grantee shall comply with all appropriate technical standards of the FCC as published in Subpart K of Part 76 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. To the extent those standards are altered, modified, or amended during the term of this franchise, the grantee shall comply with such alterations, modifications or amendments within a reasonable period after their adoption by the FCC. As provided in these rules, the franchising authority shall have, upon written request, the right to obtain a copy of tests and records required to be performed pursuant to the FCC’s rules or require additional tests, repeat tests, or tests involving specified subscriber terminals, in accordance with Section 76.601(c) of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.320 Remedies for franchise violations.

If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following reasonable written notice from the grantor and a reasonable opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise, grantor may assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in this chapter or the franchise agreement for any such violation(s). (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.330 Liquidated damages.

A. By acceptance of a franchise granted by the grantor, the grantee understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and the franchise agreement will result in damages to the grantor, and that it is and will be impractical to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance. Each of the amounts set forth below has been set in recognition of the difficulty in affixing actual damages arising from violation of this chapter and breach of the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall include and incorporate provisions, where applicable, for liquidated damages to be paid to grantor by grantee in the following amounts, or amounts set forth in the franchise agreement, and chargeable to the letter of credit, bond or security fund, should grantee not make payment within 10 days of written notice by grantor that the amounts are due for the concerns listed in the notice. If, after following the process specified in CMC 5.32.340, grantor finds that grantee has failed to materially comply with provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, liquidated damages in the following amounts may be assessed for the following concerns:

1. Failure to complete system construction in accordance with the franchise agreement, unless the city manager, or his or her designee, approves the delay due to the occurrence of conditions beyond grantee’s control: $500.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that the deficiency continues.

2. Failure to provide data, documents, or reports required by this chapter or the franchise agreement within 10 days after written request, or within such longer time as may be specified in said request: $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that each violation continues.

3. Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system as required by this chapter or the franchise agreement within such time as may be specified therein: $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues.

4. Failure to provide in a continuing manner the type of cable services proposed in the grantee’s application as incorporated into the ordinance granting the franchise, unless the city manager, or his or her designee, approves a delay or change, or the grantee has obtained a modification of its obligation under Section 625 of the Cable Act: $500.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that each noncompliance continues.

5. Failure to construct the cable system to an area meeting the density requirements following a written request therefor, within such time as may be agreed to by grantee and grantor: $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that each noncompliance continues.

6. Failure to provide required notices to subscribers: $500.00 per month for each month, or part thereof, in which notices are not distributed.

7. Failure to provide current evidence upon request of insurance and bonding: $100.00 per month for each month, or part thereof, that each noncompliance continues. Nothing in this section shall preclude grantor’s exercise of its remedies as provided for under CMC 5.32.260 or 5.32.350 for grantee’s failure to procure or maintain the required insurance and bonding.

8. Nothing in this section shall preclude further liquidated damages as agreed upon by the parties in the franchise agreement or other remedies provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement.

B. If grantor determines that grantee may be liable for liquidated damages, grantor shall issue to grantee by personal delivery, registered mail or certified mail written notice of intention to assess liquidated damages and shall follow the procedures set forth in CMC 5.32.340. If, after following the procedures set forth in CMC 5.32.340, liquidated damages are assessed by the city council, liquidated damages shall begin to accrue after the correction period specified in the written notice has lapsed. The notice shall set forth the basis for the liquidated damages and give grantee a reasonable time in which to remedy the violation. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.340 Procedure for remedying franchise violations.

Prior to imposing liquidated damages, any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter or the franchise agreement, grantor shall give grantee notice and an opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures:

A. Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction, or evidence of nonviolation, within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than five business days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise and 20 business days in all other cases. If grantee fails to:

1. Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; or

2. Commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or

3. Provide credible evidence that there is no violation;

grantor shall then give, by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, written notice of not less than 15 days of a public hearing to be held before the city council. Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred. Grantee shall be provided a fair opportunity for full participation in the public hearing, including the right to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce relevant evidence and to question persons speaking at the public hearing. Upon grantee’s prior written request and advance payment by grantee, a complete verbatim record and transcript shall be made of such hearing.

B. Subsequent to the public hearing, the city council shall consider all relevant evidence presented, and thereafter render findings and its decision.

C. If the city council finds that:

1. The grantee has corrected the alleged violation; or

2. The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation; or

3. No material violation has occurred;

the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.

D. If the city council finds that material violations exist and that grantee:

1. Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner within 30 days after receipt of the first written notice from grantor; or

2. Has not diligently commenced correction of such violation within 30 days after receipt of the first written notice and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation;

then the city council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter and/or the franchise agreement. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.350 Grantor’s power to revoke.

A. Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise:

1. If grantee fails to perform any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure;

2. If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required by this chapter or in the franchise agreement;

3. If grantee violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee’s franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee in good faith in an appropriate proceeding;

4. If grantee knowingly practices any material fraud or deceit upon grantor; or

5. To the extent allowed by applicable bankruptcy law, if grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt.

B. Prior to revoking a franchise, the city council shall cause to be served on the grantee written notice of its intent to consider revoking grantee’s franchise. Such notice shall be served on grantee at least 60 days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area 10 days prior to the hearing date. After completing the notice procedures set forth in this section, the city council may commence revocation hearings.

C. The city council shall hear any person(s) interested in the revocation and within 90 days after the date of the hearing shall make its determination, based on a preponderance of the evidence, whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise or this chapter.

D. If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a material breach, then the grantor may:

1. Declare the franchise revoked if the material breach has not been cured within the time provided by grantor; or

2. If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by the grantor.

The termination and forfeiture of the grantee’s franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.360 Appeal of finding of revocation.

The grantee may appeal a finding of revocation made pursuant to CMC 5.32.350 to an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction, which shall have the power to review de novo. Any such appeal must be taken by the grantee within 90 days of the issuance of the grantor’s decision to revoke the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.370 Force majeure – Grantee’s inability to perform.

In the event grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee’s control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from obligations pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in cable service under federal and state consumer protection laws. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court not due to any violation by grantee, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.380 Abandonment or removal of franchise property.

A. If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of six months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the cable system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the cable system or a part thereof shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use, provided notice is given to grantor of such status.

B. If grantee’s cable system is deactivated for a continuous period of six months without prior written notice to and approval by grantor and has been deemed abandoned, then grantee must, at grantor’s option and demand and at the sole expense of grantee, promptly remove all of grantee’s property from any streets or other public rights-of-way. Grantee must promptly restore the streets or other public areas from which its property, including aerial trunk and feeder lines, has been removed to the condition existing prior to grantee’s use of those streets or other public rights-of-way. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section.

C. Grantor may, upon written application by grantee, approve the abandonment in place by grantee of any property under such terms and conditions as grantor may approve. Upon grantor-approved abandonment in place of any property, grantee must cause to be executed, acknowledged, and delivered to grantor such instruments as grantor may prescribe and approve in order to transfer and convey ownership of that property to grantor.

D. At the expiration, without a request for renewal or extension, of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon a final determination concerning nonrenewal or revocation, as provided herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable system from all streets and public rights-of-way within the service area within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days.

E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, with the city’s approval, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with use thereof by any public utility or other franchise holder. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.390 Restoration by grantor – Reimbursement of costs.

Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed therein and to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor shall provide grantee with a written notice providing 20 days to complete such work. If grantee has not completed such work after the 20-day notice, grantor may cause the work to be removed. If grantor removes the work, the grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the removal work and the cost of such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the reasonable costs for such removal work no later than 30 days after receipt of the itemized work order. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.400 Extended operation and continuity of services.

Upon revocation or a denial of renewal of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. If permitted by grantor, grantee may continue to operate the cable system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide cable services. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted cable service to its subscribers, including operation of the cable system. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.410 Receivership and foreclosure.

A. At the option of the grantor and to the extent allowed by applicable law, a franchise granted hereunder may be revoked 120 days after appointment of a receiver(s) or trustee(s) to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless:

1. The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said 120 days; or

2. Such receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or

3. Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise.

B. To the extent allowed by applicable law, in the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked 120 days after service of such notice, unless:

1. Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise in the manner provided by this chapter; and

2. The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.420 Reservation of grantor rights.

In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.430 Waiver.

A. The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines (1) that it is in the public interest to do so; or (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. Grantor shall not grant or withhold waivers in a discriminatory manner.

B. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.440 Rights of individuals.

A. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against any citizen on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Grantee shall also comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. However, nothing in this chapter or the franchise agreement shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to grantee’s equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted grantee’s property or employees in the course of their employment.

B. No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber’s premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber’s property shall be deemed granted. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)


5.32.450 Privacy.

A grantee shall respect and refrain from invading the privacy of subscribers served by its cable system. A grantee shall comply with all of the requirements of 47 U.S.C. Section 551, as amended, California Government Code Section 53088.2(n), as amended, and California Penal Code Section 637.5, as amended. (Ord. 03-1893 § 3, 2003.)

Article III. CATV Consumer Protection


5.32.500 Title.

This article shall be known as and may be referred to as the “city of Covina multichannel video provider consumer protection ordinance.” (Ord. 03-1893 § 2, 2003; Ord. 94-1784, 1994.)


5.32.510 Intention.

It is the intention of the city council, by this article, to enact a Consumer protection ordinance applicable to all multichannel video providers within the city of Covina. (Ord. 03-1893 § 2, 2003; Ord. 94-1784, 1994.)


5.32.520 Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act.

A. No person shall violate the terms and provisions of the Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act, Government Code Section 53054, et seq. All multichannel video providers within the city shall comply with all of the terms and provisions of said Act. In the event of the failure of any multichannel video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Section 53055.1 of the Government Code, the city manager shall give written notice thereof to said provider to comply within 60 days, and upon failure of said operator or provider to so comply, a penalty in the sum of $500.00 for each year in which the notice is not distributed shall be imposed by the finance director. The penalties shall be due and owing immediately upon notice of its disposition and, in the case of a franchisee of the city, may be collected at the same time franchise fees are collected. Nonpayment of the penalty shall be grounds for termination of said franchise or a nonfranchisee multichannel video provider’s business license.

B. The annual notice as used herein, and as required by said Act, shall be given at least 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this section and, thereafter, on or about the first day of January of each year. The notice given to the city of Covina shall be delivered to the city manager and shall include a verbatim copy of the customer service standards established by each multichannel video provider within the city. (Ord. 03-1893 § 2, 2003; Ord. 94-1784, 1994.)


5.32.530 Video Customer Service Act.

No person shall violate the terms and provisions of the Video Customer Service Act, Government Code Section 53088, et seq. In the event any person, including the city of Covina, should claim that a multichannel video provider, as defined in Section 53088.1 of said Act and this article, is not complying with the terms and provisions of said Act or this article, or any person should have a dispute with said multichannel video provider under the provisions of said Act, written notice thereof may be filed with the city clerk.

A. Any person having a dispute with a multichannel video provider or having a complaint that the multichannel video provider is not complying with the terms and provisions of said Act shall reduce the complaint or dispute to writing and present same to the city clerk before the city clerk is required to act thereon. Upon receipt of said written notice, the city clerk shall, within 10 days, make a tentative determination of whether the matter set forth in the notice is within the terms and provisions of said Act.

B. If the city clerk should determine that the matter set forth in said notice is not within the terms and provisions of said Act within said 10 days, said city clerk shall return the written notice to the person providing the same with a written explanation of why the same is not covered under said Act.

C. If the city clerk determines that the notice appears to be under the terms and provisions of said Act, he or she shall give the multichannel video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the consumer service standards or said Act and allow the multichannel video provider at least 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach.

D. If, in the opinion of the city manager, or his or her designee, said breach is material and not remedied within said 30 days, said city manager or designee shall give the video operator a 10-day written notice of the penalties assessed for said breach as provided in Section 53088.2(o) of the Government Code of the State of California.

E. Pursuant to said Section 53088.2(o) and (p) of the Government Code, the city manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to impose the penalties therein set forth on or 30 days after final reading of the ordinance codified in this article by the city council. The penalties shall not exceed the amounts therein set forth and shall be assessed in accordance with the terms and provisions of Section 53088.2. In the event any multichannel video provider should fail to pay said penalty when assessed, on written notice to the multichannel video provider the same may be grounds for the revocation of the multichannel video provider’s franchise or business license. However, any monetary penalty assessed under the provisions of this section shall be reduced dollar-for-dollar to the extent any liquidated damages or penalty provision of any applicable franchise document imposes a monetary obligation upon the multichannel video provider for customer service failures, and no other monetary damages may be imposed in such a case.

F. Any person directly affected by any ruling or determination of the city clerk or the city manager or his or her designee may, by written notice filed within 10 days of receipt of written notice of the decision complained of, appeal said decision to the city council. The city clerk shall thereafter schedule a public hearing on said appeal before the city council within 60 days of the receipt of said appeal. (Ord. 03-1893 § 2, 2003; Ord. 94-1784, 1994.)


5.32.540 Definitions.

In addition to the provisions of any franchise documents pertaining to consumer protection the following consumer protection standards are adopted and, where inconsistent with the franchise documents, shall govern:

A. For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply:

1. “Company” shall mean any multichannel video provider operating within the city of Covina.

2. “Customer service representative” shall mean the representative of said company that is designated and trained to assist multichannel video provider customers with all matters pertaining to the provision of service.

3. “Consumer” or “customer” shall mean that person to whom company provides multichannel video services within the city of Covina.

4. “Systems” shall mean the multichannel video provider’s transmission equipment and method that delivers multichannel video services within the city of Covina.

5. “Multichannel video provider” shall mean any person, company, or service, which provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, condominium, or apartment where some fee is paid, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming. A “multichannel video provider” shall include, but not be limited to, providers of cable television, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology. A “multichannel video provider” shall not include a landlord providing only broadcast video programming to a single-family home or other residential dwelling consisting of four units or fewer.

6. “Standard” installations shall mean those aerial installations that are up to 125 feet in length from the existing distribution system and that do not require separate permits or pole attachment rearrangements.

B. Each multichannel video provider within the city of Covina shall comply with the following consumer standards:

1. Require that a customer service representative will be available to respond to customer’s or PEG channel programmer’s telephone inquiries Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Holidays are excluded. These designated times constitute minimum normal business hours as determined by city as permitted by state and federal law, and the multichannel video provider’s customer service center shall also be open during these hours. The multichannel video provider shall provide telephone availability to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. After normal business hours an answering service or an automated response system must be provided. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day.

2. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answering time by a customer service representative, including wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. The number of routine rings shall be limited to four or fewer. Under normal conditions customer callers shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. This standard shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis and in accordance to a methodology proposed by multichannel video provider and approved by the city. The city shall have an absolute right, upon three days’ written notice, to inspect any and all telephone response and monitoring information as necessary for the city to assure that the multichannel video provider is meeting its requirements.

3. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than 90 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis in accordance to methodology proposed by multichannel video provider and approved by the city:

a. Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed.

b. Excluding those situations reasonably beyond the control of the multichannel video provider (which include natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions), the multichannel video provider will respond to service interruptions, defined as three or more signal outages affecting more than one channel in a single zip code area, promptly and in no event later than four hours after notification.

Other service problems will be responded to by the close of business on the next working day of the multichannel video provider.

c. The in-home appointment window alternatives for installations and service calls shall not be longer than four hours. The customer may choose the appointment window most convenient for them. In 90 percent of cases, multichannel video provider shall respond on same-day basis to service calls for repair of a nonworking converter or remote control device if the call is received by 3:00 p.m.

d. If, at any time an installer or technician is running late and will not arrive within the prescribed window, an attempt to contact the customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time which is convenient for the customer.

4. Multichannel video provider billing statements shall be clear, concise and understandable: bills will be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges and bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. Multichannel video provider shall consult with the city on any changes to company’s statement and will consider the city’s suggestions for modifications.

5. No customer shall have their service disconnected unless there has been compliance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53088, et seq.

6. In 90 percent of cases, refund checks will be issued within 30 days; but, in no event, later than 45 days following the resolution of the request and the return of the equipment supplied by the multichannel video provider if service is terminated.

7. Multichannel video provider will cooperate with the city’s annual customer service and local programming survey.

8. Customers will be notified a minimum of 30 days in advance of any rate or channel realignment change, changes in products and services offered, billing and complaint procedures and service maintenance policies, as provided in Government Code Section 53088.2(h).

9. Multichannel video provider shall maintain records of the number of service interruptions longer than 30 minutes (on subscriber and institutional networks); service requests, complaints and service calls; their breakdown and resolution and comparison on a year-to-date and previous-quarter/last-year basis. The records shall be in a format developed by multichannel video provider and shall be available for inspection by the city.

10. Customers and local PEG channel programmers shall be afforded access to company’s management structure including the system customer service manager and system general manager. System management staff will respond to PEG channel programmers and customer complaints or inquiries within one working day of the initial request. Customers will, at least annually, be informed of this option via written notice.

11. Multichannel video provider shall file all general customer communications with the city. Company’s filing with the city shall at least be concurrent with its initial distribution to customers. General customer communications include, but are not limited to, marketing materials, rate increase correspondence, annual notification information required under state law, marketing promotions and service contract doorknob hangers.

12. Multichannel video provider will prepare and submit to the city a policy with respect to procedures for access to subscriber’s property.

13. Although actual application of this section shall occur on a case-by-case basis as determined by the multichannel video provider, it shall be general policy that if the multichannel video provider personnel does not arrive for installation or service calls within a designated four-hour time frame agreed to by the consumer, the consumer may request and is entitled to one month’s worth of the subscriber’s total bill. If the multichannel video provider fails to provide such credit, and the request was made by the consumer within 60 days of the missed appointment, the city may request the multichannel video provider to issue the credit. The acceptance of the above service credit shall not prohibit the consumer from seeking additional remedies pursuant to applicable state law.

14. If the multichannel video provider does not mail a check for a refund (including applicable interest) to any consumer disconnecting service with an outstanding credit within the next billing cycle or 30 days, whichever is earlier, the consumer may request and it shall be the general policy of the company that the customer is entitled to receive a $10.00 payment except in special circumstances. In addition to the initial refund (and applicable interest) due, if the multichannel video provider fails to provide the $10.00 payment and the request was made by the consumer within 60 days after failure to receive the refund, the city may request the multichannel video provider to provide the $10.00 payment as well as any outstanding refund (and applicable interest) due.

15. It shall be the multichannel video provider’s general policy that if the multichannel video provider cannot perform standard installations, within seven calendar days of request by a consumer, the consumer may request and is entitled to receive a $10.00 credit except in special circumstances. If the multichannel video provider fails to provide the $10.00 credit and the request was made by the consumer within 60 days of the installation request, the city may request the multichannel video provider to issue the credit.

16. The multichannel video provider shall provide an automatic credit to all consumers where there is an outage of all channels for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more which affects the entire city, regardless of the cause of the outage. The credit for such an outage shall equal, at a minimum, the value of 1/13 of each customer’s monthly bill for the first 24 consecutive-hour period and prorated for each additional four-hour period or portion thereof that the outage continues. The multichannel video provider shall provide an automatic credit to all affected consumers when there is an outage of any premium service for a period of 25 consecutive hours or more which affects the entire city, regardless of the cause of the outage. The credit shall equal, at a minimum, the value of 1/13 of each consumer’s monthly bill for the first 24 consecutive-hour period and prorated for each additional four-hour period or portion thereof that the outage continues.

17. Upon request of the consumer, it shall be the policy of the company that the multichannel video provider shall provide a credit to a consumer whenever an outage or outages of four or more hours in a 24-hour period has affected any of the nonpremium channels received by a consumer as part of their service. The credit shall equal the value of 1/13 of each consumer’s monthly bill for the outages of four hours or greater duration occurring in a 24-hour period. In the event that a premium channel is affected by the outage, the credit shall equal the value of 1/13 of the consumer’s monthly premium rate for each outage of four hours or greater duration occurring in a 24-hour period.

18. Consumers will be given at least 30 days’ notice of any scrambling or descrambling of a channel(s), or rate changes that are within the company’s control.

19. The multichannel video provider shall offer consumers the option to receive an A/B switch at the time of initial service installation for no additional installation cost, and shall provide consumers with written information as to how to use such a switch. The multichannel video provider may charge a reasonable price for said switch. Upon consumer request, the multichannel video provider shall provide an A/B switch after the initial installation of service. If the consumer requests installation of such a switch (to receive broadcast television without cable hookup), the company may charge reasonable fees for such installation and equipment.

20. If, in the opinion of the city manager, there has been a material violation of the terms and provisions of this section which has not been remedied despite notices to do so or the assessment of fees and fines, a written notice may be given to the multichannel video provider setting forth in detail the nature of the violation and proceedings commenced as provided in any franchise agreement documents or other documents for the revocation of any franchise and/or license to do business or permit. (Ord. 03-1893 § 2, 2003; Ord. 94-1784, 1994.)

Article IV. Regulation of State-Issued Cable Television and Video Franchises2


5.32.550 Applicability of chapter to state video services franchisees.

Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any person or entity to obtain a franchise issued by the city, to the extent that such person or entity is authorized to provide cable service or video services under a cable franchise or video services franchise issued under applicable state or federal law, including but not limited to Sections 5800 et seq. of the California Public Utilities Code. The requirements and provisions of this chapter shall not apply or be enforced to the extent that they actually conflict with applicable state or federal law. (Ord. 08-1950 § 2, 2008.)


5.32.560 Regulation of state video services franchisees. 

CMC 5.32.550 through 5.32.620 are designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city. As of January 1, 2007, the state of California has the sole authority to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“Act”). Pursuant to the Act, the city of Covina shall receive a franchise fee and shall receive a fee for public, educational and government (“PEG”) programming purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city has the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards, but the Act grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. The Act leaves unchanged the city’s authority to regulate the city’s current cable franchises in accordance with this chapter and the cable franchises currently in effect, until such time as the cable franchisees no longer hold a city franchise or are no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. (Ord. 08-1950 § 3, 2008.)


5.32.570 State video franchise and PEG fees. 

A. For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina, there shall be a fee paid to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder. 

B. For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina, there shall be an additional fee paid to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for public, educational, and government access purposes consistent with state and federal law. This fee obligation shall take effect upon the earlier of: (1) the fulfillment of all obligations to remit cash payments to the city for support of public, educational, and government access facilities which are contained within a city-issued cable franchise that was in effect on January 1, 2007, and which remained unsatisfied as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article; or (2) the termination by the holder of a city-issued cable franchise of its franchise as provided under state law. The intent of this subsection is to comply with the requirements of subsections (l), (m), and (n) of Section 5870 of the California Public Utilities Code, and the fee established in this subsection is intended to be a fee authorized by subsection (n) of Section 5870. 

C. Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code 5860. (Ord. 08-1950 § 4, 2008.)


5.32.580 Audit authority.

Not more than once annually, the city manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of all holders of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina to ensure compliance with CMC 5.32.570. (Ord. 08-1950 § 5, 2008.)


5.32.590 Customer service penalties under state video franchises. 

A. Any holder of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 

B. The city manager shall monitor the compliance of holders of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager, or his or her designee, will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 

1. For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500 for each violation. 

2. For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation. 

3. For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation. 

C. A holder of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 08-1950 § 6, 2008.)


5.32.600 City response to state video franchise applications.

A. Applicants for state video franchises, or amendments to existing franchises, that will authorize the applicant to operate within the boundaries of the city of Covina must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any applications or amendments to applications filed with the Public Utilities Commission. At a minimum, one complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 

B. Within 30 days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 08-1950 § 7, 2008.)


5.32.610 Notice to adjacent property owners prior to installation of video services facilities.

A. Any holder of a state video franchise, or city-issued cable franchise, operating within the boundaries of the city of Covina, that proposes to install above-ground facilities in the public right-of-way shall, prior to applying for an encroachment permit for the installation of such facilities, but in no case less than 20 days prior to installing such facilities, provide written notice to the owner of the private or public property (excluding the public right-of-way) nearest to the proposed facility. For purposes of this subsection, “above-ground facilities” shall include only those facilities that are located on the ground or on a base or pedestal that is on the ground, and shall exclude aerial or pole-mounted facilities.

B. Any franchisee to which this section applies shall provide the city with a copy of the proposed form of notice to be used in compliance with subsection (A) of this section, no less than 10 days prior to mailing or delivering the notice. The city may require the franchisee to amend the form of the notice. Once the city has approved the form of notice, the franchisee shall not be required to obtain additional approvals of notice from the city, so long as the franchisee does not materially deviate from the form of notice approved by the city. (Ord. 08-1950 § 8, 2008.)


5.32.620 Savings clause.

Each provision of this chapter is separate and distinct, and individually enforceable. In the event any provision is declared to be unlawful, the enforceability of all other provisions shall not be affected. CMC 5.32.550 through this section shall not limit the city’s authority to regulate the city’s current cable franchisee in accordance with CMC 5.32.005 through 5.32.540 and any cable franchises currently in effect until such time that any cable franchisee no longer holds a city franchise or is no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. (Ord. 08-1950 § 9, 2008.)1

For statutory provisions regarding the granting of public utility franchises by local governments, see Public Utilities Code § 6001 et seq. and Government Code § 39732; for provisions regarding the granting of CATV franchises by local government, see Government Code § 53066. 2

Code reviser’s note: Ords. 17-02, 17-03 and 17-16 reauthorize the fee of state-franchised video service providers to support public, educational, and governmental channel facilities codified in CMC 5.32.570, which will remain unchanged and in full effect as to all state-franchised video service providers. 


Chapter 5.36 MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS

Sections:

5.36.010    Definitions.

5.36.020    California Massage Therapy Council certificate required – Effective date.

5.36.030    Display, possession and notification of certification.

5.36.040    Exemptions.

5.36.050    Business license required.

5.36.060    Changes of business.

5.36.070    Zoning.

5.36.080    Health and safety regulations for massage establishments.

5.36.090    Inspections.

5.36.100    Grounds for suspension or revocation of business license.

5.36.110    Suspension or revocation of business license or conditional use permit and appeal.

5.36.120    Enforcement.

    Prior legislation: 1964 Code §§ 15B.1 through 15B.16 and 15B.18 through 15B.24 and Ords. 1232, 04-1906 and 09-1975.


5.36.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases shall have the definitions listed below:

A. “California Massage Therapy Council” means the state-organized nonprofit organization created to regulate the massage industry as set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state (commencing with Section 4600).

B. “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, hygienic, relaxation or any other reason or purpose, whether by means of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, rubbing or other manner of touching external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powders, creams, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. This definition exempts massage of the hands and feet of a seated customer or client when conducted solely for the purposes of administering manicures or pedicures and conducted by California licensed manicurists, pedicurists, beauticians, cosmetologists, or aestheticians. Also exempted is massage above the neck of a seated customer or client when conducted solely for the purposes of administering hair cutting, hair styling, facial hair removal, or nonpermanent makeup application to the face when conducted by California licensed barbers, hairdressers, beauticians, or cosmetologists. 

C. “Massage establishment” means any business conducted within the city of Covina where any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be conducted or carried on, for money or any other consideration, administration to another person of a massage, bath or health treatment involving massages or baths.

D. “Massage practitioner” means any person who administers to another person a massage either as an individual or within a massage establishment in exchange for anything of value whatsoever. The terms “massage therapist” and “massage technician” are included within this definition for purposes of this chapter.

E. “Operator” means all persons who have an ownership interest in a massage establishment and are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the massage establishment.

F. “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of the same acting as an entity. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.020 California Massage Therapy Council certificate required – Effective date.

A. On or after January 1, 2012, any person engaged in the practice of massage must possess a current and valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council. Prior to engaging in, conducting or administering massage within the city for money or other consideration, a massage practitioner shall file a copy of his or her California Massage Therapy Council certificate with the Covina finance director or designee. Compliance with this section shall not excuse a massage practitioner for failing to obtain a Covina business license as required by this code.

B. On or after January 1, 2012, no massage establishment may allow any person to engage in the practice of massage unless that person possesses a current and valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council. Compliance with this section shall not excuse a massage establishment for failing to obtain a Covina business license and a conditional use permit as required by the Covina Zoning Code.

C. Prior to January 1, 2012, any person engaged in the practice of massage may do so pursuant to either a current and valid California Massage Therapy Council certificate or a city massage permit. Prior to January 1, 2012, a city massage permit shall be deemed equivalent to a California Massage Therapy Council certificate for purposes of compliance with this chapter. All city massage permits shall expire on January 1, 2012. Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no further city massage permits will be issued or renewed. 

D. Any city massage permit remaining in effect may be suspended or revoked for violations of this chapter, this code or state law pursuant to the procedures contained in Chapter 5.04 CMC for the suspension or revocation of a city business license. Any conditional use permit remaining in effect may be revoked for violations of this chapter, this code or state law pursuant to the procedures contained in Chapter 17.62 CMC for the revocation of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.030 Display, possession and notification of certification. 

A. Every person engaging in or carrying on the business of massage practitioner shall display a copy of his or her valid California Massage Therapy Council certificate in a conspicuous place. All massage practitioners shall notify the Covina finance director or designee of a change in the practitioner’s home address, and the address of the massage establishment where the practitioner is regularly employed or retained to provide massage, within 30 calendar days after such change. 

B. Every person who owns or operates a massage establishment pursuant to this chapter shall maintain copies of California Massage Therapy Council certificates of each person engaging in or carrying on the business of a massage practitioner within that establishment or premises. All persons owning or operating a massage establishment pursuant to this chapter shall provide the Covina finance director or designee with a copy or other evidence of the California Massage Therapy Council certification of every massage practitioner who is employed by or operating out of the massage establishment, within 30 calendar days after the commencement of such massage practitioner’s period of employment. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.040 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, physical therapists, osteopaths, or other persons licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code, when engaging in such practice within the scope of his or her license. Practical nurses or other persons without qualifications as massage practitioners, whether or not employed by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, physical therapists, osteopaths or other persons licensed to practice any healing art, may not give massage or massage procedures. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.050 Business license required. 

A. Every massage practitioner performing massage within the city as an individual and every person who owns or operates a massage establishment shall possess and maintain a city business license and shall ensure that the applicable business license taxes and fees are paid. A massage practitioner employed by or operating out of a massage establishment shall not be required to possess and maintain a city business license for himself or herself, unless that practitioner also performs massage within the city as an individual outside of the massage establishment. The annual business license tax for massage practitioners and massage establishment owners or operators shall be the amounts set forth in CMC 5.04.510 (plus CMC 5.04.620 for establishments located within the Shoppers Lane parking improvement area). The annual business license application fee for massage practitioners and massage establishment owners or operators shall be the amounts set forth in CMC 5.04.235.

B. Any business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be expressly contingent upon continuing compliance with this chapter and this code, Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the state Business and Professions Code, any applicable term or condition of a California Massage Therapy Council certificate and any applicable rule or regulation issued by the California Massage Therapy Council.

C. All business licenses issued by the city pursuant to this section shall expire on the first day of January of each year. A renewal business license may be issued upon payment of prescribed taxes and fees in accordance with Chapter 5.04 CMC. In the event that a license holder fails to apply to renew his or her business license within those times prescribed by Chapter 5.04 CMC, the license holder shall have to requalify as a new applicant, subject to all provisions and fees herein.

D. An application for a business license to perform massage as an individual or to own or operate a massage establishment shall include the following:

1. All information required by CMC 5.04.160; 

2. A copy of the California Massage Therapy Council certificate for the individual practitioner, if the applicant is an individual, or for all massage practitioners employed at or operating out of the massage establishment, if the applicant is a massage establishment; and 

3. All business license application taxes and fees as required by CMC 5.04.235, 5.04.510 or 5.04.620 or other applicable provision of this code.

E. Prior to issuing a business license pursuant to this chapter, the city may make reasonable investigations into the information provided in the business license application. The city may deny the application if the applicant provides materially false information or for those other grounds set forth in this code. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.060 Changes of business.

Every massage establishment operator or manager shall report immediately to the Covina finance department any and all changes of ownership or management of the massage establishment or business, including, but not limited to, changes of manager or other person principally in charge, stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, officers, directors and partners in any and all changes of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage business. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.070 Zoning.

Massage practitioners and massage establishments that comply with the requirements of this chapter may operate in the same zones, with the same zoning restrictions and requirements, including obtaining a conditional use permit if applicable, as provided for in CMC Title 17 for the following personal or professional businesses:

A. Massage establishments; 

B. Barber and/or beauty shops; 

C. Educational or health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.080 Health and safety regulations for massage establishments. 

A. Zoning. Massage establishments shall be located in a zoning district which permits such use, and shall obtain a conditional use permit to the extent required by CMC Title 17 (see CMC 5.36.070). 

B. Massage Tables. A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and the massage shall be performed on this massage table. The tables should have a minimum height of 18 inches. Two-inch-thick foam pads with a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and shall be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds, floor mattresses, futons, sofa beds, and waterbeds are not permitted on the premises. 

C. Sheets and Towels. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. Receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linens and paper towels. Common use of towels or linen shall not be permitted. 

D. Practitioner Garments. All massage practitioners shall wear garments which cover the entire body, exclusive of the head, neck, arms, legs, hands and feet, while giving a massage. The massage practitioner must be fully covered from a point not more than four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. Such garments shall not be transparent.

E. Cleanliness. All facilities for the massage establishment, including wet and dry heat rooms, shower areas, and restrooms, shall be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized each day the establishment is in operation. All walls, floors and ceilings of each heat room, shower area and restroom shall be made smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting shall be installed in any of these areas. 

F. Alcoholic Beverages/Drugs. No person shall enter, be in or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. The owner, operator and manager shall be responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted. 

G. Signs and Display of Certificates. Each operator shall post and maintain, in compliance with existing state and city laws, a readable sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. The sign and the front of the business shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights and shall otherwise comply with the city’s business signage regulations. Each operator and/or manager shall display, in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment, both (1) the California Massage Therapy Council certificate for the establishment and (2) the California Massage Therapy Council certificate for each and every massage practitioner employed at the establishment (whether or not on duty). 

H. Roster. The operator or manager of the massage establishment shall keep a complete and current list of the names and residence addresses of all massage practitioners and employees of the massage establishment and the name and residence addresses of the manager or managing employee purported to be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment. This roster shall be kept at and/or on the premises and be available for inspection by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter.

I. Lighting. Each operator shall provide in each room or enclosure where massage is given sufficient lighting and ventilation that complies with the city’s buildings and construction code (CMC Title 14). The lighting in each massage room shall be activated at all times while a patron is in such room or enclosure. 

J. Restroom Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom handwash sink. No bar soap may be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each restroom. Showers may be provided at the operator’s option. 

K. Coverings. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary and opaque coverings capable of covering the patron’s specified anatomical areas, including the genital area, anus and female breast(s). No common use of such coverings shall be permitted, and re-use is prohibited unless adequately cleaned.

L. Separate Rooms. If male and female patrons are to be treated simultaneously at the massage establishment, separate massage rooms shall be provided for male and female patrons, except in the case of consensual “couples massage” whereby not more than two individuals may be treated simultaneously in the same room by two massage practitioners. 

M. Living and Food Prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to live inside the massage establishment at any time. All living quarters shall be separate from the massage establishment. No food of any kind shall be prepared for sale or sold in the establishment. 

N. Records of Treatment – Confidentiality. Every operator of a massage establishment shall keep a record of the dates and hours of each treatment or service, the name and address of the patron, the name of practitioner administering such service and a description of the treatment or service rendered. These records shall be prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and shall be retained on the premises for a period of 24 months after such treatment or service. These records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter and for no other purpose. The Covina finance department shall periodically inspect the records to ensure compliance with this chapter. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such records should be used only to ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter or any other applicable state or federal laws and shall remain confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city of Covina shall constitute a misdemeanor.

O. Hours of Operation. The operator must notify the city, in writing, at the time of application for a business license of the business hours for the massage establishment. The operator must notify the city of any changes in hours not later than seven calendar days prior to said change. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. All customers, patrons and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment during these hours and be advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in the front window clearly visible from the outside. No massage establishment may be open for business unless there is at least (1) one massage practitioner with a valid license or certificate on the premises and (2) at least one staff member on the premises who is not a licensed/certificated massage practitioner to assure security for clients and massage staff who are behind closed doors. During its business hours, no massage establishment may lock any of its doors through which the public enters into the establishment from an outside location nor may it lock any of its doors leading to a room in which massage is performed. 

P. No Sexually Oriented Merchandise. No person shall use or possess any sexually oriented merchandise in or on any part of a massage establishment. For purposes of this subsection, “sexually oriented merchandise” shall mean sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery-operated vaginas, and similarly sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity. 

Q. No Public Access. No person(s) other than valid permit holders under this chapter, patrons, and persons empowered by this chapter to conduct a lawful inspection will be allowed anywhere in the massage establishment other than the lobby/reception area during hours of operation. 

R. No Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or exclude patrons on the basis of their race, sex, religion, age, handicap or any other classification protected under federal or state laws, rules or regulations. Every massage establishment shall comply with all federal and state laws, rules and regulations relating to access by disabled patrons. 

S. No Communication Devices. No communication devices shall be installed or used in any manner on the premises so as to interfere with or hinder inspections by law enforcement officers or city officials. 

T. Preemption. In the event the terms and conditions of any current, valid California Massage Therapy Council certificate, or any applicable regulation adopted by a state agency, conflict with or supersede the requirements of this section, any massage establishment shall not be subject to the requirements of this section to the extent of any such conflict or inconsistency. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.090 Inspections. 

A. The city’s building and safety department, police department and/or the county fire department and health department may, at any time, make an inspection of each massage establishment, during regular business hours, for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter, state law or other applicable laws or regulations are met. Criminal investigations may be conducted as directed by the Covina chief of police or finance director. During an inspection, the city or county may verify the identity of all on-duty practitioners and employees. The operator and/or on-duty manager consents to the inspection of the massage establishment by the representatives of said agencies for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met.

B. Any operator or his or her agent, servant or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the massage establishment by a representative of the building and safety department, police department, fire department or health department at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.100 Grounds for suspension or revocation of business license.

The business license of a massage establishment may be suspended or revoked on one or more of the following grounds:

A. That the license holder provided materially false information in his or her application to obtain a business license pursuant to CMC 5.36.050(D) and (E);

B. That the license holder has employed, allowed or permitted a massage practitioner without a current, valid California Massage Therapy Council certification to perform massage in his or her massage establishment;

C. That the license holder does not adhere to the requirements set forth in this chapter or this code, including but not limited to unannounced inspections for compliance;

D. That the holder has not complied with the requirements of Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code and any applicable rule or regulation issued by the California Massage Therapy Council.

License holders may be held responsible for violations of individual employees who practice or engage in or carry on the business of a massage practitioner to the extent permitted by state law. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.110 Suspension or revocation of business license or conditional use permit and appeal. 

A. If any person holding a business license to own or operate a massage establishment conducts or carries on such business contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating such business, the city may suspend or revoke the business license pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.04 CMC. Appeals of any decision shall be as provided in Chapter 5.04 CMC. 

B. If any person holding a conditional use permit to own or operate a massage establishment conducts or carries on such business contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating such business, the city may revoke the conditional use permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.62 CMC. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


5.36.120 Enforcement.

A. Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.16 CMC.

B. Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or applicable state law shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other enforcement or abatement measures, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. They shall also take such other steps, and shall apply to such courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief, as will abate or remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter or applicable state law. (Ord. 11-1997 § 1, 2011.)


Chapter 5.38 BODY ART PRACTITIONERS AND ESTABLISHMENTS

Sections:

5.38.010    Purpose.

5.38.020    Definitions.

5.38.030    Body art practitioner – County registration required.

5.38.040    Body art facilities – County health facility permit required – Operating hours.

5.38.050    Exemptions.

5.38.060    Body art practitioners and facilities – City business license required – Changes of business.

5.38.070    Body art procedures – Client or parental consent required – Certain procedures on minors prohibited.

5.38.080    Body art procedures – Health and hygiene standards.

5.38.090    Health standards for jewelry, ink, permanent cosmetics, and instruments.

5.38.100    Health and safety standards for permanent body art facilities.

5.38.110    Health and safety standards for temporary and mobile body art facilities.

5.38.120    Sterilization procedures.

5.38.130    Mechanical stud and clasp ear piercing – Notification and operating standards.

5.38.140    Inspection/impoundment of instruments.

5.38.150    Suspension or revocation of business licenses, permits or registration.

5.38.160    Violation – Penalty.


5.38.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the provisions of the California Safe Body Art Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 119300 et seq.) which requires local registration of body art practitioners, issuance of local health permits for temporary and permanent body art facilities and allows cities to require notification forms be completed by ear piercing facilities that use only a mechanical stud and clasp device. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.020 Definitions.

A. “Act” means the California Safe Body Art Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 119300 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time.

B. “Body art” means body piercing, tattooing, branding, or application of permanent cosmetics.

C. “Body art facility” or “facility” means the specified building, section of a building, or vehicle in which a practitioner performs body art, including reception areas, the procedure area, and the decontamination and sterilization area. “Body art facility” does not include a facility that only pierces the ear with disposable, single-use, presterilized clasp and stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear.

D. “Body art practitioner” or “practitioner” means a person who performs body art on a client.

E. “Body piercing” means the creation of an opening in a human body for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. “Body piercing” includes, but is not limited to, the piercing of an ear, including the tragus, lip, tongue, nose, or eyebrow. “Body piercing” does not include the piercing of an ear, except for the tragus, with a disposable, single-use, presterilized clasp and stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear.

F. “Branding” means the process in which a mark or marks are burned into human skin tissue with a hot iron or other instrument, with the intention of leaving a permanent scar.

G. “Client” means an individual upon whom a practitioner performs body art.

H. “County” means the county of Los Angeles.

I. “Decontamination and sterilization area” means a room, or specific section of a room, that is set apart and used only to decontaminate and sterilize instruments.

J. “Enforcement officer” means any of the following:

1. The California Department of Public Health;

2. The Los Angeles County department of public health; or

3. The city of Covina police department or building and safety department.

K. “Instrument” means a nonmedical application device used in performing body art, including, but not limited to, needles, needle bars, needle tubes, forceps, hemostats, tweezers, razors, or razor blades.

L. “Mobile body art facility” means a vehicle or other movable facility where a body art practitioner performs body art for more than seven days in a 90-day period.

M. “Owner” means either of the following:

1. The person(s) whose name(s) appear on the county public health facility permit, city business license, property deed, or rental agreement of a body art facility.

2. A person, other than a client, who employs or independently contracts for the services of body art practitioners regulated by this chapter.

N. “Permanent cosmetics” means the application of pigments in human skin tissue for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other appearance of the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent eyeliner, eyebrow, or lip color.

O. “Person” means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.

P. “Procedure area” means a room, or designated portion of a room, that is set apart and only used to perform body art.

Q. “Sponsor” means an individual or business entity, including an event coordinator or manager, responsible for the organization of a convention, trade show, or other temporary event that includes a body art demonstration booth. A sponsor may also be a body art practitioner.

R. “Tattooing” means the insertion of pigment in human skin tissue by piercing with a needle.

S. “Temporary body art facility” means a temporary demonstration booth or facility where a body art practitioner performs body art for no more than seven days in a 90-day period. Vehicles or other movable facilities where a body art practitioner performs body art for seven days or less in a 90-day period are temporary body art facilities for purposes of this chapter.

The definitions contained in this section are intended to conform to those set forth in the Act. To the extent that any term set forth in this chapter is not defined herein or conflicts with the definitions set forth in the Act, the definition as set forth in the Act shall govern. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.030 Body art practitioner – County registration required.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art in the city of Covina, whether as an individual or in connection with a body art facility, without possessing a current certificate of registration from the county, pursuant to Los Angeles County Code Section 11.36.320, as it may be amended from time to time. As a condition of registration or renewal, the applicant shall do all of the following:

1. Provide to the county all of the information required by Section 119306(b) of the Act and Chapter 11.36 of the Los Angeles County Code;

2. Provide to the county proof that he or she has completed a bloodborne pathogens exposure control training program, along with any annual updates, pursuant to Section 119307 of the Act; and

3. Pay all registration fees required by the county.

B. Except as set forth in CMC 5.38.110, at least 15 calendar days prior to performing body art in the city of Covina, the body art practitioner shall file a copy of his or her county certificate of registration with the Covina police department, along with any renewals.

C. A body art practitioner shall display, in a place readily visible to the public at the body art facility where the practitioner is performing body art, his or her current county certificate of registration.

D. The county certificate of registration shall have a term as set forth by Los Angeles County Code, after which the body art practitioner shall be required to renew the certificate of registration in accordance with Los Angeles County Code Section 11.36.320, as it may be amended from time to time.

E. All body art practitioners shall notify the county and Covina police department or designee of a change in the practitioner’s place of business or location where he or she performs body art, within 30 calendar days after such change.

F. Nothing in this section shall exempt a body art practitioner from the requirement to obtain a city of Covina business license or such other permits and licenses as may be required by applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.040 Body art facilities – County health facility permit required – Operating hours.

A. It shall be unlawful for any body art facility, including temporary body art facilities and mobile body art facilities, to conduct business within the city of Covina without possessing a current county public health facility permit, pursuant to Los Angeles County Code Section 11.36.350, as it may be amended from time to time. An application for a county public health facility permit shall include all of the following:

1. A copy of the body art facility’s infection prevention and control plan, as required by Sections 119312(b) and 119313 of the Act;

2. All fees required by the county, which shall not exceed the amount necessary but that are sufficient to cover the actual costs of administration of the county’s permitting program.

B. Except as set forth in CMC 5.38.110, at least 15 calendar days prior to conducting business within the city of Covina, the owner of a body art facility shall file a copy of the county public health facility permit with the Covina police department, along with any renewals.

C. The county public health facility permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the body art facility. Certificates of registration for all body art practitioners performing body art at a body art facility shall also be prominently displayed either near the county public health facility permit or at the individual body art practitioner’s procedure area, if each body art practitioner has such a designated area.

D. A county public health facility permit is valid only for the location of the body art facility and may not be transferred to another owner or facility, unless approved by the county. All body art facilities that have received approval of the county to transfer a public health facility permit shall notify the Covina police department or designee of such transfer within 30 calendar days after such change.

E. A county public health facility permit shall have a term of as set forth in the Los Angeles County Code, after which the body art facility shall be required to renew the permit in accordance with Los Angeles County Code Section 11.36.360, as it may be amended from time to time.

F. Nothing in this section shall exempt a body art facility from the requirement to obtain a city of Covina business license, building permit, site plan review or such other permits and licenses as may be required by applicable provisions of this code. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence construction, reconstruction or alteration of a body art facility or mobile body art facility without first submitting plans, specifications and such other information as may be required to determine compliance with this code and the Act in advance of applying for any building, plumbing, or electrical permits for the facilities to be constructed, reconstructed or altered.

G. Business operating hours for any body art facility shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Any body art begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. All clients shall be excluded from the body art facility during these hours and be advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the reception area and in the front window clearly visible from the outside. During its business hours, no body art facility may lock any of its doors through which the public enters from an outside location nor may it lock any of its doors leading to a room in which body art is performed. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.050 Exemptions.

The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the activities of a physician and surgeon licensed under Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 2000) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code or a physician assistant licensed under Chapter 7.7 (commencing with Section 3500) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a body art practitioner to perform activities that are restricted under Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 2000) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.060 Body art practitioners and facilities – City business license required – Changes of business.

A. Every body art practitioner and every body art facility performing body art within the city shall possess and maintain a city business license and shall ensure that the applicable business license taxes and fees are paid. A body art practitioner employed by or operating out of a body art facility shall not be required to possess and maintain a city business license for himself or herself, unless that practitioner also performs body art within the city as an individual outside of the body art facility. The annual business license tax for body art practitioners and body art facilities shall be the amounts set forth in Chapter 5.04 CMC. The annual business license application fee for body art practitioners and body art facilities shall be the amounts set forth in CMC 5.04.235.

B. Any business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be expressly contingent upon continuing compliance with this chapter, Chapter 11.36 of the Los Angeles County Code, the Act, and applicable terms or conditions of a county certificate of registration or public health facility permit.

C. All business licenses issued by the city pursuant to this section shall expire on the first day of January of each year. A renewal business license may be issued upon payment of prescribed taxes and fees in accordance with Chapter 5.04 CMC. In the event that a license holder fails to apply to renew his or her business license within those times prescribed by Chapter 5.04 CMC, the license holder shall have to requalify as a new applicant, subject to all provisions and fees herein.

D. An application for a business license to perform body art shall include the following:

1. All information required by CMC 5.04.160;

2. For an individual body art practitioner, a copy of his or her county certificate of registration. For a body art facility, a copy of its county public health facility permit and copies of county certificates of registration for all body art practitioners employed or contracted by it to perform body art at that facility; and

3. All business license application taxes and fees as required by Chapter 5.04 CMC, or other applicable provision of this code.

E. Prior to issuing a business license pursuant to this chapter, the city may make reasonable investigations into the information provided in the business license application. The city may deny the application if the applicant provides materially false information or for those other grounds set forth in this code.

F. Every body art facility owner shall report immediately to the city finance department any and all changes of ownership or management of the body art facility, including, but not limited to, changes of manager or other person principally in charge, stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, officers, directors and partners in any and all changes of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the body art facility. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.070 Body art procedures – Client or parental consent required – Certain procedures on minors prohibited.

A. Body art practitioners may only perform body art upon a client 18 years of age or older with the client’s written consent. Prior to the performance of body art, the client shall:

1. Read, complete and sign an informed consent form that, at minimum, includes all information required by Section 119303(a) of the Act; and

2. Receive, complete and sign a health history questionnaire that, at minimum, includes all of the information required by Section 119303(b) of the Act. Pursuant to Section 119303(c) of the Act, the questionnaire and all responses contained therein shall be considered confidential information and the body art facility shall maintain the privacy of the information.

B. Subject to the limitations set forth herein, body art practitioners may only perform body art upon a client under the age of 18 years with the written consent of the client’s parent or legal guardian. Prior to the performance of body art, the client’s parent or legal guardian shall:

1. Read, complete and sign an informed consent form that, at minimum, includes all information required by Section 119303(a) of the Act; and

2. Receive, complete and sign a health history questionnaire that, at minimum, includes all of the information required by Section 119303(b) of the Act. Pursuant to Section 119303(c) of the Act, the questionnaire and all responses contained therein shall be considered confidential information and the body art facility shall maintain the privacy of the information.

C. The following body art procedures may be offered or performed on clients under the age of 18 years with written consent of a parent or legal guardian:

1. Body piercing, except of the nipples or genitals; provided, that the procedure is performed in the presence of the parent or legal guardian;

2. Application of permanent cosmetics to the nipples when applied by a registered permanent cosmetic technician and as directed by a physician.

D. The following body art procedures may not be offered or performed on clients under the age of 18 years, regardless of written consent of a parent or legal guardian:

1. Tattooing;

2. Application of permanent cosmetics, except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section;

3. Branding;

4. Body piercing of the nipples or genitals. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.080 Body art procedures – Health and hygiene standards.

A. Before performing body art, a body art practitioner shall take all precautionary health and hygiene actions required by Section 119308(a) of the Act, which include, among other things, washing of hands as well as using clean clothing, appropriate personal protective equipment, gloves and antiseptic/antimicrobial solutions.

B. After completing any body art procedure, a body art practitioner shall take all post-procedure actions required by Section 119308(b) of the Act, including answering client questions, providing the client post-procedure instructions, discarding of used sharps waste, and washing and disinfecting reusable instruments in a decontamination and sterilization area.

C. A body art practitioner shall maintain a clean and sanitary environment in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 119309 of the Act, including cleaning, disinfecting and/or decontaminating solid surfaces, objects, and instruments. No food, drink, tobacco product, or personal effects are permitted in the procedure area. The body art practitioner shall not eat, drink, or smoke while performing a body art procedure. If a client requests to eat, drink, or smoke, the body art procedure shall be stopped and the procedure area shall be protected from possible contamination while the client leaves the procedure area to eat, drink or smoke. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.090 Health standards for jewelry, ink, permanent cosmetics, and instruments.

A. Jewelry, instruments and equipment utilized for body piercing shall comply with the health and materials standards set forth in Section 119310 of the Act.

B. Any ink, pigments, dyes, permanent cosmetics, needles, or instruments utilized in tattooing or applying permanent cosmetics shall comply with the health and materials standards set forth in Section 119311 of the Act. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.100 Health and safety standards for permanent body art facilities.

With the exception of temporary body art facilities or mobile body art facilities, all body art facilities shall comply with the health and safety standards set forth in Section 119314 of the Act. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.110 Health and safety standards for temporary and mobile body art facilities.

Temporary body art facilities and mobile body art facilities shall comply with the health and safety standards set forth in Sections 119316 through 119318 of the Act. At least seven calendar days prior to commencing operations, a temporary body art facility or mobile body art facility shall file a copy of its county certificate of registration and county public health facility permit with the Covina police department. Temporary body art facility permits shall be valid only for the days and hours of operation specified on the application as approved by the county. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.120 Sterilization procedures.

Body art facilities, including temporary body art facilities and mobile body art facilities, shall comply with all of the sterilization procedures set forth in Section 119315 of the Act. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.130 Mechanical stud and clasp ear piercing – Notification and operating standards.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform piercing of the ear, except for the tragus, with a disposable, single-use, presterilized stud and clasp device or solid needle without first providing a form to the client, prepared by the city, that includes all of the information required by Health and Safety Code Section 119326(a) and paying a nonrefundable one-time notification fee to the city, as set by resolution of the city council.

B. Persons performing piercing of the ear, except for the tragus, with a disposable, single-use, presterilized stud and clasp device or solid needle shall only be required to comply with the standards set forth in Sections 119325 through 119327 of the Act. Said persons shall not be required to obtain a county certificate of registration or county public health facility permit to perform the limited activities set forth in this section. However, they shall be required to obtain a city business license in accordance with Chapter 5.04 CMC. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.140 Inspection/impoundment of instruments.

A. Body art facilities, or any location suspected of being a body art facility, shall be subject to inspection by an enforcement officer during its hours of operation and other reasonable times in order to ensure compliance with this chapter and the Act. As part of the inspection, the enforcement officer may take photographs, secure samples, documents and records, or collect other evidence. During an inspection, the enforcement officer may verify the identity of all on-duty body art practitioners. The owner consents to the inspection of the body art facility by any enforcement officer for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter, the Act or other applicable laws or regulations are met.

B. Any owner or his or her agent, servant or employee commits a violation if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the body art facility, or any location suspected of being a body art facility, by an enforcement officer at any time it is occupied or open for business.

C. Body art facilities shall maintain records of training required by this chapter and the Act and shall make them available for inspection by an enforcement officer for three years from the date of that training.

D. Based upon inspection findings or other evidence, the enforcement officer shall make a written report and provide a copy thereof to the owner of the body art facility or the body art practitioner at the completion of an inspection or investigation.

E. Based upon inspection findings or other evidence, an enforcement officer may impound instruments that are found to be unsafe to use. Within 30 days, the city, county or other enforcement agency that impounded the instruments shall commence a proceeding to release the impounded instruments or to seek an administrative or legal remedy for their disposal. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.150 Suspension or revocation of business licenses, permits or registration.

A. The city business license of a body art practitioner or body art facility may be suspended or revoked on one or more of the following grounds:

1. That the license holder provided materially false information in his or her application to obtain a business license pursuant to CMC 5.38.060(D) or (E);

2. That the license holder has employed, allowed or permitted a body art practitioner without a current county certificate of registration to perform body art in his or her body art facility;

3. That the license holder does not adhere to the requirements set forth in this chapter, Chapter 11.36 of the County Code, or the Act, including but not limited to unannounced inspections for compliance.

B. License holders may be held responsible for violations of individual employees or contractors who practice or engage in or carry on the business of a body art practitioner to the extent permitted by the Act or other state law.

C. Where a body art practitioner or body art facility conducts or carries on such business contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Act or any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating such business, the city may suspend or revoke the business license pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.04 CMC. Appeals of any decision shall be as provided in Chapter 5.04 CMC.

D. Where a body art facility conducts or carries on such business contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Act or any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating such business, the city may also revoke any site plan review or other land use entitlement applicable to the business, pursuant to the applicable procedures set forth in CMC Title 17.

E. A county certificate of registration or public health facility permit issued may be suspended, revoked or reinstated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 119320 through 119322 of the Act or Chapter 11.36 of the County Code. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


5.38.160 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.16 CMC.

B. Every person who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1.26 CMC.

C. Any body art facility operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or applicable state law shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other enforcement or abatement measures, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. They shall also take such other steps, and shall apply to such courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief, as will abate or remove such body art facility and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a body art facility contrary to the provisions of this chapter or applicable state law.

D. Remedies under this chapter are cumulative. (Ord. 12-2013 § 2, 2012.)


Chapter 5.40 PATROL OPERATORS AND SPECIAL GUARDS1

Sections:

5.40.010    Definitions.

5.40.020    State license and city permit required.

5.40.030    Permit – Application.

5.40.035    Post-permit requirements.

5.40.040    Permit – Revocation or suspension.

5.40.050    Application fee.

5.40.060    Chapter enforcement responsibility.

5.40.070    Advertisement approval.

5.40.080    Titles, insignias and items similar to police prohibited.

5.40.090    Reports to police department.

5.40.100    Definition – “On-duty,” “off-duty.”

5.40.110    Special guard badge-wearing.

5.40.120    Uniforms.

5.40.130    Private patrol vehicles.

5.40.140    Weapons.

5.40.150    Equipment and uniform inspection.

5.40.160    Punishment.

5.40.170    Permit – Investigation – Issuance.


5.40.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Private patrol operator” or “operator of a private patrol service” means a person as defined in Sections 7521 and 7522 of the Business and Professions Code of the state who, for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to furnish or furnishes a watchman, guard, patrolman or other person to protect persons or property, or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind; or performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman or other person for any of such purposes;

B. “Special guard” means an employee of a private patrol operator who performs the service of a guard, watchman, private patrolman or other patrol function. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.1.)


5.40.020 State license and city permit required.

No person shall engage in the business of being a private patrol operator or operator of a private patrol service in the city without first obtaining a valid private patrol operator’s license from the state and obtaining a permit from the city council. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.2.)


5.40.030 Permit – Application.

An application for a private patrol operator’s permit shall be submitted to the police department, shall be verified, and shall contain the following information:

A. A photostatic or certified copy of the applicant’s state license and surety bond as evidence that the applicant has complied with the state laws governing the business of private patrols;

B. A list of locations to be patrolled, including the names and addresses of businesses to be patrolled and/or locations to be patrolled;

C. A description of areas of public or private property upon which the applicant intends to park vehicles used in the operation of his business;

D. A current list of names, California driver’s license numbers, state security guard registration numbers, firearm permit numbers, and baton and mace permit numbers of the security guards to be employed in the city;

E. A description of the color and design of the uniforms to be worn by special guards employed by the applicant along with color photographs depicting the front and sides of such uniform;

F. A description of the badge to be worn by any special guard employed by the applicant along with color photographs depicting the color, shape and size of such badges;

G. A statement regarding the number of vehicles applicant intends to use for patrol, their make, model, license number, color scheme, and insignia along with color photographs depicting the front, sides and rear of such vehicles;

H. A statement regarding the manner in which the applicant intends to conduct business in the city, including how the locations will be patrolled and a proposed schedule of patrols and services;

I. Such other identification and information as may be necessary to verify the truth of the matters required to be set forth in this application.

Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to deny the police department, in investigating the applicant, the right to take fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, its officers, members, associates and employees, or request additional information regarding the organization. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.3.)


5.40.035 Post-permit requirements.

A. Every private patrol operator shall continually update the lists of locations to be patrolled, including names and addresses of businesses and locations to be patrolled by promptly notifying the police department of any changes of such names, addresses or locations.

B. Every private patrol operator shall continually update the list of guards employed in the city by notifying the police department of any changes in the list by providing the names of any additional guard or guards replacing those previously listed along with their California driver’s license numbers, state security guard registration numbers, and weapons permit numbers.

C. Any private patrol operator or operator of a private patrol service must have in his or her possession while working within the city his or her permanent private patrol license. An application for license or temporary license will not suffice. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979.)


5.40.040 Permit – Revocation or suspension.

Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to a private patrol operator may be revoked or suspended by the police chief when in his opinion the applicant is violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Private Investigator and Adjuster Act. In the event that any such permit is revoked by the police chief, an appeal may be taken to the city council within 30 days after the date of said denial or revocation. If such an appeal is taken, it shall be by written notice of appeal, filed with the city clerk and served upon the police chief by the applicant. The city council shall set a day for hearing the appeal and shall designate the time and place where such hearing is to be held. A notice of said hearing shall be given the applicant by the city clerk for mailing the same to the last known address of said applicant not less than five days prior to the date set for hearing. At any such hearing, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard and/or defend himself, and may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. The police chief or his representative shall attend the hearing. Upon conclusion of such hearing, the city council shall make findings and shall sustain or overrule, by a majority vote, the decision of the police chief. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.4.)


5.40.050 Application fee.

A. When the application for a private patrol operator’s permit is filed, a uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

B. Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall be applicable for the period designated by such resolution. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.5.)


5.40.060 Chapter enforcement responsibility.

Each private patrol operator shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the rules and regulations governing special guards. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.6.)


5.40.070 Advertisement approval.

Any advertisement, notice or card used by a private patrol operator shall first be submitted to the police chief for review to ensure that such advertisement, notice or card does not deceive an ordinarily reasonable person into believing that the patrol service is a governmental agency or is endorsed by a governmental agency. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.7.)


5.40.080 Titles, insignias and items similar to police prohibited.

No employee, officer, member or associate of any private patrol service shall wear or display any badge, insignia or uniform which so resembles that of a law enforcement officer of any city, county, state or federal agency within Los Angeles County as would deceive an ordinarily reasonable person into believing said employee, officer, member or associate was such a law enforcement officer. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.8.)


5.40.090 Reports to police department.

Violations of the law observed by a private patrol operator or his employees shall be immediately reported to the police department. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.9.)


5.40.100 Definition – “On-duty,” “off-duty.”

“On-duty” means the time the special guard or private patrol officer arrives at his first assigned post to the completion of his last assigned post. “Off-duty” means any time other than on-duty time. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.10.)


5.40.110 Special guard badge-wearing.

It shall be the duty of every special guard to have on his person a special guard badge while performing the duties of special guard. While such special guard is wearing his uniform, such badge shall be worn on the outside front of his uniform. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.11.)


5.40.120 Uniforms.

All special guards while performing their duties shall be in full, special guard uniforms, including badges, unless an exception is granted by the police chief. When uniforms are worn off-duty, the badge, insignia, hat piece, or any other identifying symbol attached to the uniform shall not be visible to public view. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.12.)


5.40.130 Private patrol vehicles.

A private patrol service shall not use or permit to be used, for the purpose of patrolling, any vehicle which is not identified with markings or insignia clearly identifying said vehicle as a private patrol vehicle. No vehicles used by, or in connection with, any private patrol service or by any special officer shall be equipped in any manner with a red light or siren exhibited or directed toward the front of such vehicle. No vehicle used by, or in connection with, a private patrol service or by any special officer shall so resemble a police vehicle or bear markings or insignia which so resemble those of a governmental agency as would deceive an ordinarily reasonable person into believing such vehicle is a police vehicle or a vehicle representing a governmental agency. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.13.)


5.40.140 Weapons.

Weapons shall include guns, mace and batons. A gun can only be carried by a special officer while he or she is on-duty and in possession of an authorized, valid State of California, Department of Consumer Affairs, Bureau of Collections, Investigative Services permit. Mace and batons may be carried by a special officer while on-duty and in the possession of an authorized, valid, permanent mace and/or baton permit. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.14.)


5.40.150 Equipment and uniform inspection.

Each holder of a private patrol operator’s permit shall hold monthly inspection of all uniforms, equipment, ammunition and weapons. Records of inspection shall be maintained for a period of one year, and available to the police chief upon request thereof. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.15.)


5.40.160 Punishment.

Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or six months in the county jail. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.16.)


5.40.170 Permit – Investigation – Issuance.

The police chief and such other department heads as may be requested within a reasonable time after filing of an application shall conduct such investigation as they may deem necessary concerning the application and the business proposed to be conducted. After the investigation of each special guard and the reports necessary for the issuance of the permit, the police chief shall issue such permit if he finds that all material facts in the application have been truly stated and that the applicant or the special guards have not previously been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; if he finds to the contrary, he shall deny such permit. (Ord. 1401 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 18.17.)1

For statutory provisions regarding regulation of private detectives, see Business and Professions Code § 7520 et seq. 


Chapter 5.44 TAXICABS1

Sections:

5.44.010    Definitions.

5.44.020    Certificate – Required.

5.44.030    Certificate – Application.

5.44.040    Certificate – Hearing.

5.44.050    Certificate – Issuance.

5.44.060    Certificate – Grounds for denial.

5.44.070    Certificate – Revocation.

5.44.080    Certificate – Application for change.

5.44.085    Employee records.

5.44.090    City driver’s permit – Issuance conditions – Other agency permit.

5.44.092    Blanket permit – Limiting duration of blanket permit – Amending or revoking blanket permit – Requiring drivers to obtain city driver’s permit.

5.44.093    Blanket permit – Denial of individual driver’s right to operate within the city.

5.44.100    City driver’s permit – Applicant fingerprinting and photographs – Criminal record investigation.

5.44.102    City driver’s permit – Testing of applicant for controlled substances and alcohol use.

5.44.105    City driver’s permit – Vehicle safety check.

5.44.110    City driver’s permit – Other agency permit – Display.

5.44.120    City driver’s permit – Expiration – Nontransferable – Renewal application – Controlled substances and alcohol testing.

5.44.130    City driver’s permit – Revocation.

5.44.140    City driver’s permit, other agency permit, or blanket permit – Appeal.

5.44.150    Nontransferability of certificates and permits.

5.44.160    Operating rules and regulations.

5.44.170    Numbering.

5.44.180    Owner’s responsibility.

5.44.190    Authority of city to recover administrative costs.


5.44.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Blanket permit” means a letter published by the police chief accepting in place of its own permits the individual driver permits issued by a governmental agency other than the city.

B. “Certificate” means a public convenience and necessity certificate issued pursuant to this chapter.

C. “City driver’s permit” means an identifying card approved by the police chief for each operator or driver identified as such in the application which has been filed with the planning division of the community development department. This permit shall have printed on it “not transferable,” “valid only in the City of Covina,” and “good until revoked or suspended or termination of employment.” Upon termination of employment, suspension or revocation, the city driver’s permit shall be surrendered to the licensee who will immediately forward the same to the police chief.

D. “Cruising” means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public places in the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.

E. “Other agency permit” means a permit issued by a governmental agency other than the city.

F. “Taxicab” means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle by means of which members of the general public are transported for hire upon any public street in the city, and not over a regular or defined route, and irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundaries of the city or not.

G. “Taximeter” means a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying motor-propelled vehicle is mechanically registered, calculated or indicated by means of figures in accordance with the distance traveled or the time elapsed, or waiting time or both. (Ord. 96-1800 § 1, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.1.)


5.44.020 Certificate – Required.

No person shall engage in the business of providing taxicab service or of operating a taxicab upon any public street within the city without having obtained a public convenience and necessity certificate from the city council in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, and without complying with or having complied with all the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city. (1964 Code § 26.2.)


5.44.030 Certificate – Application.

Any person desiring to obtain a certificate required by CMC 5.44.020 shall submit to the planning division of the community development department of the city an application which the department shall convey to the city council for hearing and which sets forth the information described in subsections (A) through (G) of this section:

A. The name and address of the applicant, and if the same is a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same is a partnership, association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company with the address of each;

B. A complete schedule of the fares or rates to be charged;

C. A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving:

1. Trade name and year model,

2. Motor and serial number,

3. State license number,

4. Seating capacity,

5. Body style;

D. The street number and exact location of the place where the applicant proposes to conduct such business;

E. The name of the legal and registered owner of each such vehicle;

F. The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram and insignia which will be used on such vehicles;

G. Such further information as the city council may require. (Ord. 96-1800 § 2, 1996; Ord. 1281 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 26.3.)


5.44.040 Certificate – Hearing.

Upon receipt of any certificate application referred to in CMC 5.44.030, the city council shall set a time not less than 10 or more than 30 days thereafter for the hearing of the application before the city council, and shall give notice of the time so set at least five days before the date of the hearing to the applicant by mail, at the address set out in such application, and by publication of notice of such application and the date of hearing in a newspaper in the city on one day of publication in accordance with State Government Code § 6061. (Ord. 96-1800 § 3, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.4.)


5.44.050 Certificate – Issuance.

At the time set for the hearing of a certificate application, the city council may examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter set forth in the application and shall determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the certificate applied for, and if the city council so finds, it shall by resolution order the finance department to issue a business license and certificate in accordance with the application, subject to the filing and approval of insurance, as provided for in CMC 5.44.060(E), and subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the resolution, including the minimum and maximum number of vehicles that may be used. The business license fee shall be paid at the time the business license and certificate are issued by the finance department. (Ord. 96-1800 § 4, 1996; Ord. 1281 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 26.5.)


5.44.060 Certificate – Grounds for denial.

Any of the following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of a certificate:

A. That the application does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this chapter;

B. That the vehicles described do not meet the requirements set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state in regard to safety;

C. That the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon such motor vehicles is in conflict with or imitates any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any person in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public;

D. That the applicant has at some prior time had such a certificate or similar certificate issued by any other city revoked for any reason;

E. That the applicant fails to provide insurance for bodily injury in the amount of $1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each accident and insurance for property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 for each accident;

F. That it appears to the city council that the granting of more certificates would unduly congest the traffic and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public, and that the public interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of such certificate. (Ord. 96-1800 § 5, 1996; Ord. 91-1724 § 1, 1991; 1964 Code § 26.6.)


5.44.070 Certificate – Revocation.

Any certificate granted under provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city council, either as a whole or as to any car described therein, or as to the right to use any distinctive color, monogram or insignia, after five days’ notice to the certificate holder requiring him to appear at a certain time and place to show cause why the certificate should not be revoked for any of the following reasons:

A. That the undertaking or insurance provided for in CMC 5.44.060(E) has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for nonpayment of premium, or is not in force for any reason;

B. For the nonpayment of any business license fee;

C. For failure to observe any of the rules and regulations or provisions set out in this chapter, in the certificate or in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the certificate;

D. For the violation of any laws involving moral turpitude by any certificate holder, operator or driver of any taxicab covered by such certificate;

E. For failure to use a distinctive color, monogram or insignia described in the application, or for deviation from the schedule of rates and fares set forth in the application, or for voluntarily discontinuing operations for five days or more;

F. For any cause which in the opinion of the city council makes it contrary to public interest, convenience and necessity for the certificate to be continued. (1964 Code § 26.7.)


5.44.080 Certificate – Application for change.

In the event that any certificate holder desires to change his or her schedule of rates or charges or the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on the taxicabs described in the application, or to substitute any vehicle for or in place of a vehicle described in the application, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him or her as taxicabs, he or she shall make application for permission to do so to the city council, which permission shall be granted if in its discretion the city council deems that the public interest, necessity and convenience will be served by the change, and if the certificate holder has complied with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 96-1800 § 6, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.8.)


5.44.085 Employee records.

Every certificate holder shall maintain and make available for inspection to the police chief or his authorized representative, upon reasonable request during normal business hours, the employee records of all current taxicab drivers showing name, date of hire and date of issuance of driver’s permit by the city or by another approved government agency as set forth in CMC 5.44.090(B). (Ord. 96-1800 § 7, 1996; Ord. 1660 § 1, 1988.)


5.44.090 City driver’s permit – Issuance conditions – Other agency permit.

No person shall drive or operate a taxicab in the city without first obtaining either a city driver’s permit in writing to do so as provided for in this chapter, or a permit issued by a governmental agency other than the city whose driver permitting process has been formally approved by the city police department, and whose permits will be accepted by the city police department in lieu of city permits.

A. In cases where the police department will not accept the driver permits of a governmental agency other than the city, any person desiring to obtain such driver’s permit shall make a written application through the finance department of the city, submit photographs and fingerprints as described in CMC 5.44.100, and submit to controlled substances and alcohol testing as required by state law and as described in CMC 5.44.102, and no city driver’s permit shall be valid until approved by the police chief. No city driver’s permit shall be issued to any person under the age of 18 years, or to any person who has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or to any person who within a period of two years immediately preceding such application has been convicted of reckless driving or driving a vehicle upon a highway while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs. No city driver’s permit shall be granted to any person who does not hold a chauffeur’s license issued by the Motor Vehicle Department of the state. Any falsification of the application for the permit shall be grounds for the refusal of the permit.

B. In place of issuing permits itself, the police department may accept the permits issued by another government agency if the police department determines the other agency’s permitting process to be as acceptable as its own permitting process, which process must include a criminal record check as set forth in CMC 5.44.100, a controlled substances and alcohol testing program as set forth in CMC 5.44.102, and a vehicle safety check as set forth in CMC 5.44.105. The certificate holder must apply by letter to the finance department for such an acceptance, which letter must give the name, address, and telephone number of the agency issuing permits to the certificate holder’s drivers, and which letter the finance department will convey to the chief of police. The police department in its turn may conduct such investigations as it deems necessary and may request the transportation section of the planning division to conduct all or part of such investigations. If the police department accepts another agency’s permitting, the police department will issue a blanket permit to the certificate holder in the form of a letter testifying to its acceptance of the other agency’s permitting, specifying the duration of such acceptance, and requiring the certificate holder to provide the police department with monthly lists giving the names of all drivers that will operate within the city using permits issued by the governmental agency approved by the police department. (Ord. 96-1800 § 8, 1996; Ord. 1541 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1281 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 26.9.)


5.44.092 Blanket permit – Limiting duration of blanket permit – Amending or revoking blanket permit – Requiring drivers to obtain city driver’s permit.

At the time it grants a blanket permit that recognizes the permitting authority of a governmental agency other than the city, the police department may specify the duration of the blanket permit; at the end of the specified time period, the police department may extend the blanket permit indefinitely by declining to revoke it formally. At any time after issuing a blanket permit, the police department may, for just cause, revoke the blanket permit or amend it to require one or more drivers of the certificate holder holding the blanket permit to obtain individual driver permits from the city as described in CMC 5.44.090(A), 5.44.100, 5.44.102, and 5.44.105. Just cause includes but is not limited to:

A. The reasons given in CMC 5.44.060(A) through (F);

B. The discovery that a driver of the certificate holder has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has been convicted within two years of the decision to amend or revoke the blanket permit of reckless driving or driving a vehicle upon a highway while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs;

C. The failure of the certificate holder to report to the police department a driver it knows to have been convicted of the violations described in subsection (B) of this section;

D. The failure of the certificate holder to submit monthly lists to the police department naming all drivers who operate within the city using the permits of the noncity governmental agency approved by the police department;

E. The failure of a driver or drivers to abide by the operating rules and regulations described in CMC 5.44.160 and 5.44.170;

F. The discovery that the permitting procedures followed by the approved noncity governmental agency no longer satisfy the requirements of the police department;

G. The discovery that a driver or drivers have tested positive in the other agency’s controlled substances and alcohol testing program, which program is described in CMC 5.44.102. (Ord. 96-1800 § 9, 1996.)


5.44.093 Blanket permit – Denial of individual driver’s right to operate within the city.

The police chief may, citing the reasons for revocation described in CMC 5.44.130 applicable to city-permitted drivers, deny the privilege of operating in the city to a driver or drivers of the certificate holder holding the blanket permit. (Ord. 96-1800 § 10, 1996.)


5.44.100 City driver’s permit – Applicant fingerprinting and photographs – Criminal record investigation.

Before a permit is granted to an applicant, the applicant shall present himself to the police department, furnish two acceptable photographs and be fingerprinted, and one photograph and the fingerprints shall be filed with the records of the police department, which shall investigate the applicant’s criminal record. The remaining photograph shall be affixed to the permit. (Ord. 96-1800 § 12, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.10.)


5.44.102 City driver’s permit – Testing of applicant for controlled substances and alcohol use.

As required by Section 53075.5 of the State of California Government Code (adopted in August 1995), before a city driver’s permit is granted to an applicant, the applicant shall submit to the procedures of a specified controlled substances and alcohol testing program and shall test negative as an outcome of those procedures. In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the testing facility shall report the results directly to the police department, which shall notify the taxicab leasing company of record, if any, of positive results. In all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the employing transportation operator, which must notify the police department of positive results. (Ord. 96-1800 § 13, 1996.)


5.44.105 City driver’s permit – Vehicle safety check.

Before a permit is granted to an applicant, the applicant shall make his or her vehicle available to the police department, which will inspect the vehicle to make sure it is safe to drive. (Ord. 96-1800 § 14, 1996.)


5.44.110 City driver’s permit – Other agency permit – Display.

Upon obtaining a permit as provided for in this chapter, the driver or operator shall at all times keep the city or other agency permit posted in full view in the vehicle operated by him or her. (Ord. 96-1800 § 15, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.11.)


5.44.120 City driver’s permit – Expiration – Nontransferable – Renewal application – Controlled substances and alcohol testing.

All city permits to operate a taxicab shall expire one year from date of issue. The permits are personal and are not transferable. Applications for renewal shall be made within 30 days before the date of expiration of the permit. As required by Section 53075.5 of the State of California Government Code (adopted in August 1995), before a driver’s permit may be renewed, the applicant for renewal shall submit to the procedures of a specified controlled substances and alcohol testing program and shall test negative as an outcome of those procedures. In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the testing facility shall report the results directly to the police department, which shall notify the taxicab leasing company of record, if any, of positive results. In all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the employing transportation operator, which must notify the police department of positive results. (Ord. 96-1800 § 16, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.12.)


5.44.130 City driver’s permit – Revocation.

The police chief may revoke or suspend any such permit so issued for any violation of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of such permit or for the existence of any state of facts which would have been a good reason for denying such permit when applied for, whether such state of facts existed at the time the application was made for such permit or came into existence thereafter. (Ord. 96-1800 § 17, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.13.)


5.44.140 City driver’s permit, other agency permit, or blanket permit – Appeal.

In the event of a refusal, revocation or suspension of any permit under this chapter by the police chief, including amendment or revocation of a blanket permit, or denial of the right to operate of a driver or drivers operating under a blanket permit, the applicant or permittee may appeal from the decision to the city council which may, in its discretion, affirm, reverse or modify the rule made by the police chief. (Ord. 96-1800 § 18, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.14.)


5.44.150 Nontransferability of certificates and permits.

No certificate or permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable, either by contract or by operation of law, without the permission of the city council having been first obtained, and any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause for revocation thereof. (Ord. 96-1800 § 19, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.15.)


5.44.160 Operating rules and regulations.

The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all persons operating taxicabs:

A. All taxicabs shall be kept in good mechanical condition;

B. Every taxicab shall have posted in the passenger compartment a schedule of rates and charges for the hire of such vehicle;

C. The operator of any taxicab shall carry any passenger engaging the same safely and expeditiously to his or her destination by the most direct, accessible route;

D. No operator of any taxicab shall solicit or carry any passenger after the taxicab has been engaged or while it is in use by another passenger, without the consent of the passenger first engaging or using the taxicab. A passenger engaging a taxicab shall have the exclusive right to full and free use of the passenger compartment and the whole thereof if he or she desires the same;

E. No charges shall be made by any operator or owner of any taxicab lower than or in excess of the rates posted in the passenger compartment of the vehicle and approved by the city council and as shown by the taximeter;

F. Every taxicab operated in the city shall have located therein a taximeter conspicuously displayed to allow any passenger to observe the same; (Ord. 96-1800 § 20, 1996; Ord. 1281 § 3, 1974; 1964 Code § 26.16.)


5.44.170 Numbering.

Every certificate holder shall designate each of his or her taxicabs by number, and no two taxicabs of any certificate holder shall be designated by the same number. The name or trade name of the certificate holder and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab and in the passenger compartment thereof. (Ord. 96-1800 § 21, 1996; 1964 Code § 26.17.)


5.44.180 Owner’s responsibility.

It is unlawful for the owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of a taxicab, to request, cause or permit the operation of a taxicab upon any public street within the city by any driver who does not have a valid permit to operate a taxicab, whether that permit is issued by the city or by a governmental agency other than the city and approved by the city’s police department. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 1988.)


5.44.190 Authority of city to recover administrative costs.

The city may charge the certificate holder and the certificate holder’s drivers a reasonable fee or fees in order to recover expenses incurred in processing applications, conducting background investigations, and carrying out other administrative tasks associated with the operation of the certificate holder’s taxicabs within the city. (Ord. 96-1800 § 23, 1996.)1

For statutory provisions allowing local authorities to license and regulate the operation of any vehicle for hire and drivers of passenger vehicles for hire, see Vehicle Code § 16501; for provisions regarding carrier generally, see Commercial Code § 2805 et seq.; for provisions regarding financial responsibilities, see Vehicle Code § 16500 et seq. 


Chapter 5.50 GAMES FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES

Sections:

5.50.010    Permitted.

5.50.020    Organizations eligible for permit to conduct bingo games.

5.50.030    Bingo game permit required.

5.50.040    Definitions.

5.50.050    Procedures.

5.50.060    Filing of application.

5.50.070    Action on receipt of permit fee.

5.50.080    Reports on application.

5.50.090    Information.

5.50.100    Findings and determination by chief of police.

5.50.110    Appeal.

5.50.120    Contents of permit.

5.50.130    Permit fee – Law enforcement-public safety fee.

5.50.135    Term of permit.

5.50.140    Applications to be kept current.

5.50.150    Requirement for bingo manager.

5.50.160    Manager to be noncompensated.

5.50.170    Bingo manager permit.

5.50.180    Investigation.

5.50.190    Bingo games open to public.

5.50.200    Attendance limited to occupancy and parking capacity.

5.50.205    Off-street parking requirements for bingo activities.

5.50.210    Maximum amount of prize.

5.50.220    Proceeds and profits to be kept in separate fund or account – Use of proceeds and profits.

5.50.230    Financial interest in permittee only.

5.50.240    Exclusive operation by permittee.

5.50.245    Nonassignment of license.

5.50.250    Receipt of profit by a person – A misdemeanor under state law.

5.50.260    Bingo games conducted only on permittee’s property.

5.50.270    Equipment and supplies.

5.50.280    Minors not to participate.

5.50.290    Intoxicated persons not to participate.

5.50.300    Hours of operation – Use limitation per parcel.

5.50.305    Distance requirement.

5.50.310    Participant must be present.

5.50.320    Use of credit prohibited.

5.50.330    Posting of permit.

5.50.340    Members operating and staffing games – Identification badges.

5.50.350    Posting of costs, prizes and rules.

5.50.360    Record of prizes.

5.50.370    Record keeping.

5.50.380    Ineligible persons and organizations.

5.50.390    Prohibition against admission fee.

5.50.400    Cooperation with chief of police.

5.50.410    Revocation.


5.50.010 Permitted.

Bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized pursuant to Section 19, Article IV, of the California Constitution, and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.020 Organizations eligible for permit to conduct bingo games.

Organizations allowed to conduct bingo games pursuant to the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, are eligible to apply to the city for permits to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1372 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.030 Bingo game permit required.

No organization shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the city without first having secured a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operation of bingo games. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.040 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo includes cards having numbers or symbols that are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes.

B. “Nonprofit charitable organization” means any organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of California as the same is amended from time to time. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.050 Procedures.

The application procedure provided for in this chapter shall be followed with regard to permits sought pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.060 Filing of application.

Every person desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the chief of police upon a form to be provided by the chief of police and, at such time, pay the required fee.

Any applicant for an initial permit shall file a complete application not later than 90 calendar days prior to the date upon which the applicant wishes to commence its first bingo game. A permittee who wishes to continue bingo operations beyond the expiration date of its then current permit shall apply for permit renewal by filing a complete permit application not later than 45 calendar days prior to the date upon which the renewal applicant’s permit expires. A permittee’s or applicant’s failure to file a complete application within the time frames set forth above shall constitute independent grounds to deny issuance or renewal of a bingo permit under this chapter.

The application shall specify:

A. The name, address, and telephone number of the local applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under CMC 5.50.020;

B. The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the local corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust;

C. A list of the names and descriptions of all members of the applicant organization who will operate and staff bingo games;

D. A detailed schedule of the date(s), hours, location, parking space capacity, and occupancy capacity of such location of each bingo game to be held;

E. A detailed description of the record system to be used to account for the proceeds, prizes, expenses and profits of each bingo game, as well as a copy of the audited financial records of the applicant for the previous 12 calendar months;

F. The location and signatures of the special bank account(s) required by CMC 5.50.220;

G. A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon violation of any of such provisions;

H. The annual permit fee affixed by the city council by resolution shall accompany the application;

I. The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a letter or other evidence from the State Franchise Tax Board showing that the applicant is exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code Section contained in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code if the applicant claims eligibility for a permit by virtue of said section;

J. The application shall be signed by at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the local corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust;

K. The application shall be verified under penalty of perjury;

L. The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed;

M. The names of the individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the permittee;

N. Whether the application is for a new permit or a renewal of an existing permit. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1372 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.070 Action on receipt of permit fee.

Upon receipt of a permit fee, the chief of police shall:

A. Issue a dated receipt showing the location for which an application has been made;

B. Transmit copies of the permit application to interested departments of the city, including but not limited to the planning director, the building official, the health officer, and the fire chief, to determine if the appropriate zoning ordinances and regulations, building code ordinances, the health code ordinance, the provisions of this chapter, and the fire code ordinance have been or will be complied with. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.080 Reports on application.

Every officer and department to which an application is referred shall, in writing, advise the chief of police of all material facts necessary to determine whether the permit should be granted, granted subject to conditions, or denied, and their approval or disapproval of the application. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.090 Information.

Every officer and department to which an application for a permit is referred may require such additional information and the filing of such additional forms as he deems necessary. Applicants shall provide such information and identification as deemed necessary by the chief of police in order to investigate matters bearing upon the moral character of members of the applicant organization and those who will staff and operate bingo games. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.100 Findings and determination by chief of police.

Upon review of data submitted by the applicant and upon completion of his investigation of all relevant information, the chief of police shall make findings on the following matters:

A. Whether or not the applicant is an eligible organization as defined in this chapter;

B. Whether or not the applicant meets all applicable requirements of the city, including this chapter, for the conduct of bingo games. In making this finding, the statements of all reporting officials and departments shall be considered;

C. Whether or not the applicant meets all applicable requirements of state law including Section 326.5 of the Penal Code.

Based upon the above findings, the chief of police shall grant the permit, subject to conditions reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with all laws and regulations, or deny the permit. The applicant shall be notified of such determination. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.110 Appeal.

The denial of a permit or any condition to which a permit is subject deemed unreasonable by an applicant may be appealed by an applicant by written notice to the city council filed with the city clerk. Said notice of appeal shall be filed within 15 days of the date on which the chief of police mailed notice of his determination to the applicant and shall set forth grounds upon which the appeal should be granted.

Within 45 days after the filing of such appeal, the city council shall set the matter for a hearing and cause notice thereof to the applicant-appellant and any other person requesting notice thereof. Based on the information presented at the hearing, the city council shall make findings in accordance with CMC 5.50.100 and shall grant or deny the appeal in accordance with such findings. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.120 Contents of permit.

A permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall contain the following information:

A. The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued;

B. The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

C. The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

D. The date of the expiration of such permit;

E. The fact that this permit is subject to revocation for any violation of this chapter;

F. Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.130 Permit fee – Law enforcement-public safety fee.

A. The fee for the bingo permit shall be in the amount set forth by council resolution, not to exceed the amount authorized by Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. If the application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.

B. In addition to the annual bingo permit fee set forth in subsection (A) of this section, a permittee shall pay a law enforcement-public safety fee to the finance department if all of the following criteria are met:

1. The police department, fire department, or any other law enforcement or public safety organization is required to respond to a request for assistance at a location where permitted bingo is being conducted;

2. The responding department or organization incurs actual costs directly related to responding to the request for assistance;

3. The responding department or organization requests to be reimbursed for those actual costs incurred in responding to the request for assistance; and

4. The request for assistance arises from a permittee’s violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

If all of the above criteria are satisfied, the responding law enforcement or public safety department or organization may request reimbursement from the permittee by submitting to the finance director a statement outlining the actual costs incurred in responding to the request for assistance (“statement”). The finance director shall serve the statement upon the permittee in person or by regular mail. Service of the statement shall be deemed complete on the date of personal service or five calendar days after the date of mailing.

Unless appealed, the permittee shall remit to the finance director the reimbursement amount set forth in the statement within 30 calendar days following the date of service of the statement. Upon proof submitted by a permittee of a financial hardship, the finance director, in his or her discretion, may allow the permittee to pay the reimbursement amount set forth in the statement over several monthly payments, in those amounts and on reasonable terms determined by the finance director.

If the permittee disputes that it is responsible for costs set forth in the statement, the permittee may appeal that determination by written notice to the city council, filed with the city clerk. Said notice of appeal shall be filed within 15 calendar days following the date of service of the statement and shall set forth grounds upon which the appeal should be granted. Within 45 days after the filing of such appeal, the city council shall set the matter for a hearing and cause notice thereof to be sent to the permittee/appellant. Based upon the information presented at the hearing, the city council shall make findings determining whether or not the permittee/appellant is responsible for the costs set forth in the statement. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-1906 § 7, 2004; Ord. 1372 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.135 Term of permit.

Each initial or renewed permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of one calendar year, after which it shall expire. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005.)


5.50.140 Applications to be kept current.

A. Every person having a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall notify the chief of police in writing within five days after any change in facts required to be stated by CMC 5.50.060.

B. The permittee shall notify the chief of police of any changes in the list of members who will operate and staff bingo games. Said notification shall be made in writing and served upon the chief of police by personal delivery of a revised list and the obtaining of approval therefor at least three days prior to the operation of any game.

C. The permittee shall retain in his records proof of service of the notification required by subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.150 Requirement for bingo manager.

No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the operation of a bingo game unless such game is conducted under the personal direction of a bingo manager, duly approved by the chief of police. The bingo manager shall be present on the premises during the operation of all bingo games and no person other than a member of a permittee under this chapter shall operate, staff or promote a bingo game. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.160 Manager to be noncompensated.

A bingo manager shall not receive any compensation, in any form, for the services performed in connection with bingo games. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.170 Bingo manager permit.

To obtain a bingo manager’s permit, an applicant for bingo manager shall file with the chief of police an application, together with the fee required by council resolution, setting forth all information and identification the chief requires to conduct a background investigation on the applicant. Such information shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

A. A statement that neither the bingo manager nor the members of the nonprofit organization which operates any bingo game organized by such organization will receive any profit, wage, or salary or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game.

B. A statement that the bingo manager applicant has read and understands all requirements of the law in regard to conducting bingo games in the city, and that such bingo manager will accept full responsibility for the conduct of such bingo games and all bingo card/ticket salespeople under his direction.

C. A statement that the bingo manager applicant, his or her spouse and minor children do not hold a financial interest in any business which sells, leases or distributes bingo supplies or equipment. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.180 Investigation.

A. The chief of police shall issue a bingo manager’s permit if he finds that:

1. The applicant is of good moral character and does not have a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity;

2. All of the statements made in such application are and each of them is true and are not deceptive or misleading and that the applicant has not violated any of the provisions of this chapter or engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise, and that the applicant intends to conduct his business fairly and honestly.

B. If the chief of police determines that the applicant fails to meet the foregoing conditions, he shall deny the application and refuse to issue a permit, and shall notify the applicant of his decision.

C. Each bingo manager permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of one calendar year, after which it shall expire. Initial and renewed bingo manager permits shall be applied for and processed in the same manner provided in CMC 5.50.060, except that the applicant for an initial or renewed bingo manager permit shall be required to provide the information set forth in CMC 5.50.170. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.190 Bingo games open to public.

All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the permittee organization. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.200 Attendance limited to occupancy and parking capacity.

Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to both the occupancy capacity of the room and the parking capacity of the location at which such game is conducted, as determined by the fire department and planning department in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Said capacity shall be posted in plain view on the premises. The permittee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.205 Off-street parking requirements for bingo activities.

A. As an express condition of its permit, during all hours that a permittee conducts bingo, that permittee shall provide the following minimum off-street parking space at the location where bingo activities are conducted: one space for each five fixed seats or one space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for bingo activities, whichever amount is greater; plus one space for the bingo manager and one space for each bingo staff member.

B. During all other hours that a permittee does not conduct bingo at its location, the off-street parking requirements for the underlying use (i.e., church, school, club, lodge, etc.) imposed by Chapter 17.72 CMC (Off-Street Parking and Loading) shall govern.

C. If any section of Chapter 17.72 CMC or of any other chapter of this code imposes a higher off-street parking standard for the location conducting bingo than those set forth in subsection (A) of this section, that regulation imposing the greater amount of off-street parking shall govern.

D. Except as set forth above, Chapter 17.72 CMC shall govern all other standards for the design, location, development, orientation, operation and maintenance of off-street parking spaces for bingo activities. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005.)


5.50.210 Maximum amount of prize.

The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.220 Proceeds and profits to be kept in separate fund or account – Use of proceeds and profits.

All proceeds and profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The permittee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time and the permittee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available. All proceeds and profits derived from a bingo game shall be used only for charitable purposes or for such other limited purposes which are permitted under Sections 326.5(j) and (k) of the Penal Code. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.230 Financial interest in permittee only.

No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the permittee shall hold a financial interest in or receive financial gain from the conduct of a bingo game authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.240 Exclusive operation by permittee.

A bingo game shall be operated, managed and staffed only by members of the permittee organization and they shall not participate in any game while performing these duties. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration, from any bingo game. Only the permittee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. Notwithstanding the above, security personnel who are not members of the permittee but are employed by the permittee may be paid from the proceeds of bingo games, as provided in Sections 326.5(j) and (k) of the Penal Code. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.245 Nonassignment of license.

It shall be unlawful for any person, as an operator, agent, and/or employee of any permittee to assign its license, or to arrange for, or in any other manner sublet, directly or indirectly, with or without consideration, to any person not having a valid, unsuspended or unrevoked license the right to conduct a bingo game. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person, not having a valid, unsuspended or unrevoked license to conduct a bingo game on the premises of a permittee. It shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any permit issued to a permittee to allow the farming out, assignment, or subletting of any bingo game permit under this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005.)


5.50.250 Receipt of profit by a person – A misdemeanor under state law.

It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for any person except for security personnel employed by the permittee to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. The city may also bring an action against the permittee or any person to enjoin any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.260 Bingo games conducted only on permittee’s property.

A permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to it, which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The permit issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the permittee is organized, the permit shall have no further force or effect. A new permit may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that organization. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.270 Equipment and supplies.

All equipment and supplies shall be purchased and not leased or rented for use and all bingo cards shall bear distinctive markings permitting the same to be identified as belonging to the permittee. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.280 Minors not to participate.

No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.290 Intoxicated persons not to participate.

No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.300 Hours of operation – Use limitation per parcel.

No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m., nor shall any permittee conduct bingo games on more than one day per week. No more than one permittee shall conduct bingo on any one parcel of property. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 98-1828 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.305 Distance requirement.

Bingo gaming shall not be conducted on any parcel of property that is located within 700 feet of any other parcel of property where bingo gaming is conducted, measured from the property line of the bingo permit applicant to the property line of any other existing bingo permittee. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005.)


5.50.310 Participant must be present.

No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.320 Use of credit prohibited.

No permittee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to IOU’s and checks to be held) or allow any patron to play on credit. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.330 Posting of permit.

An organization granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not conduct or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless said permit is posted at the public entrance in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game. The permittee shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying for renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect permits. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.340 Members operating and staffing games – Identification badges.

The bingo manager shall have available on the premises at all times during the conduct of games the list of members operating and staffing games which has been filed with the chief of police, pursuant to CMC 5.50.060 and 5.50.140. In the event the list is different than the list originally submitted with the permittee’s application for a permit, proof of service of the revised list, as required by CMC 5.50.140, shall be attached to the current list. The names of the bingo manager and his on-duty staff shall be posted at the entrance to the premises. The bingo manager and all staff members of a bingo game shall wear on their outside clothing an identification insignia or badge, no less than two and one-half inches by three and one-half inches in dimension, indicating the name of the organization and the name and title of the staff member. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.350 Posting of costs, prizes and rules.

The permittee shall post the costs, prizes and rules of each game to be played. Such signs shall be posted adjacent to the permit during the conduct of the bingo game. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.360 Record of prizes.

A record shall be kept by the permittee showing the name and written signature, the address, and the telephone number of the winner, and the consecutive serial number on the receipt for the prize. A list of winners from the previous month shall be posted at the public entrance to the premises. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.370 Record keeping.

A complete and detailed records system shall be maintained by permittees on a continuing basis, clearly displaying all proceeds from bingo operations and patron attendance for each bingo session. By accepting a permit for bingo operations, a permittee shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of such records without prior notice by the finance director, chief of police and their designees, who may retain such records without the need for a warrant. The bingo manager shall personally maintain such records. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.380 Ineligible persons and organizations.

No person convicted of a felony or the crimes of fraud, theft, immoral conduct, bribery or bad-check offenses shall run or operate or assist in the running or operation of bingo games, nor shall such person provide, sell or lease bingo equipment or supplies to a permittee under this chapter. No person from a corporation having any financial interest in a permittee under this chapter or in any way connected with the bingo operations of a permittee under this chapter shall provide, sell or lease bingo equipment or supplies to a permittee under this chapter. Such prohibition shall extend to all persons related by blood or marriage to persons within the prohibited classes. No organization shall conduct bingo games unless said organization has been located and operated within the city for not less than two years. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.390 Prohibition against admission fee.

No admission fee, purchase or donation shall be required for entry onto the bingo premises. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.400 Cooperation with chief of police.

No person shall interfere with, prevent, or refuse to permit a peace officer to make an examination or inspection of any premises, whether the premises is open to the public or not, or of any record kept by the applicant organization, or by any agent or staff member thereof, for the purpose of determining whether the applicant organization and bingo manager are complying with all of the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, statutes, rules and regulations affecting applicant’s business. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


5.50.410 Revocation.

A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of a permit by the chief of police. A permittee may appeal any such revocation to the city council by filing a notice of appeal thereof with the city clerk within 15 days after the revocation is effective. The city council shall set this matter for a hearing within 45 days after the filing of said notice of appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given permittee and anyone requesting notice. Upon evidence presented at the hearing, the council shall determine whether the permittee violated any provision of this chapter and if so whether such violation warrants revocation of the permit.

An organization whose permit is revoked shall be ineligible to apply for a bingo permit for a period of two years thereafter. (Ord. 05-1920 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1349 § 1, 1977.)


Chapter 5.60 FORTUNE-TELLING

Sections:

5.60.010    Definitions.

5.60.020    Prohibitions.

5.60.030    Exceptions.

5.60.040    Permit – Application.

5.60.050    Permit – Investigation – Issuance.

5.60.060    Permit – Fees.

5.60.070    Term of permit.

5.60.080    Bond required.


5.60.010 Definitions.

A. “For pay” means for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.

B. “Fortune-telling” means telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy, or other craft art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, of any kind or nature. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.020 Prohibitions.

No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in or practice fortune-telling or cause the same to be done for pay without having first obtained a permit therefor and without having posted and maintained in full force and effect a surety bond as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.030 Exceptions.

The provisions of CMC 5.60.020 shall not be construed to include, prohibit or interfere with the exercise of any religious or spiritual function of any priest, minister, rector or an accredited representative of any bona fide church or religion where such priest, minister, rector or accredited representative holds a certificate of credit, commission or ordination under the ecclesiastical laws of a religious corporation incorporated under the laws of any state or territory of the United States of America or any voluntary religious association, and who fully conforms to the rights and practices prescribed by the supreme conference, convocation, convention, assembly, association or synod of the system or faith with which they are affiliated; provided, however, that any church or religious organization which is organized for the primary purpose of conferring certificates of commission, credit or ordination for a price and not primarily for the purpose of teaching and practicing a religious doctrine or belief shall not be deemed to be a bona fide church or religious organization. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.040 Permit – Application.

Before any permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, an application for such permit shall be filed with the finance director, shall be signed and verified by the applicant and accompanied by the fee required and shall set forth the following:

A. The name, home and business address, and home and business phone number of the applicant;

B. The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations;

C. The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the city;

D. The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.050 Permit – Investigation – Issuance.

The police chief and such other department heads as may be requested, within a reasonable time after filing of an application, shall conduct such investigation as they may deem necessary concerning the application and the business proposed to be conducted and report their findings to the finance director. After such investigation and report, the finance director shall issue such permit if he finds the following to be true:

A. That all material facts in the application have been truthfully stated;

B. The applicant has not, within the previous six months, been convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to fraud or moral turpitude;

C. The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of the permit and this chapter. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.060 Permit – Fees.

The fee for issuing any permit under this chapter and the fee which shall be submitted with the application for permit under this chapter shall be established by the city council on occasion by resolution. (Ord. 04-1906 § 8, 2004; Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.070 Term of permit.

The term of the permit shall be for no more than the term of the corresponding term for business licenses. A renewal application shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner as a new application. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


5.60.080 Bond required.

Prior to the issuance of a fortune-telling permit and a business license for fortune-telling, the applicant shall have paid the application fee, the license fee required by Chapter 5.04 CMC, and shall have posted with the city clerk a surety bond in the principal amount of $10,000 executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety business in the state and as a principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney and shall have been given to ensure good faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for all loss, damage, theft, or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 1985.)


Chapter 5.70 SHOPPING CART CONTAINMENT AND RETRIEVAL BY OWNERS

Sections:

5.70.010    Purpose – Declaration of nuisance.

5.70.020    Definitions.

5.70.030    Unlawful acts/penalty.

5.70.040    Cart containment plan.

5.70.050    Cart retrieval plan.

5.70.060    Plan submission and approval.

5.70.070    Appeals.


5.70.010 Purpose – Declaration of nuisance.

Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers while shopping on the premises of such businesses. However, shopping carts removed from the premises of such businesses and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The proliferation of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts on public and private sidewalks, streets, parking lots and other ways interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on public and private streets and impedes emergency services. For the aforesaid reasons, such lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts are hereby declared to be a public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this chapter or in any other manner provided by law. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by the owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers to either prevent the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, or provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts, to complement and supplement provisions of state law, and to adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute. (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


5.70.020 Definitions.

Except as expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A. “City” means the city of Covina, California.

B. “Community development director” means the community development director of the city.

C. “Enforcement officer” means any police officer or code enforcement officer employed by the city.

D. “Laundry cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them.

E. “Lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart” means a shopping cart which is either (1) removed from the premises of a retail establishment by any person without written permission or consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer otherwise entitled to possession of such cart, or (2) left unattended, discarded or abandoned upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with the permission of the owner. For purposes of this chapter, any shopping cart located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which such shopping cart was removed shall be presumed lost, stolen or abandoned, even if in the possession of any person, unless such person in possession thereof either (1) is the owner, or any employee or authorized agent of the owner, entitled to possession of said shopping cart, (2) is an officer, employee or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve such carts, (3) is an enforcement officer retrieving, storing or disposing of said cart pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or (4) has written permission or consent to be in possession of said shopping cart from the owner entitled to possession of said shopping cart.

F. “Owner” means any owner, manager, or operator of any retail establishment.

G. “Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for the use of customers of said retail establishment for parking of customer vehicles. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the multistore complex or shopping center.

H. “Premises” means any building, property or other area upon which any retail establishment business is conducted or operated in the city, including the parking area provided for customers of such retail establishment.

I. “Retail establishment” means any business located in the city which offers or provides shopping carts for the use of the customers of such business regardless of whether such business is advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business, and regardless of whether such business is open to the general public, or is a private club or business, or is a membership store.

J. “Shopping cart” or “cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. The term “shopping cart” or “cart” includes a laundry cart. (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


5.70.030 Unlawful acts/penalty.

A. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, any shopping carts to customers of said retail establishment without an approved cart containment plan or cart retrieval plan as required by either CMC 5.70.040 or 5.70.050; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to any retail establishment, or the owner thereof, which provides a total of five or less shopping carts for the use of customers of said retail establishment.

B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, to customers of said retail establishment any shopping cart which does not have a sign permanently affixed thereto containing all of the information specified in Section 22435.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California.

C. Violations of either subsection (A) or (B) of this section committed by any person or entity shall be punishable as follows:

1. The first violation shall be punishable as an infraction in accordance with applicable provisions of the California Penal Code and Government Code; and

2. The second and all subsequent violations of any provision of either subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as set forth in CMC 1.16.010(A). (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


5.70.040 Cart containment plan.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner who provides shopping carts to customers for use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement and comply with the provisions of a written plan approved by the city to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the premises of such business without authorization of the owner (the “cart containment plan”). The cart containment plan, at a minimum, shall include the following elements:

A. Signs Affixed to Carts. Every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall have a sign permanently affixed to it that identifies the owner of the cart, the retail establishment, or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; and lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart removed from the premises to the owner or retail establishment.

B. Notice to Customers. Written notice shall be provided to customers, both in English and Spanish, that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. Such notice may be provided in the form of flyers distributed on the premises, warnings printed on shopping bags, direct mail, website notices or any other means demonstrated to be effective to the city’s satisfaction. The cart containment plan shall identify the specific measures to be implemented to comply with this notice requirement. In addition, conspicuous signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises near all customer entrances and exits and throughout the premises, including the parking area, warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law.

C. Physical Measures. Specific physical measures shall be implemented and maintained by the owner to prevent, deter or impede the removal of shopping carts from the premises. Such physical measures shall be specifically identified in the cart containment plan and may include, but are not limited to, the following: disabling devices installed and maintained on carts, maintaining one or more security guards assigned the responsibility to deter or stop customers from removing shopping carts from the premises, preventing any shopping carts from being taken outside the confines of building exits unless accompanied by an employee of the business, bollards and chains in locations between the business exits and the parking area which effectively prevent transporting shopping carts into the parking area or off the premises, requiring security deposits by customers for cart use, or rental or sale of carts to customers.

D. Daily Cart Confinement. All shopping carts located on the premises of the retail establishment (other than an establishment open for business 24 hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the retail establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at the cart containment area on the premises, as designated in the cart containment plan, until the commencement of the next business day. All shopping carts located on the premises of any retail establishment open for business 24 hours per day, other than carts then currently in use by a customer or patron, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart containment plan at least once per calendar day between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on each day the retail establishment is open for business. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any shopping carts located within an enclosed building.

E. Employee Training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of the cart containment plan and provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. The cart containment program shall expressly describe the employee training program.

F. Collaboration with Other Businesses. Two or more retail establishments located within the same shopping or retail center or sharing a common parking area may collaborate and submit a single cart containment plan.

G. Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any retail establishment which complies with the requirements of CMC 5.70.050. (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


5.70.050 Cart retrieval plan.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner who provides shopping carts to customers to use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement and comply with the provisions of a written plan approved by the city to provide for the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts which have been removed from the premises of the retail establishment (the “cart retrieval plan”). The cart retrieval plan, at a minimum, shall include the following elements:

A. Retrieval Personnel. The owner shall provide personnel for purposes of the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business or one or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The cart retrieval plan shall either:

1. Identify the number of employees who will be assigned such cart retrieval duties, the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned, and the training each of such personnel has received or will receive concerning the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts; or

2. Include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service (other than confidential financial information which may be redacted from the contract). For purposes of this section, those persons identified in the cart retrieval plan as providing cart retrieval services, whether employees of the business or independent contract services, shall be referred to in this section as “retrieval personnel.”

The owner shall provide written authorization to all retrieval personnel, which authorization shall be carried by each such person while performing cart retrieval services on behalf of the owner and shall be provided to any enforcement officer upon request. Each vehicle used by retrieval personnel shall bear conspicuous signs on the vehicle identifying either the name of the retail establishment for which such retrieval service is being performed or, if applicable, the name of the cart retrieval service with which the retail establishment has contracted for such services.

B. Prompt Retrieval of Carts. The owner shall provide retrieval personnel in sufficient numbers to assure that all public streets within a minimum two-mile radius of the premises of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every 24 hours, and all bus stops within a minimum one-mile radius of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every 12 hours, and each lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart owned or provided by the retail establishment which is found as a result of such patrols is immediately retrieved and removed from any public or private property upon which the cart is found. The cart retrieval plan shall identify the streets and bus stops which will be patrolled as required by this subsection; the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and the procedures to be employed by the retail establishment to identify and retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. The cart retrieval plan shall identify the number of trucks, hours of operation of the retrieval personnel, and such other information as reasonably required by the city to assure that the owner is devoting sufficient resources to cart retrieval operations to comply with the provisions of this section and the approved cart retrieval plan. 

C. Monthly Reports. The owner shall provide, or cause to be provided by each cart retrieval service under contract with the owner, on or before the tenth day of each month, a written report to the community development director specifying the number of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts retrieved by retrieval personnel during the preceding calendar month period. 

D. Daily Cart Confinement. All shopping carts located on the premises of the retail establishment (other than an establishment open for business 24 hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the retail establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart retrieval plan until the commencement of the next business day. All shopping carts located on the premises of any retail establishment open for business 24 hours per day, other than carts then currently in use by a customer or patron, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart retrieval plan at least once per calendar day between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on each day the retail establishment is open for business. The provisions of this subsection (D) shall not apply to any shopping carts located within an enclosed building.

E. Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any retail establishment which complies with the requirements of CMC 5.70.040. (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


5.70.060 Plan submission and approval.

A. New or Relocated Retail Establishments. Unless otherwise expressly exempt hereunder, each new retail establishment, and any existing retail establishment relocating to a different location within the city, shall submit a proposed plan complying with the requirements of either CMC 5.70.040 or 5.70.050 to the community development director, and obtain approval thereof by the city, prior to providing any shopping carts to customers of the retail establishment. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the community development director unless accompanied by the processing fee established by the city council.

B. Existing Retail Establishments. Unless otherwise expressly exempt hereunder, each existing retail establishment shall submit a proposed plan complying with the requirements of CMC 5.70.040 or 5.70.050 to the community development director within 120 calendar days following the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. No such retail establishment existing on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted shall provide or continue to provide shopping carts for the use of its customers after the one hundred eightieth calendar day following the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter without a plan approved by the city as conforming to the requirements of either CMC 5.70.040 or 5.70.050; provided, however, such date shall be extended for the period, if any, during which an appeal of the denial of such plan is pending pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the community development director unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the city council. 

C. Plan Review and Approval. Upon the filing of any proposed plan pursuant to either CMC 5.70.040 or 5.70.050 (collectively referred to herein as “the plan”), and receipt of the required processing fee, the community development director shall review said proposed plan and either approve or deny approval of said proposed plan within 60 calendar days following the receipt thereof by the community development director. If the proposed plan complies with each of the applicable requirements of this chapter, the community development director shall approve the plan, otherwise the proposed plan shall be denied. The decision of the community development director shall be made in writing and notice thereof shall be transmitted to the owner of the retail establishment by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery or fax transmission. The notice of decision of the community development director shall be deemed given to the owner on the date of personal delivery or on the date of the fax transmission to the owner; notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the owner on the third day following the date of deposit in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service. If the proposed plan is denied, the notice of decision given to the owner shall state the grounds upon which the proposed plan was denied. A decision of the community development director may be appealed by the owner in the time and manner provided in CMC 5.70.070.

D. Amendments by Owner. The owner of any retail establishment which has an approved plan conforming to requirements of this chapter may, at any time, submit a proposed amendment to the approved plan, which amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedure provided for in subsection (C) of this section. Each proposed amendment shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. No proposed amendment shall be accepted for filing and processing by the community development director unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the city council.

E. Revocation or Amendment by City.

1. Grounds. An approved plan may be revoked by the city upon any of the following grounds:

a. The owner of any retail establishment with an approved plan is operating, or is permitting the operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the provisions of said approved plan and has failed to correct said violation(s) for a period of at least 15 calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the city; or

b. The owner of any retail establishment with an approved plan is operating, or is permitting the operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the requirements of this chapter and has failed to correct said violation(s) for a period of at least 15 calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the city; or

c. The cart containment plan, as approved, is inadequate to reasonably prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment; or

d. The cart retrieval plan, as approved, is inadequate to ensure the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts removed from the retail establishment.

2. Order to Show Cause. If at any time following the approval of a plan, the community development director obtains information or evidence that any of the grounds set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section may exist, the community development director shall issue a written order to show cause as to why the approved plan should not be revoked and schedule a hearing thereon which hearing shall not be less than 15 calendar days nor more than 30 calendar days following the date such order to show cause is given to the owner of the retail establishment. The order shall state the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke the approved plan and shall include the information and evidence, or a summary thereof, upon which such order was issued.

3. Notice of Hearing. Notice of hearing on any order to show cause issued pursuant to this section shall be given in writing and shall be given to the owner of the retail establishment as provided in subsection (C) of this section.

4. Conduct of Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence shall not be applicable. The owner and the city shall each have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses. The parties may each be represented by legal counsel or other representatives of their choice. The city shall bear the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that grounds exist to revoke the plan. 

5. Option to Amend Plan in Lieu of Revocation. The community development director, at his or her discretion, and as an alternative to revocation, may consider amendment of the plan if the grounds for the order to show cause are solely the inadequacy of the approved plan.

6. Decision of Community Development Director. Within 15 calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the community development director shall render a decision in writing either dismissing the proceedings or revoking or amending the plan. If the plan is revoked or amended, the decision shall specify the findings of fact and the reasons for such action. If the plan is amended, the decision shall also specify the amendment(s) to the plan.

7. Notice of Decision. Notice of decision of the community development director shall be given in the time and manner specified in subsection (C) of this section.

8. Appeal of Decision. The decision of the community development director shall be subject to appeal by the owner within the time and manner specified in CMC 5.70.070. In the absence of a timely appeal, the decision of the community development director shall be final and conclusive.

9. Use of Shopping Carts Following Revocation Prohibited. No owner of any retail establishment which is subject to the requirements of this chapter shall provide or make available shopping carts for the use of customers following the date any decision revoking a plan required and approved pursuant to this chapter becomes final unless and until a new proposed plan is approved by the city for such retail establishment. 

10. No New Plan for 180 Days Following Revocation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner of a retail establishment shall not be eligible to submit a new proposed plan to the city for processing for a minimum of 180 calendar days following the date any decision revoking the prior plan for such retail establishment becomes final. Any proposed plan submitted to the city for such retail establishment during said 180-calendar-day period shall be returned to the owner of the retail establishment as untimely. (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


5.70.070 Appeals.

A. Filing of Appeal. Any owner aggrieved by any adverse decision of the community development director may appeal such decision to the city manager of the city, within 15 calendar days following the date of giving of notice of such decision, by filing with the community development director a written notice of appeal grounds for such appeal. The notice of decision shall be deemed given on the date as provided in CMC 5.70.060(C). Such appeal shall be deemed filed on the date the appeal is actually received in the office of the community development director accompanied by an appeal processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. No appeal shall be accepted for filing and processing by the community development director unless accompanied by the appeal processing fee as established by the city council.

B. Notice of Hearing. If the appeal is timely filed, the community development director shall notify the city manager, who shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which hearing date shall be within 30 calendar days following the date of receipt of such notice of appeal. The appellant shall be provided not less than 10 calendar days’ written notice of the date, time, and place of hearing. 

C. Conduct of Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally before the city manager and the legal rules of evidence shall not be applicable. The owner and the city shall each have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses. The parties may each be represented by legal counsel or other representatives of their choice. No additional evidence or argument shall be received or considered following the conclusion of the hearing except as may be agreed by stipulation of the parties.

D. Decision by City Manager. The city manager shall render a decision on the appeal and adopt findings of fact in support of such decision within 30 calendar days following the conclusion of said hearing.

E. Notice of Decision. The notice of decision of the city manager shall be deemed given on the date of personal delivery or on the date of the fax transmission to the appellant; notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the appellant on the third day following the date of deposit in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service.

F. Decision Is Final. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive on the date said decision is deemed given to the appellant as provided in subsection (E) of this section. (Ord. 08-1963 § 1, 2008.)


Title 6 (RESERVED)


Title 7 ANIMALS

Chapters:

7.04    Adoption

7.08    Definitions

7.12    Amendments

7.16    Violation – Penalty


Chapter 7.04 ADOPTION

Sections:

7.04.010    Adoption.

7.04.020    Copies.


7.04.010 Adoption.

The animal control ordinance of the county of Los Angeles contained in Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, adopted and amended through Ordinance No. 2011-038, passed on July 26, 2011, is adopted by reference as the animal control ordinance of the city (hereinafter referred to as “animal control ordinance”). (Ord. 11-2003 § 1, 2012; Ord. 10-1984 § 1, 2010; Ord. 04-1909 § 1, 2004; Ord. 01-1881 § 1, 2001; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.04.020 Copies.

A copy of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, the animal control ordinance, shall be on file in the office of the city clerk at all times during regular business hours. (Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


Chapter 7.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

7.08.010    Applicability.

7.08.020    County or county of Los Angeles.

7.08.030    County clerk.

7.08.040    Unincorporated territory.


7.08.010 Applicability.

Wherever in the animal control ordinance the following words or phrases are used, they respectively shall have the following meanings ascribed to them. (Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.08.020 County or county of Los Angeles.

“County” or “county of Los Angeles” means the City of Covina. (Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.08.030 County clerk.

“County clerk” means the city clerk of the city of Covina. (Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.08.040 Unincorporated territory.

“Unincorporated territory” shall be deemed to refer to the city of Covina. (Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


Chapter 7.12 AMENDMENTS

Sections:

7.12.010    Section 10.20.038 amended – Keeping more than three dogs or cats prohibited.

7.12.020    Section 10.20.030 amended – License – Required – Costs.

7.12.030    Section 10.20.190 amended – Keeping unlicensed dogs prohibited.

7.12.040    Section 10.28.061 amended – Keeping and breeding pygmy pigs – License required.

7.12.050    Section 10.32.002 added – Pygmy pigs – Leash required.

7.12.060    Section 10.32.004 added – Pygmy pigs – Prohibited in parks.

7.12.070    Repealed.

7.12.080    Section 10.12.19 amended – Refusing to show license or certificate – Unlawful.

7.12.090    Reserved.

7.12.100    Section 10.90.010 amended – Fees.


7.12.010 Section 10.20.038 amended – Keeping more than three dogs or cats prohibited.

Section 10.20.038 of the animal control ordinance is amended to read as follows:

SEC. 10.20.038. Keeping more than 3 dogs or cats prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this title, it is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or permit the keeping, harboring, or maintaining of more than three dogs or three cats at any one residence within the city of Covina.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.020 Section 10.20.030 amended – License – Required – Costs.

Section 10.20.030 of the animal control ordinance is amended to read as follows:

SEC. 10.20.030. License – Required – Costs. Every person owning or having custody or control of any dog over the age of four months in the City of Covina shall obtain a license from the director for each of such dogs and shall pay the fees for such licenses as set forth in Resolution of the City Council. 

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.030 Section 10.20.190 amended – Keeping unlicensed dogs prohibited.

Section 10.20.190 of the animal control ordinance is amended to read as follows:

SEC. 10.20.190. Keeping unlicensed dogs prohibited. A person, other than an approved research institution, shall not have, harbor or keep, or cause or permit to be harbored or kept, any unlicensed dog in the City of Covina.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.040 Section 10.28.061 amended – Keeping and breeding pygmy pigs – License required.

Section 10.28.061 of the animal control ordinance is amended to read as follows:

SEC. 10.28.061. Keeping pygmy pigs – License required. There shall be no more than one such animal per household, lot or parcel of land and/or improved lot, in any R-1 or RD zone. Any person owning or having the custody, care or control of a pygmy pig as defined in this title who keeps or maintains such pigs, whether as a pet or for personal use, or breeds such pigs for pay or other compensation, shall first pay a fee and obtain an annual license or animal business license from the department, except that no such license shall be issued unless:

A. The person keeping or maintaining a pygmy pig in a residential area as permitted in Section 22.20.030 has provided proof from a licensed veterinarian that the pig has been neutered or spayed and such proof has been submitted to the department;

B. The person owning or having custody and care of the animal has obtained any and all licenses and zoning permits required pursuant to this county code or any other ordinance or statute and has submitted proof of such to the department.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.050 Section 10.32.002 added – Pygmy pigs – Leash required.

Section 10.32.002 of the animal control ordinance is added to read as follows:

SEC. 10.32.002. Pygmy pigs – Leash required. It is unlawful for any owner or custodian of any said pig to allow or permit such pig to be off the premises of its owner or custodian unless such pig is securely restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, of sufficient strength to prevent the escape of such pig and unless such pig is in the charge or control of a person capable of keeping the pig under effective charge and control of such person.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.060 Section 10.32.004 added – Pygmy pigs – Prohibited in parks.

Section 10.32.004 of the animal control ordinance is added to read as follows:

SEC. 10.32.004. Pygmy pigs – Prohibited in Parks. It is unlawful for any person to permit any pygmy pig owned by him, or then under his immediate control, to be in any publicly owned park, playground or recreation area.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.070 Section 10.32.015 added – Dogs – Prohibited in parks.

Repealed by Ord. 11-1995. (Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


7.12.080 Section 10.12.190 amended – Refusing to show license or certificate – Unlawful.

Section 10.12.190 of the animal control ordinance is amended as follows:

SEC. 10.12.190. Refusing to show license or certificate – Unlawful. Any person upon whom demand is made under authority of this Division 1 for the exhibition of any dog rabies vaccination certificate, or any dog license or tag, who fails or refuses to exhibit the same if he or she has it in his or her possession, is guilty of a violation of this Division 1 and shall be punishable as herein provided.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 01-1881 § 2, 2001.)


7.12.090 Reserved.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010.)


7.12.100 Section 10.90.010 amended – Fees.

Section 10.90.010 of the animal control ordinance is amended to read:

SEC. 10.90.010. Licensing Fees schedule. The fees to be charged pursuant to the Animal Control Ordinance shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

(Ord. 10-1984 § 2, 2010; Ord. 01-1881 § 4, 2001.)


Chapter 7.16 VIOLATION – PENALTY

Sections:

7.16.010    Violation – Penalty.


7.16.010 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is guilty of an infraction, unless another penalty is provided for in this title.

B. Violation of Sections 10.12.190, 10.12.200, 10.20.280, 10.20.310, 10.28.060, 10.28.280(C), 10.32.020, 10.32.070, 10.32.080, 10.37.030, 10.37.050(C), 10.37.060(F), 10.40.010, 10.40.040, or 10.86.010 of the Los Angeles County Code is a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Penal Code Section 19. (Ord. 04-1909 § 3, 2004; Ord. 95-1791, 1995.)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.04    Health Code

8.08    Waste Management

8.09    Diversion Requirements for Construction and Demolition Projects

8.12    Swimming Pools

8.16    Abandoned Vehicles

8.18    Abandonment of Shopping Carts

8.20    Alarm Systems

8.40    Public Nuisances

8.42    Abandoned Residential Property Inspection, Registration and Maintenance

8.44    Controlled Substances and Gang-Related Crime Eviction Program

8.50    Storm Water Quality and Urban Runoff Control

8.60    Fireworks, Pyrotechnics and Production Effects

8.70    Regulation of Ephedrine Purchases


Chapter 8.04 HEALTH CODE1

Sections:

8.04.010    Adoption of the Health and Safety Code of the county of Los Angeles.

8.04.020    Reserved.

8.04.030    Interpretation.


8.04.010 Adoption of the Health and Safety Code of the county of Los Angeles.

A. Adoption. Subject to the changes and amendments set forth in this chapter, the Los Angeles County Code, Title 11, as amended through and including February 28, 1998, is hereby adopted by reference as the Public Health Code for the city of Covina (hereafter referred to as “Health Code”). Ordinance No. 97-0071 adopted by the Los Angeles County board of supervisors on December 16, 1997, relating to the operation of food establishments and the certification of food handlers is hereby specifically adopted by reference and is made a part of the Health Code. Copies of the Health Code are on file in the office of the city clerk and are open to public inspection.

B. Definitions. Wherever said Health Code uses the following words or phrases, they, respectively, shall mean:

1. “County” or “county of Los Angeles” means the city of Covina; and

2. “Health officer” or “county health officer” means the health officer of the city of Covina.

C. Penalty. Violation of any provisions of the Health Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or both. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the said Health Code is committed or permitted, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 98-1834 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1258 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 14.1.)


8.04.020 Reserved.


8.04.030 Interpretation.

The definition or regulation of any activity, condition or structure in the Health Code shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or allow the conduct of any such activity or the construction or maintenance of any such condition or structure as may be otherwise prohibited or restricted by any other sections of this code or other ordinances of this city heretofore or hereafter adopted. (1964 Code § 14.3.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt health regulations not in conflict with general laws, see Health and Safety Code § 500; for provisions authorizing adoption of codes by reference, see Government Code §§ 50022.1 through 50022.10. 


Chapter 8.08 WASTE MANAGEMENT1

Sections:

8.08.010    Definitions.

8.08.020    Adoption of county ordinance – Private refuse disposal facilities.

8.08.030    Promulgation and enforcement of waste management rules and regulations.

8.08.040    Accumulation prohibited – Mandatory collection, transportation, processing and disposal.

8.08.050    Award of agreement.

8.08.060    Disposal agreement required.

8.08.070    Deposit on public place.

8.08.080    Collection, transportation and processing – Prohibitions and exceptions.

8.08.090    Collection, transportation, processing and disposal agreement required.

8.08.100    Collection – Supervision.

8.08.110    Collection – Routes, days and hours establishment.

8.08.120    Residential refuse containers – Requirements.

8.08.130    Commercial and industrial refuse containers – Requirements.

8.08.140    Places for collection.

8.08.150    Unauthorized removal or use.

8.08.160    Service application – Form.

8.08.170    California Integrated Waste Management Act/Solid Waste per Capita Disposal Measurement Act – Imposition of charges.

8.08.180    Charges – Imposition – Determination – Service discontinuance for nonpayment.

8.08.190    Service discontinuance – Service restoration – Appeal.

8.08.200    Cash deposit – Refund.

8.08.210    Delinquent bill – Deduction from deposit.

8.08.220    Charge – Liability.

8.08.230    Unauthorized containers – Impoundment.

8.08.240    Penalties for failure to comply with this chapter.


8.08.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Acts” means (1) the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code, Section 40000 et seq. (and sometimes referred to as “AB 939”) and (2) the Solid Waste per Capita Disposal Measurement Act, each as they may be amended from time to time. 

B. “Ashes” means the residue from the burning of wood, cardboard, paper, brush and similar material resulting from heating, cooking or disposing of waste combustible materials, but not including ashes resulting from industrial processes.

C. “Bulky waste” means large items including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other waste materials other than construction debris, special waste materials, or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for in containers.

D. “City manager” means the city manager, or his or her designee.

E. “Collector” means any person authorized to collect, transport, process and/or dispose of refuse, green waste and/or recyclables within the city pursuant to an agreement with the city as set forth in CMC 8.08.050. 

F. “Commercial refuse” means all bulky waste, garbage, rubbish and stable matter originating from stores, business offices, commercial warehouses, hospitals, educational, health care, military, correctional institutions, nonprofit research organizations, government offices and any other commercial unit. Commercial refuse does not include construction and demolition debris.

G. “Commercial unit” means a site zoned for a commercial business and which generates commercial refuse. 

H. “Construction and demolition debris” means any combination of inert building material and solid waste material resulting from building, construction, alteration, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements or on any residential or commercial buildings or other structures, including asphalt, brick, stone, cement, land clearing, lumber, plaster, carpeting, drywall, plastic pipe, steel, roofing, packaging, and rubble.

I. “Container” means a plastic, metal, or fiberglass receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use at residential, commercial, and industrial units and having a lid capable of preventing entrance by vectors. A container may be color-coded in blue/gray (recyclables), black (refuse), and green (green waste).

J. “E-waste” means waste material previously used as a computer, server, monitor, printer, keyboard, mouse, telephone or similar telecommunications device (land line or portable), radio or television, or other electronic device, or any part thereof, separated from refuse and recyclables which, due to the presence of certain chemicals, must be specially collected and processed for either recycling or disposal. The city may provide to occupants within the city a list of materials that qualify as e-waste under this chapter.

K. “Garbage” means every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not limited to, all putrescible or easily decomposable waste, animal matter or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, special waste materials, or stable matter.

L. “Green waste” means leaves, plants, grass clippings, tree trimmings, brush, tree and bush trunks, branches, and other forms of organic waste generated from landscapes and gardens, which are not hazardous waste.

M. “Hazardous waste” means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance, or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous as that term is defined or pursuant to federal or state law, including but not limited to flammable waste, liquid waste, sewage sludge, waste from pollution control processes, contaminated soil, explosive substances, poisonous chemicals, solvents, radioactive materials, infectious waste, and medical waste.

N. “Household hazardous waste” means any hazardous waste commonly used by the public, including but not limited to cleaners, polishes, bleach, pool chemicals, herbicides, insecticides and insect repellents, rodenticides, fertilizers, batteries, thermostats, sealants, propane and other gas fuels, gasoline, kerosene, oils, and lighter fluid. 

O. “Household recyclables” means commonly used plastic, glass, or metal bottles, cans or containers, cardboard or paper, and similar recyclables separated from residential, commercial, or industrial refuse. 

P. “Industrial refuse” means all garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, and stable matter originating from mechanized manufacturing facilities, factories, refineries, publicly operated treatment works, and any other industrial unit. Industrial refuse does not include construction and demolition debris.

Q. “Industrial unit” means a site zoned for an industrial use and which generates industrial refuse.

R. “Occupant” means the property owner, tenant in lawful possession, service customer, or other person responsible for the removal, collection, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse, green waste, special waste materials and recyclables from a residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit. 

S. “Recyclable materials” or “recyclables” means solid waste that is source separated, has some potential economic value, and is set aside, handled, packaged, or offered for collection in a manner different from refuse in order to allow it to be processed for recycling.

T. “Refuse” means commercial refuse, residential refuse, and industrial refuse.

U. “Residential refuse” means garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, and stable matter generated from single-family or multiple-family dwellings. Residential refuse does not include construction and demolition debris.

V. “Rubbish” means all wood waste, wood products, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, green waste, recyclable materials, garbage, stable matter, or special waste materials.

W. “Special waste materials” means construction and demolition debris collected and transported away from a construction/demolition site by a construction/demolition contractor’s own vehicles and employees and delivered to a materials recovery facility owned or operated by a collector, hazardous waste, and e-waste. Construction and demolition debris not collected and transported away from a construction/demolition site by a construction/demolition contractor’s own vehicles and employees and delivered to a materials recovery facility owned or operated by a collector shall be deemed recyclables and not special waste materials. 

X. “Stable matter” means all manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock. (Ord. 18-03 § 2, 2018; Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; 1964 Code § 13.1.)


8.08.020 Adoption of county ordinance – Private refuse disposal facilities.

For the purpose of prescribing regulations for the operation of private refuse disposal facilities within the city and collecting fees from owners of private refuse disposal facilities, that certain Ordinance No. 11886 of the county of Los Angeles, entitled “An Ordinance Establishing the Solid Waste Ordinance of the County of Los Angeles and Amending the Administrative Code and Business License Ordinance Relating to the Regulation of Solid Waste Handling and Disposal,” including amendments thereto, effective April 13, 1979, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk for public record and inspection, is adopted by reference. Whenever in Ordinance No. 11886 reference is made to the unincorporated area of the county of Los Angeles, such area shall be deemed to include in its true geographical location the entire area of the city of Covina. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1453 § 1, 1980.)


8.08.030 Promulgation and enforcement of waste management rules and regulations.

A. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all provisions of this chapter and other laws, ordinances or regulations pertaining to the storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse, green waste, special waste materials, and recyclables within the city. The city manager may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary and proper for the operation of collection, transportation, processing and disposal services. Such rules and regulations may include controls, restrictions, rules or regulations governing collection, transportation, processing and disposal services, and the customers or users of such services with regard to the storage, processing, collection, transportation and disposal of refuse, green waste, special waste materials, and recyclables.

B. A copy of such rules and regulations, including the revisions thereof, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, together with a copy of the resolution of the council approving the same. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1455 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.5.)


8.08.040 Accumulation prohibited – Mandatory collection, transportation, processing and disposal.

A. It is unlawful for any occupant to keep or accumulate, or cause or permit to be kept or accumulated, upon any premises owned, controlled or occupied by him or her in the city any refuse, green waste, special waste materials, or recyclables which are putrid or offensive or which are a fire hazard, health menace or a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of each such occupant to cause any such accumulation to be handled, treated, placed, and disposed of as set forth in this chapter.

B. It is mandatory for any occupant of an occupied residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit within the city to arrange for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of all refuse, green waste, and recyclables on at least a weekly basis and pay the related charges described in CMC 8.08.180. If a residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit generates refuse, green waste, and/or recyclables at a rate such that weekly collection, transport, processing and disposal is insufficient to prevent an accumulation that violates subsection (A) of this section, the city may require an occupant to arrange for such collection, transportation, processing and disposal more frequently than once weekly, as determined by the city manager. 

C. Any occupant of a residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit within the city shall arrange for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of all refuse, green waste and recyclables from the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit with either of the following:

1. The city; or

2. One or more collectors who, pursuant to CMC 8.08.050, have entered into an approved agreement with the city for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse, green waste, and recyclables. 

D. Any occupant of a residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit within the city shall, as needed, arrange for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of all special waste materials from the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit and may do so only with a business permitted by the city to perform such services pursuant to Chapter 8.09 CMC. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, an occupant may, as needed, self-haul e-waste or household hazardous waste to a public or legally operated private collection facility or recycling center without a permit, as more specifically set forth in CMC 8.08.080(C). No occupant, under any circumstances, may self-haul any other types of special waste materials without first obtaining a permit pursuant to Chapter 8.09 CMC. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; 1964 Code § 13.2. Formerly 8.08.050)


8.08.050 Award of agreement. 

The city council may, based upon the recommendation of the city manager, find that the public health, safety, and welfare require that the city award a nonexclusive, partially exclusive, or wholly exclusive agreement with a collector for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse, green waste and recyclables, as defined in Section 40195 of the California Integrated Waste Management Act, for any given geographic area within the city. Should the city council award such agreement(s), such collection, transportation, processing and disposal services must be provided in compliance with the Acts, all other applicable laws, and the terms and conditions imposed by the city council in any approved agreement with the collector. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011.)


8.08.060 Disposal agreement required.

No person shall dump, deposit, place, or bury refuse, green waste, or recyclables on land within the city limits without obtaining approval of an agreement therefor from the city council pursuant to CMC 8.08.050. Residential composting of green waste does not require an agreement. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.3.)


8.08.070 Deposit on public place.

It is unlawful for any person to deposit or to cause or permit to be deposited any refuse, green waste, special waste materials, or recyclables upon or in any public street, alley or other public place, or upon any public premises in the city, except in the manner and at the time and place as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; 1964 Code § 13.4.)


8.08.080 Collection, transportation and processing – Prohibitions and exceptions.

A. It is unlawful for any person to collect, process or transport, or to cause or permit to be collected, processed or transported, any refuse, green waste, or recyclables within the city; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person in the employ of the city who is assigned by the city to the work of refuse, green waste, or recyclables collection, transportation, processing and disposal, or to any person with whom the city has entered into or may hereafter enter into an agreement for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse, green waste, or recyclables or to any employee of such collector during such time as such agreement is in force.

B. It is unlawful for any person to collect, process or transport, or to cause or permit to be collected, processed or transported, any special waste materials within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city pursuant to Chapter 8.09 CMC; provided, however, an occupant may self-haul e-waste and household hazardous waste without such a permit in accordance with subsection (C) of this section.

C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the occupant of a residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit from personally removing e-waste, household recyclables, and household hazardous waste from the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit occupied by him or her and transporting same to a public or a legally operated private collection facility or recycling center; provided, that the occupant complies with the following: 

1. All removal and transportation performed pursuant to this subsection (C) shall be accomplished by the occupant or by the occupant’s employees using the occupant’s own vehicles and equipment. No subcontracting of such work is permitted.

2. Commercial or passenger motor vehicles may be used by a self-hauler in accordance with this subsection (C) only if the e-waste, household recyclables, and household hazardous waste is so contained as to prevent it from leaking, dripping, falling, blowing, or scattering from the vehicle in which it is being transported. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.6.)


8.08.090 Collection, transportation, processing and disposal agreement required.

A. No person shall engage in the business of collection, transportation, processing or disposal of refuse, green waste, or recyclables in the city from any premises in the city without first entering into a written agreement approved by the city council pursuant to CMC 8.08.050.

B. No person shall engage in the business of collection, transportation, processing or disposal of special waste materials within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city pursuant to Chapter 8.09 CMC. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.7.)


8.08.100 Collection – Supervision.

The city manager shall supervise the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of all refuse, green waste, special waste materials, and recyclables in the city. He or she may make such rules consistent with the provisions of this chapter and with any approved agreement as may be necessary, reasonable and proper to effect the expedient, economical, and efficient collection of refuse, green waste, special waste materials, and recyclables. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.8. Formerly 8.08.110.)


8.08.110 Collection – Routes, days and hours establishment.

Except as otherwise provided in any approved agreement, the city manager shall establish routes, days and hours for collection of refuse, green waste, and recyclables, and may change the same from time to time. When such routes, days and hours are established or changed, the city manager shall give notice thereof. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001. Formerly 8.08.120.)


8.08.120 Residential refuse containers – Requirements.

A. Separate residential containers, including but not limited to residential refuse, green waste, and recyclable material containers, shall be furnished to each occupant by the city or its approved collector for green waste, recyclables, and all other residential refuse, unless otherwise exempted by this chapter or specifically approved by the city manager. Each container shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition by the occupant of the residence that said container serves.

B. All ashes, when placed in a refuse container, shall be cold, dampened, and free from any fire, live coals, or other substances capable of igniting or which might ignite other materials with which they come in proximity or contact.

C. Any residential refuse, green waste, or recyclables that cannot be placed in a container, as described in this chapter, may be placed for collection at curbside. Green waste placed for collection at curbside must be securely tied in bundles not heavier than 50 pounds nor more than four feet in length.

D. It is unlawful for an occupant to introduce residential refuse, special waste materials, green waste, or any materials which are not recyclables into a container designed for recyclable materials. 

E. It is unlawful for an occupant to introduce residential refuse, special waste materials, recyclables, or any materials which are not green waste into a container designed for green waste.

F. It is unlawful for an occupant to introduce green waste, special waste materials, recyclables, or any materials which are not refuse into a container designed for refuse.

G. It is unlawful for any person to place for collection any residential refuse, green waste, or recyclables on any premises other than the place from which such refuse, green waste, or recyclables accumulated or was generated. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011.)


8.08.130 Commercial and industrial refuse containers – Requirements.

A. Containers shall be furnished to each occupant by the city or its approved collector for commercial or industrial refuse, unless otherwise exempted by this chapter or specifically approved by the city manager. Each container shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition by the occupant of the commercial unit or industrial unit that said container serves.

B. All ashes, when placed in a refuse container, shall be cold, dampened, and free from any fire, live coals, or other substances capable of igniting or which might ignite other materials with which they come in proximity or contact.

C. It is unlawful for a person occupying or having control of any commercial or industrial unit to introduce special waste materials or any materials that are not commercial or industrial refuse, green waste, or recyclables into a container. 

D. It is unlawful for any person to place for collection any commercial or industrial refuse, green waste, or recyclables on any premises other than the place from which such refuse, green waste, or recyclables accumulated or was generated. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001.)


8.08.140 Places for collection.

A. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit placing refuse, green waste, or recyclable containers for collection to place the same in the following manner: 

1. For residential collection, containers shall be placed as close to the roadway as practical, with wheels against the curb and spaced at least one foot apart to allow for mechanized collection, without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. No refuse, green waste, or recyclable containers shall be placed in any other location for collection except by express approval of the city manager, or as permitted by any applicable agreement. No occupant shall permit refuse, green waste, or recyclable containers to remain at the place for collection for more than 24 hours before or after the time of collection. 

2. For commercial and industrial collection, containers shall be placed in a location that allows for mechanical collection and which minimizes interference with public rights-of-way, off-street parking and/or ingress and egress serving the premises. All other federal, state and local requirements pertaining to interference with the public right-of-way shall apply. Containers in enclosures shall comply with applicable requirements of Chapters 17.72 and 17.76 CMC. 

B. Until refuse, green waste, and/or recyclables have been picked up for collection, the occupant of the premises receiving such service shall clean up any and all refuse, green waste, and/or recyclables spilled in any manner at the premises of which the occupant is in charge. This responsibility remains the sole responsibility of the occupant notwithstanding human or animal interference, wind, or other natural forces. The lids to containers shall remain closed except for the time period it takes to deposit items into the container. Containers shall not be overfilled such that the lids cannot be completely closed. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.14.)


8.08.150 Unauthorized removal or use.

No person, other than the occupant of the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit, his or her agents or employees, or an officer or employee of the city, or any person holding an agreement with the city for collection, transportation, processing or disposal of refuse, green waste, or recyclable materials, his or her agents or employees authorized for such purpose, shall tamper or meddle with or remove any container or refuse, green waste, or recyclable materials. No employee of the city or of any collector shall remove or dispose of, for the employee’s individual use or benefit, any refuse, green waste or recyclables or container used for the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of refuse, green waste, or recyclables. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; 1964 Code § 13.15.)


8.08.160 Service application – Form.

Before any refuse, green waste, or recycling services will be supplied by the city or by any collector to any person, the occupant of the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit shall make a written application for such refuse, green waste, or recyclable collection, transportation, processing and disposal service upon a form provided by the city or by the collector. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1877 § 1, 2001.)


8.08.170 California Integrated Waste Management Act/Solid Waste per Capita Disposal Measurement Act – Imposition of charges.

This provision is enacted for the purpose of compliance with the Acts. The city shall adopt a source reduction and recycling element and household hazardous waste element pursuant to said Acts which shall include the imposition of charges to fund the preparation, adoption and implementation of said elements. Such charges and method of collection shall be determined, fixed and established by the city council by ordinance or resolution duly and regularly adopted. Such charges and methods of collection may be changed by the city council from time to time by ordinance or resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated in or governed by such respective ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 91-1734 § 1, 1991.)


8.08.180 Charges – Imposition – Determination – Service discontinuance for nonpayment.

There are imposed charges for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse, green waste, and recyclables by the city. Each occupied residence, commercial unit, and industrial unit within the city shall be responsible for the payment of these charges and be required to pay, at a minimum, for the level of service equivalent to other similar residences, commercial units, and industrial units. Such charges for collection, transportation, processing and disposal services rendered or to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by ordinance or resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by ordinance or resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated in or governed by such respective ordinances or resolutions. A refuse bill shall be considered delinquent if the occupant fails to pay any refuse bill on or before 30 days after the date the bill is addressed to the occupant and posted in the United States mail. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1397 § 2, 1979; Ord. 1394 § 6, 1978; 1964 Code § 13.17.)


8.08.190 Service discontinuance – Service restoration – Appeal.

A. An occupant who vacates a property shall notify the city or collector pursuant to the procedure in CMC 8.08.220.

B. If an occupant receiving service fails to pay the bill within 30 days after it becomes delinquent, his or her service shall be discontinued after five days from mailing of written notice to discontinue service, mailed to him or her at his or her last known place of residence or business. Any occupant whose service has been discontinued due to nonpayment shall make a cash deposit to the city or to the collector in a sum equal to four times the amount of the monthly charge for service before service may be reinstated. If full payment of the delinquent bill is not made and the deposit is not paid within 15 days following discontinuance of service, the city or the collector may cancel the account and recover any and all containers that previously served the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit.

C. If an occupant receiving service fails to comply with any other provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall so notify the occupant in writing. The notice shall be sent to the occupant’s last known place of residence or business, shall state the nature of the violation(s) and the necessary corrective action to be taken and shall provide the occupant at least 15 days to correct the violation(s). The notice shall constitute the city manager’s order to correct the violation(s). If the occupant fails to correct the violation(s) within the time specified in the notice, the city manager may order that the occupant’s service be suspended or discontinued. If the service is discontinued, the city or the collector may recover any and all containers that previously served the occupant’s residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit. The city manager may order that service be subsequently restored, upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the violation(s) has/have been corrected and upon compliance upon such other reasonable conditions as he or she may place upon the occupant to prevent future violations.

D. Any occupant may appeal an order of the city manager pursuant to subsection (C) of this section to the city council. Such appeal request shall be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk not less than 15 days following the date of the city manager’s notice/order. The appeal request must indicate a return address and set forth the basis for the appeal. If the appeal deadline falls on a day City Hall is closed, then the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day. Upon receipt of a timely appeal request, the city clerk shall fix a date, time, and place for the city council to hear the appeal and shall notify the occupant in writing no less than five days before the hearing. The failure of the occupant to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this section. The city council shall conduct an orderly, fair hearing and accept evidence on which persons commonly rely in their ordinary business affairs. The city council shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence. The city council may affirm, reduce, reverse, or modify the city manager’s decision. The decision of the city council shall be final. Failure of an occupant to file an appeal and appear for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a waiver of that person’s rights to challenge the city manager’s order and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1397 § 3, 1979.)


8.08.200 Cash deposit – Refund.

Any person who has made a cash deposit pursuant to CMC 8.08.190 may apply, in writing, to the city or the collector for a refund of such deposit. No refund shall be made unless the person applying for the refund has maintained the refuse bill account on a current basis for 12 continuous months preceding the date upon which the application for refund is received, and has, for the same 12 continuous months preceding the date upon which the application for refund is received, caused no more than one delinquency, as defined in CMC 8.08.180. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1397 § 3, 1979.)


8.08.210 Delinquent bill – Deduction from deposit.

If the occupant receiving refuse, green waste, or recyclable service has a deposit placed with the city or the collector, the amount of the delinquent bill may be deducted therefrom in which event the occupant or business shall be required to restore the deposit when the amount thereof has been deducted by the city or the collector and used in the liquidation of such bill. If the deposit is not restored after 15 days from the mailing of written notice to restore the same, service shall be discontinued as set forth in CMC 8.08.190(B). (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1397 § 3, 1979.)


8.08.220 Charge – Liability.

The city council finds and determines that the regular collection of refuse, green waste, and recyclables, and transportation, processing and disposal thereof from all places in the city, is beneficial to the inhabitants of the city and necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and is a service to the premises from which it is collected. All occupants of residences, commercial units, and industrial units in the city are liable for the refuse, green waste, and recyclable collection charges prescribed by this chapter. In the event that any residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit in the city will become vacant and the occupant desires to discontinue refuse, green waste, and/or recyclable collection, transportation, processing and disposal service to said residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit, it shall be the duty of such occupant to notify the city or the collector in writing of such vacancy and the occupant’s desire to discontinue such service at least 30 days before such service is to be discontinued in order to be exempt from liability for the charges imposed in this chapter. An occupant may not request discontinuance of service if the residence, commercial unit, or industrial unit will remain occupied. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1397 § 3, 1979.)


8.08.230 Unauthorized containers – Impoundment.

All containers used within the city shall be owned and/or operated by either (A) the city, (B) an approved collector of the city, or (C) a business that collects, processes or transports special waste materials within the city pursuant to a permit issued from the city under Chapter 8.09 CMC. All other containers are unauthorized and may be immediately removed and impounded by the city manager. In addition, the city manager may immediately remove and impound any container(s) that create a dangerous or hazardous condition constituting an immediate threat to public health or safety.

A. Upon the impoundment of a container, a written notice of such action shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to (1) the owner or person in charge of the container at the address identified on the container(s) and (2) the occupant, within three days after the impoundment. The notice shall specify (1) the reason(s) why the container(s) is/are unauthorized, (2) the location where the container(s) is/are impounded, (3) that the owner or person in charge of the container(s), or the occupant (jointly and severally), will be responsible for the costs of removal and impound of the container(s), (4) the right to appeal the city manager’s decision to impound pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, and (5) that, unless the city manager’s decision is appealed, any container(s) not retrieved within 30 days following the impound will be sold or disposed of by the city and the city may retain any proceeds. Failure of an owner or person in charge of an impounded container or occupant to receive written notice pursuant to this subsection shall not invalidate the impoundment. 

B. The owner or person in charge of the container or the occupant may appeal the city manager’s decision to impound the container to the city council within 15 days following the date of the impound notice, as provided in CMC 8.08.190(D). 

C. The owner or person in charge of the container or the occupant who provides sufficient proof of ownership or responsibility for the container may have such container returned within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days from the date of impoundment or, if an appeal is timely requested, within 15 days from the date the appeal becomes final. The container shall not be returned until the owner or person in charge of the container or the occupant pays an impound fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council, plus the reasonable cost of disposing of the contents of the container and the reasonable costs of impounding, removing, and storing the container, if any, in excess of the fee established by the city council. If it is determined on appeal that the container was authorized to be used in the city, any impound fee and costs paid for the release of a container shall be refunded to the owner or person in charge of the container or to the occupant, whoever paid the impound fee. 

D. If no appeal has been requested, or, if requested, has resulted in a final decision that the container was rightfully impounded, and if the impound fees and costs specified in this subsection have not been paid within 30 days following the impound, or if timely appealed, within 30 days following the city council’s final decision, the city manager may sell or otherwise dispose of the container and retain the proceeds from any such sale or other disposition.

E. The city manager may delegate to a collector the authority to remove and impound unauthorized containers, to provide written notice to owners, persons in charge and occupants, to collect fees and costs, and to dispose of unclaimed containers, all as authorized by this section. Prior to exercising such delegated authority, the collector shall enter into a written agreement, in a form satisfactory to the city, indemnifying and holding harmless the city against all claims and causes of action arising out of the collector’s actions herein. The collector shall also agree to amend its operating agreement issued by the city pursuant to CMC 8.08.050 to reflect that impoundments performed by the collector without full compliance with this section shall be deemed violations of the collector’s operating agreement. The city manager may revoke this delegation of authority, in whole or in part, at any time in his or her sole discretion, and the collector shall acknowledge that any such revocation shall not be deemed a breach of the collector’s operating agreement. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011.)


8.08.240 Penalties for failure to comply with this chapter.

A. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, which is punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC. 

B. The violation of any provision of this chapter is also hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.40 CMC. 

C. This chapter may also be enforced pursuant to the administrative citation procedure set forth in Chapter 1.26 CMC. 

D. The provisions of this section are cumulative to any other remedies authorized by law. (Ord. 11-2000 § 1, 2011; Ord. 01-1877 § 1, 2001. Formerly 8.08.230.)1

For statutory provisions regarding weed and rubbish abatement by municipalities, see Government Code § 39501 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to contract for garbage and refuse disposal and to prescribe terms and conditions by resolution or ordinance for such service, see Health and Safety Code § 4250; for provisions prohibiting dumping of garbage on roads or private property, see Penal Code § 374b and Health and Safety Code § 4476. 


Chapter 8.09 DIVERSION REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION PROJECTS

Sections:

8.09.010    Definitions.

8.09.020    Purpose.

8.09.030    Recyclable and reusable construction and demolition debris.

8.09.040    Minimum construction and demolition debris diversion requirements.

8.09.050    Compliance requirements per project type.

8.09.060    Permit requirements.

8.09.070    Pre-project recycling plan (“PPRP”).

8.09.080    Approved recycling facilities.

8.09.090    Collection and hauling options.

8.09.100    Deconstruction.

8.09.110    Administrative fee.

8.09.120    Diversion security deposit.

8.09.130    Exempt projects.

8.09.140    Post-project compliance report.

8.09.150    City’s right to monitor and inspect.

8.09.160    Refund of diversion security deposit.

8.09.170    Forfeiture and city use of diversion security deposit.

8.09.180    Appeal – Construction and demolition debris diversion requirements.

8.09.190    Enforcement of this chapter.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 00-1862, 09-1975 and 11-2000.


8.09.010 Definitions.

Defined terms in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Chapter 8.08 CMC, unless otherwise indicated. In addition, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise indicated:

A. “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity or person who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, grading, renovation, or similar operation on a project within the city.

B. “Construction and demolition debris” means any combination of inert building material and solid waste material resulting from building, construction, alteration, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements or on any residential or commercial buildings or other structures, including asphalt, brick, stone, cement, land clearing, lumber, plaster, carpeting, drywall, plastic pipe, steel, roofing, packaging, and rubble.

C. “Covered project” means all construction, demolition, addition, alteration, and remodeling projects within the city which require a building, demolition, grading, or similar permit, and which are not otherwise exempt by CMC 8.09.130 or any other provision of this chapter.

D. “Demolition” means the destroying, razing, tearing down, or wrecking of any pavement, building, or other structure or improvement regardless of the nature of such structure or improvement whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

E. “Director” means the director of public works or his/her designee.

F. “Disposal” means the ultimate disposition of solid waste collected at a landfill or otherwise, in full regulatory compliance.

G. “Divert/diversion” means to divert from disposal facilities or transformation facilities through source reduction, recycling, reuse, or composting.

H. “Green waste” means leaves, plants, grass clippings, tree trimmings, brush, tree and bush trunks, branches, and other forms of organic waste generated from landscapes and gardens, which are not hazardous waste.

I. “Hazardous waste” means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance, or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous as that term is defined or pursuant to federal or state law, including, but not limited to, flammable waste, liquid waste, sewage sludge, waste from pollution control processes, contaminated soil, explosive substances, poisonous chemicals, solvents, radioactive materials, infectious waste, and medical waste.

J. “Inert building material” means concrete (including fiberglass or steel reinforcing bar embedded in the concrete), asphalt, gravel, sand, stone, crushed glass, fiberglass, asphalt or fiberglass roofing shingles, brick, slag, ceramics, plaster, clay, and clay products. Inert building materials are materials that do not undergo biological, chemical, physical, or radiological transformation.

K. “Land clearing and excavating debris” means trees, stumps, rocks, associated vegetation and soils resulting primarily from land clearing and excavating activities.

L. “Pre-project recycling plan” or “PPRP” shall mean the plan described in CMC 8.09.070.

M. “Recyclable materials” means solid waste that is source separated, has some potential economic value, and is set aside, handled, packaged, or offered for collection in a manner different from refuse in order to allow it to be processed for recycling.

N. “Recycling” means the process of separating for collecting, sorting, cleaning, treating, and/or reconstituting recyclable materials which would otherwise be discarded as solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of materials for new, reused, or reconstituted products. The collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste not intended for, or capable of, reuse is not recycling, and recycling does not include the use of solid waste for conversion to energy.

O. “Reuse” means using an object or material again, either for its original purpose or for a similar purpose, without significantly altering the physical form of the object or material.

P. “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purposes of reuse, storage for later reuse, sale, or donation.

Q. “Solid waste” means solid waste as defined under Public Resources Code Section 40191, including all changes through amendments thereto.

R. “Universal waste” means electronic devices, fluorescent lamps, batteries, instruments containing mercury, CRTs (glass picture tubes removed from items such as televisions and computer monitors), CRT glass, and nonempty aerosol cans. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the recycling of construction and demolition debris which is recyclable and reusable, as defined in CMC 8.09.030, to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to meet the city’s obligations under state law, including the Acts. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.030 Recyclable and reusable construction and demolition debris.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following construction and demolition debris is determined to be recyclable and reusable:

A. Masonry building materials and similar products generally used in construction including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, and brick.

B. Wood materials including all dimensional lumber, fencing, or construction wood that has not been chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated, or painted.

C. Plant materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush, or any other type of plant or green waste that is cleared from a site for construction or other purpose.

D. Land clearing and excavating debris including vegetation, rocks, and soils.

E. Metals, including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, doorframes, and fences.

F. Roofing materials, including wood shingles, asphalt, stone, tile, and slate-based roofing materials.

G. Other salvageable materials including, but not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, sinks, bath tubs, and appliances.

H. Any other construction or demolition debris that is nonhazardous and available for recycling or reuse, as may be identified on the building plans approved by the city. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.040 Minimum construction and demolition debris diversion requirements.

A. All covered projects shall reuse, recycle, or divert from landfills or disposal sites at least 75 percent, or the state-mandated construction and demolition diversion percentage, whichever is greater, of all construction and demolition debris, unless a lower rate is approved by the city as a part of the project’s pre-project recycling plan (“PPRP”) required pursuant to CMC 8.09.070.

B. Diversion may be satisfied by any of the following methods:

1. Documented on-site or off-site reuse of the construction and demolition debris.

2. Documented delivery of construction and demolition debris to an approved recycling facility.

3. Documented delivery of salvaged materials to a donation center.

4. Other methods as approved by the city.

C. For nonresidential projects, 100 percent of trees, stumps, rocks, and associated vegetation and soils resulting from land clearing shall be reused or recycled.

D. All hazardous waste and universal waste removed from any project site must be properly disposed of and diverted from landfills. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.050 Compliance requirements per project type.

A. Covered Projects Generally.

1. A covered project must meet all requirements for covered projects set forth in this chapter.

2. All covered projects shall, at a minimum, divert from landfills the amount of construction and demolition debris mandated by CMC 8.09.040. Demolition followed by construction on the same site, which requires separate permits, shall be considered two separate projects. Otherwise, concurrent permits for the same site are considered one project for the purposes of this chapter.

3. Applicants for a covered project must submit to the city a pre-project recycling plan (CMC 8.09.070), an administrative fee (CMC 8.09.110), and a diversion security deposit (CMC 8.09.120) prior to beginning any construction, remodeling, or demolition activities.

4. If a project involves both demolition and construction and the applicant has not met the diversion requirement for demolition, the director may, in addition to other remedies set forth in this chapter, require a higher percentage of diversion for construction than that amount required by CMC 8.09.040; provided, that the higher percentage is no higher than the shortfall in diversion from demolition.

B. City-Sponsored Projects. Unless specifically exempted by the city, all city-sponsored construction and demolition projects shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter, except that the city shall be exempt from paying an administrative fee and diversion security deposit. The city may exempt any city-sponsored project, including any project of the Covina housing authority, from the requirements of this chapter. Nevertheless, the city may require alternative diversion requirements for any city-sponsored project that has otherwise been exempted from the requirements of this chapter.

C. All Other Projects. All construction, demolition, addition, alteration, and remodel projects within the city that are below the thresholds for covered projects set forth in this section, or which are otherwise excluded by the city from complying with this chapter, are nevertheless encouraged to divert the minimum amount of construction and demolition debris described in CMC 8.09.040. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.060 Permit requirements.

A. All permits for construction, remodeling, grading, and/or demolition issued for a covered project shall be conditioned upon compliance with this chapter.

B. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the building/demolition permit applicant, or any party who was obligated to obtain a permit but failed to do so, to penalties as described in this chapter. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.070 Pre-project recycling plan (“PPRP”).

A. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, each applicant who applies for a building, demolition, or grading permit for a covered project shall submit a pre-project recycling plan (“PPRP”) on a form to be provided by the city concurrent with his/her application for a building, demolition, or grading permit. No permit shall be issued for a covered project until a PPRP has been approved by the director.

B. To be deemed complete, a PPRP must contain the following information:

1. The estimated volume or weight of project waste to be generated identified by material type.

2. The estimated volume or weight of each type of material that is intended to be diverted via recycling.

3. The estimated volume or weight of each type of material that is intended to be reused on site or off site.

4. The estimated volume or weight of each type of material that is intended to be salvaged and later offered for donation or sale.

5. The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that is intended to be disposed of per material type.

6. The facility(ies) that each type of material will be hauled to and the entity that will haul the material.

7. Verification that hazardous waste and universal waste removed from a project site shall be properly disposed of and diverted from landfills.

8. The projected feasible diversion rate, based on the foregoing information.

C. Because actual material volumes/weights are not available at this stage, estimates may be used. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the PPRP, each applicant shall use industry standard conversion rates for this purpose. If the projected feasible diversion rate described in the PPRP does not meet the diversion goal, the applicant must submit additional information to the city which identifies the specific reasons for the diversion shortfall and supports a request for approval of a lower diversion rate. If this documentation is not included, the PPRP shall be deemed incomplete.

D. Approval. No building, demolition, or grading permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the director has approved the PPRP. A PPRP shall not be required, however, where emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety. The director shall only approve a PPRP if it is determined that all of the following conditions have been met:

1. The PPRP provides all of the information required by this chapter.

2. The PPRP indicates how the specified percent of construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be diverted, or that an alternate diversion goal has been approved.

3. The applicant has submitted the appropriate administrative fee.

4. The applicant has submitted the appropriate diversion security deposit.

E. Nonapproval. If the director determines that the PPRP is incomplete or fails to indicate how, at minimum, the requirements set forth in CMC 8.09.040 or the alternative approved diversion goal will be achieved, the PPRP shall be returned to the applicant indicating either:

1. “Further Explanation Needed” with a statement of the type of additional information needed; or

2. “Disapproved” with a statement of reasons for the disapproval.

When a PPRP has been disapproved, the director shall notify the building division to immediately stop processing the building, demolition, or grading permit application.

F. Time Frame for Review. The director will review the PPRP and advise the applicant within five business days of receipt of the PPRP of the city’s decision regarding approval or nonapproval. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.080 Approved recycling facilities.

The city shall maintain a listing of recycling facilities that have the capability to divert the percentage of construction and demolition debris required by the city. Applicants that elect to self-haul as described in CMC 8.09.090(C) may deliver material only to those facilities included on the city’s listing of approved recycling facilities. Applicants may make a request to the city to utilize an alternative recycling facility; the decision to authorize or deny the request shall be in the sole discretion of the director. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.090 Collection and hauling options.

A. Collection Generally. An applicant must obtain collection service from the city’s franchised waste hauler for the collection of construction and demolition debris, except as otherwise provided in this section. No person shall collect, remove, transfer, or dispose of any construction and demolition debris from any premises within the city, unless that person holds a franchise from the city for such collection, except as otherwise provided in this section.

B. On-Site Pickup of Recyclable and Reusable Materials. An applicant may allow the third party collection of source-separated recyclable and reusable construction and demolition debris, provided such service is rendered free of charge or is otherwise rendered in a manner that results in a net payment to the applicant, not the person rendering the service.

C. Self-Haul of Recyclable and Reusable Materials. An applicant may utilize his/her own vehicles to remove recyclable and reusable construction and demolition debris from a project site; provided, that such recyclable material is delivered to an approved recycling facility as described in CMC 8.09.080.

D. Donation/Sale of Recyclable Materials. An applicant may donate or sell source-separated recyclable materials and/or salvaged materials to a third party. Such material may be picked up from the project site by the third party or delivered by the applicant. Any pickup service must be rendered free of charge or otherwise rendered in a manner that results in a net payment to the applicant, not the person rendering the service.

E. Off-Site Reuse. An applicant may deliver reusable materials to a separate project site for the purpose of reuse. An applicant may also deliver reusable materials to a temporary off-site storage location for later reuse. All such delivery and reuse must be in compliance with applicable laws. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.100 Deconstruction.

Applicants for all demolition projects are encouraged to perform deconstruction, prior to demolition, and make materials available for salvage and reuse through sale or donation, in addition to other recycling methods. Applicants are encouraged to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable and reusable materials prior to demolition. Salvaged and reusable material from every project shall be counted toward meeting the diversion requirement. Salvaged and reusable materials may be given away or sold on the premises, taken to reuse facilities, or stored by the applicant for future reuse. Receipts from recipients shall be obtained for material given away, as well as for items sold. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.110 Administrative fee.

As a part of any application for, and prior to the issuance of, any building, demolition, or grading permit that involves the creation of construction or demolition debris, every applicant for a covered project, unless exempt, shall pay the city an administrative fee which will compensate the city for all expenses incurred in reviewing the applicant’s PPRP and post-project compliance report, and confirming performance of the diversion plan. The amount of such fee shall be established by a resolution of the city council and may be modified from time to time. This fee is nonrefundable and will not be returned in the event a permit is canceled. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.120 Diversion security deposit.

Each applicant for a permit for a covered project shall concurrently remit a refundable diversion security deposit in the amount equal to three percent of the estimated project value up to the first $100,000, two percent of the next $400,000, one percent of the next $500,000, and one-quarter of a percent for any amount over $1,000,000. The diversion security deposit may not exceed $30,000. The diversion security deposit may be paid via cash, cashier’s check, credit card, personal check, or money order.

The diversion security deposit will be refunded to the applicant as described in CMC 8.09.160 upon confirmation that the diversion requirements set forth in this chapter have been achieved. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.130 Exempt projects.

A. The following are not “covered projects” and are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1. Residential alterations that do not increase the building’s footprint area, volume, or size.

2. Work which only requires a plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit.

3. A seismic tie-down project.

4. The installation of new fencing, walls, or gates, but not replacement of an existing fence, wall, or gate.

5. The installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers when no foundation or other structural building modifications are required.

6. The installation of pre-fabricated accessories, such as signs or antennas, which do not require structural building modifications.

7. City-sponsored projects that have been specifically exempted by the city.

8. Emergency demolition which is necessary to protect the public health and safety.

9. Projects not generating construction and demolition debris, as determined by the director. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.140 Post-project compliance report.

A. Within 90 calendar days following the completion of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to release of its diversion security deposit, submit to the director documentation of its compliance with this chapter. Necessary documentation includes a final completed post-project compliance report which lists the actual tonnage of materials removed, recycled, and diverted, supported by receipts and weight tickets or other records of measurement from recycling facilities, disposal facilities, materials recovery facilities, and salvage companies. Receipts and weight tickets shall be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been recycled, reused, salvaged, or otherwise disposed of.

B. Time Frame for Review. The director will review the post-project compliance report and advise the applicant within seven business days of receipt of the post-project compliance report of the city’s decision regarding approval or nonapproval. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.150 City’s right to monitor and inspect.

The city shall have the right to inspect all covered projects to determine levels of actual diversion activities and validate the information contained in the PPRP and the post-project compliance report. Upon request by the city, the applicant shall provide documentation relating to the disposal of construction and demolition debris for a covered project. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.160 Refund of diversion security deposit.

A. The director may authorize the full refund of a diversion security deposit when the applicant has satisfactorily submitted a post-project compliance report pursuant to CMC 8.09.140, and the director has verified that the minimum diversion requirements have been met.

B. If the director determines that the diversion requirement for a specific project has not been achieved, he/she shall determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In the director’s sole discretion, the director may authorize a partial to full refund of a diversion security deposit when less than the minimum diversion requirement is met. The partial refund shall not exceed that portion of the diversion security deposit that is in the same ratio as the demonstrated amount of diverted waste. For example, if the director determines that a good faith effort has been achieved, however, 60 percent diversion is reached as compared to the 75 percent diversion requirement, then 80 percent (60/75) of the diversion security deposit may be returned to the applicant.

C. The director may authorize the refund of a diversion security deposit which was erroneously paid or collected, or any portion of a diversion security deposit erroneously given in excess of the required amount.

D. The director may authorize the full refund of a diversion security deposit when a permit application is withdrawn or canceled before any work has begun.

E. Any diversion security deposit, or portion thereof, that is returned will be returned without interest, within 30 calendar days after authorization is issued by the director.

F. When a diversion security deposit has been forfeited as the result of an expired permit, if new permits are issued for the completion of the same project within one year of the prior permit’s expiration, the permittee may request that the forfeited diversion security deposit be applied to the new permit if the permittee has retained all documentation of recycling and disposal for the entire project. Upon receipt of such a request, the decision to authorize or deny this request shall be in the sole discretion of the director. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.170 Forfeiture and city use of diversion security deposit.

A. If the director determines that an applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if an applicant fails to submit the documentation required by CMC 8.09.140 within the required 90-day period, the full diversion security deposit shall be forfeited.

B. Forfeited diversion security deposits shall be used by the city for solid waste and recycling related purposes including, but not limited to:

1. Planning, implementing, or promoting solid waste diversion programs.

2. Developing or improving the infrastructure needed to divert waste from landfills.

3. Educating generators and handlers of solid waste in the city regarding solid waste recycling and disposal alternatives.

4. Reviewing the accuracy of solid waste collector’s reports, PPRPs, post-project compliance reports, and other solid waste records. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.180 Appeal – Construction and demolition debris diversion requirements.

An applicant may appeal to the city manager a decision of the director to deny an exemption or withhold all or any portion of a diversion security deposit. Notice of appeal must be filed with the city manager’s office within 10 calendar days of the date of the director’s decision. The notice of appeal shall set forth in concise language the particular decision or decisions complained of and the reason why the applicant feels aggrieved thereby. A decision regarding the appeal will be made by the city manager within 30 calendar days, and the decision will be final. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the time prescribed herein constitutes a waiver of any objection to the decision of the director and such decision shall be final. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


8.09.190 Enforcement of this chapter.

A. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, which is punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

B. In addition to the penalties herein, if violations of the provisions of this chapter exist in connection with a covered project requiring completion of a PPRP, the city may use various administrative measures to ensure compliance, including, but not limited to:

1. Withholding a permit or a certificate of occupancy for a project until all violations have been corrected.

2. Issuing a stop work notice until all violations have been corrected.

3. Stopping all inspections for the project until all violations have been corrected.

4. Applying any other civil or criminal penalties or liabilities recommended by the city attorney. (Ord. 18-03 § 1, 2018.)


Chapter 8.12 SWIMMING POOLS

Sections:

8.12.010    Enclosures – Requirements.

8.12.020    Plans – Requirement compliance required.

8.12.030    Definitions.


8.12.010 Enclosures – Requirements.

A. Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise, upon which is situated a swimming pool shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is located and completely surrounding such pool, lot or premises, a fence or other solid structure not less than five feet in height. The following materials are approved for fencing: solid masonry or concrete block wall, solid wood fence, chain link fence and ornamental iron fencing, providing there are not intermediate horizontal members (other than top and bottom rail which shall be a minimum of 54 inches apart) and all vertical members shall not be more than four inches apart. Any fencing other than that listed herein shall require special approval from the building department. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use. Such device that is accessible from outside the enclosure shall be a minimum of four feet 10 inches above the ground; provided, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure required in this section need not be so equipped. Overhead garage doors and driveway gates shall not be used as part of the pool enclosure. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to public swimming pools for which a charge or admission price is required to be paid for such use thereof, nor to swimming pools which are a part of and located upon the same premises as an actively operated hotel or motel.

B. Where there is located upon such lot or premises an unattended, undrained swimming pool and such premises are vacated or unoccupied, such unattended, undrained swimming pool is a public nuisance and shall be immediately drained by such person in possession of the land either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise.

C. When there is located upon such lot or premises, whether occupied or not, a swimming pool containing water so dirty or algae-filled, or unclear for any other reason that objects below the surface thereof are not readily visible or discernible, such swimming pool is a public nuisance and shall be immediately drained by such person in possession of the land either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise.

D. Whenever any person in possession of the land, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section, the community development director or designee may, upon order of the city council as hereinafter described, abate the nuisance by draining the swimming pool and taking such other action necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

E. The community development director or designee shall give the owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or person in possession of the land written notice of his intention to abate such nuisance by mailing such notice by certified mail to the owner of the land according to the tax assessment records and by posting such notice on or in front of the property upon which such nuisance exists, at least five days before the time set for hearing objections. Such notices shall describe the nuisance, require the owner to comply with this section within five days of the date of the notice, and provide that unless such action is taken by the owner, the nuisance will be abated by the city and the cost of such abatement assessed upon such land until paid. The notice shall state the time and place when the city council will hear objections to the proposed abatement.

F. At the time stated in the notices, the city council shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed abatement. It may continue the hearing from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing, and after considering and disposing of objections, or if no objections are made, the council shall order the fire chief to proceed with abatement or take such other action as is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and ensure compliance with this chapter. Such order may be made by motion and shall be final.

G. The community development director or designee, or others assigned by him to carry out the abatement order, may enter upon private property to abate the nuisance. Before the arrival of persons assigned to carry out the order, the property owner may abate the nuisance at his own expense.

H. The community development director or designee shall keep an account of the cost of abatement on each separate parcel of land where work is done and shall submit to the legislative body for confirmation an itemized written report showing such cost. A copy of the report shall be sent to the property owner of each parcel of land along with a notice of the time that the city council will consider the report. A copy of such report and notice shall also be posted on or near the door of the council chamber. Such report and notice shall be sent and posted at least five days prior to the time fixed for consideration by the council.

I. At the time set for consideration of the report, the city council shall hear it with any objections of the property owners liable to be assessed for the abatement. It may modify the report as necessary and shall then confirm the report by motion.

J. The total cost for abating such nuisance shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcel of land to which it relates. After confirmation of the report by the city council, a copy may be turned over to the tax collector for the city, to add the amount of the special assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

K. The community development director or designee may receive the amount due on the confirmed report and issue receipts at any time prior to turning the same over to the tax collector. The tax collector may collect the assessment by separate billing and issuing receipts, without reference to the general taxes, at any time prior to the time the special assessment is added to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel of land for municipal purposes.

L. The provisions of this section shall not in any way limit or restrict the city or the district attorney from enforcing this chapter or other city ordinances, or abating public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 1653 §§ 1 – 5, 1987; Ord. 1604 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1223 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 17.21.)


8.12.020 Plans – Requirement compliance required.

All plans submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed shall show compliance with the requirements of CMC 8.12.010. Final inspection and approval of all pools constructed shall be withheld until all requirements of CMC 8.12.010 have been complied with. (1964 Code § 17.22.)


8.12.030 Definitions.

As used in CMC 8.12.010, “swimming pool” means and includes swimming pool, spa, hot tub, or any uncovered structure or device, whether above or below ground, containing water measuring 18 inches in depth or greater. (Ord. 1604 § 2, 1985.)


Chapter 8.16 ABANDONED VEHICLES1

Sections:

8.16.010    Findings – Nuisance declaration.

8.16.020    Definitions.

8.16.030    Applicability.

8.16.040    Additional regulation.

8.16.050    Enforcement.

8.16.060    Right of entry.

8.16.070    Administrative costs.

8.16.080    Abatement – Authority.

8.16.090    Abatement.

8.16.100    Abatement – Hearing – Procedure.

8.16.110    Abatement – Hearing – Action.

8.16.120    Abatement – Decision appeal.

8.16.130    Removal of vehicle.

8.16.140    Identification notice.

8.16.150    Cost assessment.

8.16.160    Removal failure.


8.16.010 Findings – Nuisance declaration.

In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1964 Code § 16A.1.)


8.16.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes street;

B. “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll;

C. “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record;

D. “Public property” does not include highway;

E. “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks;

F. “Administrator” means the person or persons designated by the city manager as being responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions contained within this chapter. (Ord. 10-1988 § 9, 2010; 1964 Code § 16A.1.)


8.16.030 Applicability.

A. This chapter shall not apply to:

1. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

2. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

B. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (1964 Code § 16A.2.)


8.16.040 Additional regulation.

This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (1964 Code § 16A.3.)


8.16.050 Enforcement.

Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the administrator. In the enforcement of this chapter the administrator, or designee thereof, may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 10-1988 § 10, 2010; Ord. 04-1914 § 1, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.4.)


8.16.060 Right of entry.

When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons are authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (1964 Code § 16A.5.)


8.16.070 Administrative costs.

The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. (1964 Code § 16A.6.)


8.16.080 Abatement – Authority.

Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the administrator or designees thereof shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 10-1988 § 11, 2010; Ord. 04-1914 § 2, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.7.)


8.16.090 Abatement.

A 10-day notice of intent to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. (Ord. 10-1988 § 12, 2010; Ord. 04-1914 § 3, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.8.)


8.16.100 Abatement – Hearing – Procedure.

A. An owner of the vehicle or owner of the land who receives a notice of intention may appeal it within 10 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of intention. To request an appeal, an applicant shall submit a written request for an appeal hearing, which shall indicate a return address and must specify the basis for the appeal. In lieu of a written request for appeal, the owner of the land may submit a sworn written statement to the administrator or designee thereof within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle (or parts of the vehicle) subject to the notice of intention, with reasons for denial, and such statement shall be accepted as a written request for an appeal hearing at which the owner of the land does not intend to be present. Any appeal, whether made by submitting a written request for appeal or a sworn written statement, shall be accompanied by an appeal fee, which shall be in the same amount as that for appeals of administrative citations, pursuant to CMC 1.26.090(A). If the appeal deadline falls on a day that City Hall is closed, then the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day.

B. As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal or written sworn statement, the administrator or designee thereof shall fix a date, time and place for a public hearing before an impartial hearing officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. During the time that an appeal is pending, the city shall take no action to abate or remove the vehicle (or parts thereof) that is the subject of the appeal unless abatement or removal of the vehicle (or parts thereof) is necessary to prevent an immediate hazard to the public health and safety.

C. Hearing shall be open to the public and shall take place once per month at a set time and date, unless the administrator or designee thereof determines it necessary to schedule hearings more or less frequently. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by registered mail upon the applicant at the return address indicated on the written appeal or sworn statement, and upon the owner of the land and/or vehicle, if different from the appellant, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. Service of the hearing notice must be made at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing.

D. Unless as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, hearings before hearing officers shall be conducted by the same procedures set forth in CMC 1.26.090 through 1.26.110.

E. If a request for hearing is not received within 10 calendar days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicles or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 10-1988 § 13, 2010; Ord. 04-1914 § 4, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.9.)


8.16.110 Abatement – Hearing – Action.

All hearings under this chapter shall be held publicly before an impartial hearing officer, who shall hear all facts and testimony deemed relevant. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited to the technical rules of evidence, but the hearing officer shall follow the hearing procedure regulations set forth CMC 1.26.100 and 1.26.110 (Community Improvement and Administrative Citations) unless the terms of this chapter direct otherwise. The owner of the land may appear in person at the public hearing or, in lieu thereof, not appear at the public hearing but present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the public hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of the provisions of this chapter. The hearing officer may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing and shall make a written decision based on the findings. The hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. The city shall preserve all exhibits submitted by the parties and shall serve the decision by first-class mail on the appellant, and the owner of the land and the owner of the vehicle, if different from the appellant, within 10 calendar days after the hearing.

If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. (Ord. 04-1914 § 5, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.10.)


8.16.120 Abatement – Decision appeal.

The decision of the hearing officer ordering abatement or removal of a vehicle (or parts thereof) is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with the state law for administrative citations (Government Code Section 53069.4), pursuant to an appeal to superior court filed by the appellant within 20 days of the date that the abatement/removal order is mailed to the appellant. There are no appeals to the planning commission or the city council. (Ord. 04-1914 § 6, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.11.)


8.16.130 Removal of vehicle.

Five calendar days after the service of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance and ordering their abatement or removal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 04-1914 § 7, 2004; 1964 Code § 16A.12.)


8.16.140 Identification notice.

Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (1964 Code § 16A.13.)


8.16.150 Cost assessment.

If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to CMC 8.16.110 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (1964 Code § 16A.14.)


8.16.160 Removal failure.

It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or applicable state law. (1964 Code § 16A.15.)1

For statutory provisions regarding abandoned vehicles and local regulation thereof, see Vehicle Code § 22660; for provisions regarding abandoned vehicles generally, see Vehicle Code § 22650. 


Chapter 8.18 ABANDONMENT OF SHOPPING CARTS

Sections:

8.18.010    Declaration of public nuisance.

8.18.020    Definitions.

8.18.030    Abandoned cart.

8.18.040    Administration and enforcement.

8.18.050    Shopping cart abatement.

8.18.060    Removal of wrecked shopping carts.

8.18.070    Assessments for shopping cart removal – Hearings.

8.18.080    Identification of shopping carts.

8.18.090    Removal from premises prohibited – Exceptions.

8.18.100    Abandonment prohibited.

8.18.110    Owner’s responsibility to prevent littering.

8.18.120    Unlawful possession.

8.18.130    Supplementation of codes, statutes, ordinances, etc.


8.18.010 Declaration of public nuisance.

The city council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of wrecked, dismantled, or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public or private property is found to create a condition tending to reduce property values, to promote blight and deterioration, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to be aesthetically detrimental to the community and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of wrecked, dismantled, or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public or private property, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

A. “Shopping cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in retail establishments by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind.

B. “Private property” means and includes front yards, corner side yards, parking lots, private roadways, and other areas not dedicated to public use, but otherwise plainly visible from any public right-of-way.

C. “Public property” means and includes, but is not limited to, all areas dedicated to public use for public facilities, parks, schools, public streets, roadways, parkways, alleys, sidewalks, flood control channels and any public right-of-way.

D. “Parkway” means that area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.030 Abandoned cart.

A. When a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private property, the shopping cart shall be deemed to be abandoned and therefore a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to shopping carts left standing on private property (including the common areas of shopping centers adjacent thereto) of the owner of the shopping cart according to the name of such owner affixed thereto as required by CMC 8.18.080. In the event that a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private property or in the event the cart violates CMC 8.18.080, the owner thereof shall be responsible and liable for the removal and disposition of the abandoned shopping cart as provided in this chapter.

B. The city manager may, but shall not be obligated to exempt a shopping cart owner from the provisions of this section if the cart owner has implemented a cart containment or retrieval plan, in accordance with Chapter 5.70 CMC. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.040 Administration and enforcement.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his or her authorized representative. In the enforcement of this chapter, the city manager or his or her authorized representative may enter onto public or private property to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a shopping cart and to remove, or cause the removal of, a shopping cart, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.050 Shopping cart abatement.

Upon discovering the existence of a wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping cart, or parts thereof, on public or private property within the city, the city manager, or his or her authorized representative, shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure described in this chapter. Any shopping carts abated and removed from public or private property shall be stored at the city’s public works yard until claimed or disposed of pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.060 Removal of wrecked shopping carts.

The city manager, or his or her authorized designee, may determine that a wrecked shopping cart abated and removed according to the provisions of this chapter is in such poor condition that it may be immediately disposed of without giving notice to the owner as otherwise provided in this chapter. This action will be a discretionary decision of the city manager or his or her authorized designee, and shall be limited to those circumstances where it is determined to be highly unlikely that the owner would reclaim the shopping cart. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.070 Assessments for shopping cart removal – Hearings.

A. Upon the abatement and removal of any shopping cart located on public or private property within the city, the city manager or his or her authorized representative shall notify the owner thereof (if the same can be ascertained) within 24 hours by providing written notice of abatement to (1) the last known address of the owner, (2) the last known facsimile number of the owner, or (3) the last known e-mail address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the shopping cart was removed from public or private property, identify the location where the shopping cart may be claimed, and include a statement outlining the owner’s rights to an administrative hearing as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. Any such shopping cart removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within 30 days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable administrative fees. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, such administrative fees shall be waived if the shopping cart has been retrieved by the owner within three days following the date of the notice.

B. The administrative fees for the removal and storage of the shopping cart shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council and shall include the city’s actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping cart, or parts thereof, plus the proportional share of administrative costs in connection therewith.

C. Any owner of a shopping cart that has been removed and stored pursuant to this chapter may appeal the city’s decision by requesting an administrative hearing, in writing, within 10 days following the date of the notice. Any written request for appeal must clearly set forth the basis for the appeal and shall be accompanied by all administrative fees charged to date, plus any appeal fees, as established or modified by resolution of the city council. Failure to request an appeal (and tender all applicable fees) within the 10-day period shall constitute a waiver of the owner’s rights to appeal, and the owner must claim its shopping cart(s) (and pay all applicable fees) by the end of the 30-day period set forth in subsections (A) and (D) of this section. If an appeal is requested (and all applicable fees are tendered to the city) within the 10-day period, the owner’s time period to claim its shopping cart(s) shall be tolled pending the conclusion of the appeal hearing. Any hearing which is requested shall be conducted before an impartial hearing officer, in accordance with CMC 1.26.090 through 1.26.110. If good cause is shown for the abatement and removal of the shopping cart(s), the owner or its agent shall have 15 days from the date of the hearing officer’s decision to retrieve its shopping cart(s) upon payment of the administrative fees. If good cause is not shown for the abatement and removal of the shopping cart from public or private property, the administrative fees and appeal fees shall be waived and the owner or its agent shall have 15 days after the date of the hearing officer’s decision to retrieve its shopping cart(s) from the storage area.

D. Any shopping carts which are not retrieved by the owner of such shopping cart within 30 days after the mailing of written notice of abatement when such owner has not requested a hearing in accordance with this section, or within 15 days after the date of the hearing officer’s decision, when such owner has requested a hearing in accordance with this section, shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned and may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 01-1885 § 2, 2001; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.080 Identification of shopping carts.

All shopping carts used in the city shall be properly identified by the owner thereof in accordance with Section 22435.1 of the State of California Business and Professionals Code and include at minimum the following: a permanently affixed sign that identifies the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; and lists a telephone number or address for returning the cart removed from the premises or parking area to the owner or retailer. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.090 Removal from premises prohibited – Exceptions.

No person shall remove from the immediate store or parking premises of any food store, market or other mercantile establishment in the city, any shopping cart, wagon or similar device, bearing a notification affixed thereto in a conspicuous place thereon to the effect that such cart, wagon or device is not to be removed from the owner’s premises, unless such person is the owner or owner’s employee or agent. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.100 Abandonment prohibited.

No person shall abandon or leave any such cart, wagon or device which has been removed from the owner’s premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place, or upon any private property (except that of the owner of the cart, wagon or device) not under the control of such person abandoning or leaving such cart, wagon or device. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.110 Owner’s responsibility to prevent littering.

The action of an owner or owner’s agent or employee to permit any such cart, wagon or device to be removed from the owner’s premises shall be considered littering. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.120 Unlawful possession.

No person shall have in his/her possession any such cart, wagon or device which has been removed from the owner’s premises without authorization or which has been abandoned or left on private property under circumstances as described in CMC 8.18.030 unless such person so having possession has notified the police department of the presence and location of such cart, wagon or device. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


8.18.130 Supplementation of codes, statutes, ordinances, etc.

This chapter is not to be construed as the exclusive regulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts with the city; it shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 09-1965 § 1, 2009; Ord. 95-1795 § 1, 1995.)


Chapter 8.20 ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:

8.20.010    Purpose.

8.20.020    Definitions.

8.20.030    Administration – Funding – Increases in fees and fines – Annual evaluation.

8.20.040    Alarm registrations required – Terms – Fees and fee collection.

8.20.050    Registration application – Contents.

8.20.060    Transfer of registration prohibited.

8.20.070    Duties of alarm users.

8.20.080    Audible alarms – Restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm.

8.20.090    Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.

8.20.100    Duties and authority of the alarm administrator.

8.20.110    False alarm fines – Fees – Late charges.

8.20.120    Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police response.

8.20.130    Alarm registration suspension, fees, fines, violation to make alarm dispatch request for suspended alarm site and verified response.

8.20.140    Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and fines.

8.20.150    Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations.

8.20.160    Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.

8.20.170    Police department response.

8.20.180    Confidentiality of alarm information.

8.20.190    Scope of police duty – Immunities preserved.


8.20.010 Purpose. 

The city of Covina council finds and declares that:

A. The vast majority of alarms to which the police department responds are false alarms, which are reported to the police by alarm companies.

B. Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper or careless use of an alarm system.

C. The public and police officers are subjected to needless danger when the officers are called to respond to false alarms.

D. Officers responding to false alarms are not available to carry out other police duties.

E. In the interest of using limited police resources most effectively and efficiently, the number of false alarms can and must be reduced.

F. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and inefficiencies associated with false alarms and to encourage alarm companies and property owners to maintain the operational reliability, properly use alarm systems, and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.

G. This chapter governs systems intended to summon a police response, establishes fees, fines, establishes a system of administration, sets conditions for the suspension of a police response and establishes a public education and training program. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A. “Alarm administrator” means the person or persons designated by the police department to administer the provisions of this chapter.

B. “Alarm agreement” means the legal contract or agreement by and between the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.

C. “Alarm agreement holding company” means the alarm installation company or monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement with the alarm user.

D. “Alarm installation company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and includes individuals or firms that install and service alarm systems used in a private business or proprietary facility.

E. “Alarm dispatch request” means a notification to the police department that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.

F. “Alarm registration” means a registration and unique number issued by the alarm administrator to an alarm user, which authorizes the operation of an alarm system. 

G. “Alarm response manager (ARM)” means a person designated by an alarm installation company and monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the city’s alarm administrator.

H. “Alarm site” means a location served by one or more alarm systems. In a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate alarm site if served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that houses two or more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each business will be considered a separate alarm site.

I. “Alarm system” means a device or series of devices, which emit or transmit an audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is intended to summon police response. The term includes hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems, but does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle, on an individual’s person or a system which will not emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the building, residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of a building or residence. 

J. “Alarm user” means any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service for an alarm system from an alarm installation company or monitoring company, or who owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.

K. “Alarm user awareness class” means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.

L. “Alarm user list” means a list provided by the alarm user’s alarm installation company or, if no alarm agreement exists between the alarm user and an alarm installation company, the alarm user’s monitoring company.

M. “Arming station” means a device that controls an alarm system.

N. “Automatic voice dialer” means any electronic, mechanical, or other device which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message to the police department or city requesting an officer dispatch to an alarm site. 

O. “Burglar alarm” means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an intruder in either a business or residence.

P. “Business license” means a business license issued by the city of Covina business license division to an alarm installation company or monitoring company to conduct business in the city.

Q. “Cancellation” means the termination of a police response to an alarm site after an alarm dispatch request is made but before an officer’s arrival at the alarm site.

R. “Conversion of alarm user” means the transaction or process by which one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was previously serviced or monitored by another alarm company.

S. “City” means city of Covina.

T. “Duress alarm” means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires an officer response. 

U. “Enhanced call verification” means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user and/or the alarm user’s designated representatives by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police burglar alarm dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer dispatch. Names and numbers of those contacted or attempted to contact shall be provided when requested.

V. “False alarm” means an alarm dispatch request to the police department, which results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after completing an investigation of the alarm site.

W. “Holdup alarm” means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.

X. “Local alarm system” means an unmonitored alarm system that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site.

Y. “Monitoring” means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the police department. 

Z. “Monitoring company” means a person in the business of providing monitoring services.

AA. “One plus duress alarm” means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code equals 1234, one plus duress code equals 1235).

BB. “Panic alarm” means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring an officer response.

CC. “Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.

DD. “Police department” means the Covina police department.

EE. “Protective or reactive alarm system” means an alarm system that produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable a person’s vision. 

FF. “Registration number” means a unique individual number assigned to an alarm user as part of alarm registration issued by the police department. 

GG. “Responsible party” means a person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.

HH. “Robbery alarm” means an alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic activation of a device or any system, device or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person is in need of immediate police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or death. The term has the same general meaning as “holdup alarm” or “duress alarm.” 

II. “SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01” means the ANSI – American National Standard Institute-approved Security Industry Association – SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, are marked as follows: “Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction.”

JJ. “Takeover” means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another alarm user.

KK. “Verified response” means a police response that is based on information received from a person physically present at a location (e.g., an alarm site) or from real-time audio or video surveillance positively verifying that there is evidence of either a crime or an attempted crime at the location. 

LL. “Zones” mean a division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.030 Administration – Funding – Increases in fees and fines – Annual evaluation. 

A. Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the police department.

B. The police department shall designate an alarm administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in this section.

C. Monies generated by fees and fines assessed pursuant to this section shall be dedicated for use by the police department for the administration of the provisions of this chapter and officers’ response to alarms.

D. The amount of the fees and fines set forth in this section shall be specified in the city fee schedule, which may only be revised by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. For purposes of this subsection, “fees” includes any type or class of fee and includes late charges. 

E. The alarm administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as warranted. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.040 Alarm registrations required – Terms – Fees and fee collection.

A. An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm system without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A registration fee including a completed alarm registration application shall be received and approved by the alarm administrator prior to any alarm system activation. There shall be reduced residential registration fees for senior citizens, low-income and disabled persons. The city council shall establish such classes of persons by resolution. 

B. Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections of this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or other requirements that are applicable.

C. The fee for a new initial alarm registration and the alarm registration renewal fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator. 

D. Existing Alarm Systems.

1. Any alarm system that has been installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be registered and a registration fee collected by the alarm administrator.

a. The alarm agreement holding company shall provide within 40 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter an alarm user list of existing alarm users in the city, in a format approved by the alarm administrator, including name, address, billing address and telephone number, to the alarm administrator.

b. The alarm agreement holding company may apply to the alarm administrator for an extension of the time limit in subsection (D)(1)(a) of this section based on extenuating circumstances. 

2. The alarm agreement holding company may, through a mutual written agreement, have another alarm company provide the alarm user’s list. 

E. New Alarm Systems.

1. Any alarm installation company that installs an alarm system on premises located within the city of Covina shall notify the alarm administrator within 10 days that an alarm system has been installed and send the alarm administrator the required information. 

2. In the case of self-installed alarm systems that are to be monitored by a monitoring company, the monitoring company shall act as the alarm installation company regarding the duties to notify the alarm administrator.

3. Failure of an alarm installation company to notify the alarm administrator of a new alarm system installation within 10 days of installation shall result in a fine as established by resolution of the city council to be imposed on the alarm installation company. 

4. The initial alarm registration fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator. Failure of the alarm user to submit an application and registration fee within the 30 days after notice shall result in the alarm system being classified as nonregistered and late charges being assessed.

F. Alarm Registration and Renewal Fees.

1. An alarm registration shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user of the need to renew their registration 30 days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit the updated information and renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew shall be classified as use of a nonregistered alarm system and subject the alarm site to a suspension and late charge. 

2. Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a one-year registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required is established by resolution of the city council.

G. Late Charge. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm registration prior to the registration’s expiration date will be assessed a late charge as established by resolution of the city council. 

H. Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee will be made.

I. Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall issue a registration number or alarm registration renewal to the applicant unless:

1. The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this chapter; or 

2. An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and the condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or 

3. The alarm installation company and/or the monitoring company listed on the registration application is not in possession of a current valid State of California Department of Consumer Affairs alarm company operator’s license.

4. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue an alarm registration.

J. Exceptions.

1. Government entities, including but not necessarily limited to the city, county, state, federal and school districts, must obtain alarm registrations for all alarm systems on property under their control within the boundaries of Covina, but are exempt from payment of alarm registration and renewal fees. 

2. All registration-fee-exempted alarm sites are required to obtain and maintain a valid alarm registration for a police response and are subjected to all other fees, fines and suspension enforcements. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.050 Registration application – Contents. 

An application for an alarm registration must be in a format provided by the police department. The information required on such forms shall be determined by the alarm administrator. Registration applicants acknowledge that the police response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions and staffing levels. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.060 Transfer of registration prohibited. 

A. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator and their alarm company of any change to the information listed on the alarm registration application within 10 business days after such change. 

B. Exceptions may be made in the discretion of the alarm administrator when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the original registration holder or successors in interest to the property for which the alarm registration has been issued. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.070 Duties of alarm users. 

A. An alarm user shall:

1. Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms.

2. Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the alarm system’s location within 30 minutes after being requested by the monitoring company or police department in order to:

a. Deactivate an alarm system; 

b. Provide access to the alarm site; and/or

c. Provide alternative security for the alarm site.

3. Provide his, her, or its monitoring company with the updated names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to: 

a. Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;

b. Respond to the alarm site at any time; and

c. Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system, if necessary.

4. Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.

5. Notify his, her, or its monitoring company of any suspension of police response (as provided for under this chapter) and request that the monitoring company not make a burglar alarm dispatch request. 

B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the police department or the city and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal. A fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed for each violation of this prohibition. 

C. An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.080 Audible alarms – Restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm. 

A. No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense warning. The chief of police shall make the final determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.

B. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter no one shall install, modify or repair an alarm system in the city of Covina that has a siren, bell or other signal that is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that sounds for longer than 10 consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that repeats the 10-minute audible cycle more than three consecutive times during a single armed period. A fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed for each violation of this prohibition. 

C. In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset itself or continues to activate for more than 60 minutes and the responsible person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person cannot or will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation of the alarm is creating a disturbance, the police department may cause the alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the circumstances. The alarm user shall be held responsible for the actual costs involved to abate the malfunctioning alarm up to a maximum of $300.00. The city, its employees or agents shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such disconnection. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.090 Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies. 

A. Registration.

1. No alarm company operator or alarm agent, as defined by the Business and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, or repair any alarm system within the city unless the alarm company operator or alarm agent has, prior to performing such work, obtained a business license and registered his or her name and address and filed a copy of his or her state identification card with the city’s finance department.

2. Each alarm installation company and alarm monitoring company must designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company. The individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the alarm administrator. The name, contact number, and e-mail address of the ARM shall be provided to the alarm administrator. Failure to comply within 30 days after being notified in writing from the alarm administrator may result in the suspension of police department response to alarm dispatch requests from the noncomplying alarm installation company or monitoring company.

3. Each alarm installation company shall provide the name, address and phone number of any monitoring company it is using to monitor its alarm sites within the city, and monitoring companies shall do the same for alarm installation companies that use their monitoring services within the city.

4. Disconnected Alarm Users. An alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement shall notify the alarm administrator by the fifteenth day of each month of all their alarm customers within the city of Covina that have discontinued their alarm service with the company in the previous month. Failure to comply shall result in a fine per violation in an amount established by resolution by the city council. The fine may be waived by the alarm administrator when the alarm installation company or monitoring company provides documentation that it has a valid contract with the respective alarm user. 

B. Alarm installation companies shall:

1. Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm installation company shall distribute to the alarm user information summarizing:

a. The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the registration fee and the potential for fines and suspension of an alarm registration; 

b. How to prevent false alarms; and

c. How to operate the alarm system.

2. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress alarms installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 

3. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not install, modify or repair “single action” devices for the activation of holdup, robbery or panic alarms. New devices shall require two actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the user intends to activate the device. 

4. Ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an alarm installation company shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet ANSI/SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard – Features for False Alarm Reduction.

5. An alarm installation company shall not use an automatic voice dialer for any alarm system which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the police department or the city and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal. 

6. Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, robbery, holdup or panic alarm have been provided adequate training as to the proper use of the alarm system’s operation and function. 

7. All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric utility service will not activate the alarm system.

8. All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than 10 minutes per activation.

C. A monitoring company shall:

1. Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator or other approved communication processes.

2. Employ enhanced call verification procedures on all burglar alarm dispatch requests. The Covina police department may refuse to accept an alarm dispatch request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the procedures required by enhanced call verification. This subsection becomes effective 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3. Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the police department in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.

4. Communicate cancellations to the police department in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.

5. Communicate any available zone information (north, south, front, back, door, window, etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s) as part of an alarm dispatch request.

6. Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request. 

7. Notify communications (dispatch) of any alarm site that it knows, or reasonably should know, has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a protective-reactive alarm system. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).

8. After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the police department if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or a responsible party is on the way to the alarm site.

9. Each monitoring company must maintain, for a period of at least one year after the date of an alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, each alarm system zone activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of all attempts to verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for any individual alarm user. If the request is made within 60 days after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three business days after receiving the request. If the records are requested between 60 days and one year after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within 30 days after receiving the request. 

10. Each monitoring company shall, upon request, immediately provide the police department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm user’s emergency contacts at the time of each alarm dispatch request. 

D. Conversion of Alarm Users. An alarm installation company or monitoring company that converts the servicing of any alarm system account from another company shall notify the alarm administrator of such conversion and shall make a reasonable effort to provide to the alarm administrator, within 60 days from the date of conversion, an alarm user list of the converted accounts, in a format acceptable to the alarm administrator, that includes the following:

1. Registration number.

2. Customer name.

3. Customer billing address.

4. Customer telephone number.

5. Alarm site address.

6. Alarm installation company license number.

7. Monitoring company license number.

E. The customer lists described in subsection (D) of this section are proprietary and confidential information and will not be released to anyone absent a court order. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.100 Duties and authority of the alarm administrator. 

A. The alarm administrator shall: 

1. Designate the manner and form of alarm dispatch requests and the telephone numbers and/or communication process that is to be used for such requests; and

2. Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests.

B. The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and record information on alarm dispatch requests.

C. The alarm administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following: 

1. The date and time of an officer’s response to the false alarm; and 

2. Any false alarm fine incurred. 

D. The alarm administrator may require that a conference be held with an alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company responsible for repairing or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. The conference may be held in person or through a conference telephone call, at the alarm administrator’s discretion. Failure to participate may result in suspension of the alarm registration, as indicated by the facts of the case. 

E. The alarm administrator may establish an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the alarm ordinance and problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid creating false alarms.

F. If a false robbery, holdup or panic alarm has occurred and the alarm was triggered using a single action, nonrecessed device, the alarm administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the false alarm fine, if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action, non-recessed device.

G. The alarm administrator shall make a copy of this chapter and/or a chapter summary sheet available to each alarm user.

H. The alarm administrator may use electronic means to communicate with alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies when applicable or when requested by the recipient and at the alarm administrator’s discretion. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.110 False alarm fines – Fees – Late charges.

A. The alarm administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false alarm occurring at that alarm user’s alarm site. The amount of said fines for the listed categories shall be established by city council and may be subsequently amended by resolution of the city council.

1. Burglar false alarm fines.

2. Robbery false alarm fines.

3. Residential panic false alarm fines.

B. If a false alarm fine is not paid within 30 days after the invoice is mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed. 

C. Fines for False Alarms from Nonregistered Alarm Systems. For person(s) operating a nonregistered alarm system incurring a false alarm, fines shall be imposed as established by resolution of the city council. 

D. Any monitoring company after five business days of receiving notice from the alarm administrator that an alarm user’s registration status is that of nonregistered shall not make a burglar alarm dispatch request from that alarm user. 

E. If cancellation of a police response occurs prior to the officer’s arrival at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false alarm and no false alarm fine will be assessed.

F. The alarm installation company shall be assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council if the officer responding to a false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation company directly caused the false alarm. Such false alarms are not included in the total number of false alarms for the alarm user, nor is the alarm user to be held liable for any false alarm fine resulting from such alarm activation. 

G. A fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed against any monitoring company that fails to verify alarm system signals as required in CMC 8.20.090(C)(2). 

H. A fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed against an alarm installation company if the alarm administrator determines that an employee of the alarm installation company knowingly made a false statement concerning the inspection of an alarm site or the performance of an alarm system. 

I. Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with notice of any fine.

J. All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed under this section are due within 30 days of written notice unless otherwise noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not paid within 30 days. 

K. The alarm administrator may waive the false alarm fine for the first chargeable false alarm during the alarm user’s one-year registration period, pending the successful completion of the online alarm user awareness class available through the alarm administrator. In order to have the fine waived, the alarm user shall have successfully completed the class within 30 days of the fine notice. Alarm users without online access may request the online school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to complete the alarm user awareness class shall be allowed for mail delivery. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.120 Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police response. 

A. The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after each false alarm. The notice shall include the amount of the fine for the false alarm, the fact that police response to further alarms will be suspended after the fourth false alarm during the alarm user’s one-year alarm registration period (excluding duress, robbery, holdup and panic alarms), and that the alarm user has the right to appeal.

B. The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing 30 days beforehand that a police department response to further alarms is to be suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/or fines due and a description of the reinstatement process. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.130 Alarm registration suspension, fees, fines, violation to make alarm dispatch request for suspended alarm site and verified response.

A. The alarm administrator shall notify the police department of each alarm user whose alarm registration qualifies for suspension under this section. The alarm administrator may suspend an alarm registration if it is determined that:

1. There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration application.

2. The alarm user has had four or more false burglar alarms within the one-year registration period, except that the alarm administrator may waive a suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing reasonable attempts to repair the alarm system prior to the notice of suspension.

3. The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or alarm registration renewal fee, false alarm fine, late charge, or any other fee, fine, or charge assessed under this section. 

B. It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a burglar alarm system during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended. It is a violation of this chapter for a monitoring company to make an alarm dispatch request to a burglar alarm site after the monitoring company’s alarm response manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the alarm administrator that the registration for that alarm site has been suspended. A grace period of five business days after the ARM’s notification shall be granted the monitoring company to comply.

C. False Alarm Fines Under Suspension Status. In addition to the fines set forth in CMC 8.20.110(A), a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said fines shall be established by resolution of the city council. 

D. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify their respective alarm monitoring company of their suspension status. An alarm user shall be held financially accountable for all false alarm fines incurred. 

E. Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the police department may or may not dispatch an officer to an alarm site for which an alarm registration is suspended.

F. Upon an additional suspension for excessive false alarms within 12 months after an alarm user has reinstated their alarm system, the status of the registration shall be that of verified response. Verified response status for burglar alarm requests shall be enforced for 12 months from the official date of notice of suspension. Such affected alarm user may apply for reinstatement after the expiration of the 12 months. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.140 Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and fines. 

A. If the alarm administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an alarm registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm registration, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company.

B. The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company may appeal any action described in subsection (A) of this section to the police chief (or his or her designee) by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the police chief (or designee) within 20 business days after receipt of notice of the action. Failure to deliver the appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal. 

C. The procedure for an appeal to the police chief (or designee) is as follows: 

1. The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee and setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled “Appeal from Alarm Administrator’s Action.” The appeal fee shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council and will be returned to the appealing party if the appeal is successful.

2. The police chief (or designee) shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after the police department’s receipt of the request for appeal and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the alarm administrator. The police chief (or designee) must base the decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the alarm administrator.

3. Filing of an appeal stays any action by the alarm administrator to suspend an alarm registration or require the payment of a fee or fine until the appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of the alarm administrator that is the subject of the appeal. This provision does not operate as a bar to enforcement action on violations of this section that occur thereafter.

D. The alarm administrator or the police chief, or their respective designees, may adjust the count of false alarms or assessed fees based on:

1. Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of a communications services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);

2. Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage of more than four hours or severe weather such as a tornado or earthquake;

3. Evidence that an alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; or

4. The occurrence of multiple alarms within a 24-hour period, which may be considered as one false alarm if the alarm user has taken corrective action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user.

E. The alarm administrator may waive all or part of a false alarm fine due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action with supervisor approval. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.150 Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations. 

A. On the suspension of an alarm registration, a person whose alarm registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by the alarm administrator if the person:

1. Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of the city council; 

2. Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other charges;

3. Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company;

4. The alarm user successfully completes an alarm user awareness class and test. 

B. The police department shall reinstate its response to an alarm site as soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the alarm administrator. The alarm user and monitoring company shall take notice that the alarm site has been officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the alarm administrator of that fact. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to verify that his, her, or its registration status and future police response have been properly restored. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.160 Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain alarm installation companies and monitoring companies. 

A. The police chief or command staff designee may suspend police response to an alarm dispatch request from an alarm installation company or monitoring company if it is determined that:

1. There is a violation of this chapter by the alarm installation company or monitoring company and the condition causing the violation has not been corrected; and/or

2. The alarm installation company or monitoring company has failed to pay any fee, fine, or other charge assessed under this section, more than 60 days after the fee, fine, or other charge is due.

B. The police department may not respond to any alarm dispatch request where the alarm installation company or monitoring company who installed or monitors that alarm has failed to comply with California licensing requirements or failed to maintain a valid copy of the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs alarm company operator’s license.

C. A suspension of police response made pursuant to this section is subject to the appeal process provided for within this chapter. In addition, the alarm administrator has the ability to accept a workable solution from the affected party prior to an appeal. The affected party has 60 days after the written notice of suspension before police response is suspended to its alarm customers. 

D. The alarm administrator shall notify all known alarm users subscribing to an alarm installation company or an alarm monitoring company that the police department has suspended response to the company’s alarm dispatch requests.

E. The city shall assess the alarm installation company or monitoring company a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. In addition, if the alarm administrator has incurred costs in notifying alarm users by mail of the suspension of their alarm installation company or monitoring company, reimbursement to the city of those costs shall be a condition of reinstatement. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.170 Police department response.

A. Subject to the suspension provisions in CMC 8.20.130 and the discretion discussed in CMC 8.20.190, the police department at its discretion will respond to all “in progress” robbery, panic or burglar alarms as promptly as possible, taking into account pending calls for service and any policy establishing priority of dispatched calls following notification of the receipt of the alarm from the monitoring company. Police supervisors may, in their discretion, cancel a police response to any or all alarms based on weather or other factors affecting police service needs.

B. The police chief or his or her designee may re-prioritize assignment of burglar alarms and response time at any time during a 24-hour period as may be necessary due to the service needs of the community. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.180 Confidentiality of alarm information.

All information contained in documents gathered through alarm registrations, the submission of customer lists, the alarm appeal process and records relating to alarm dispatch requests must be held in confidence by all employees of the alarm administrator, city of Covina and any third-party alarm administrator. Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared confidential and not a public record. Absent special circumstances, such information must not be released to the public or any person other than a law enforcement agency, third party administrator or the applicable alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company except pursuant to court order. Per California Government Code Section 6254(f). (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


8.20.190 Scope of police duty – Immunities preserved. 

The issuance of alarm registrations does not create a contract between the police department and/or the city of Covina and any alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, on the police department to respond to any alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure of the police department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the police department response is influenced by the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions. (Ord. 12-2014 § 1, 2012.)


Chapter 8.40 PUBLIC NUISANCES1

Sections:

Article I. Nuisances Enumerated

8.40.010    Findings, purpose, and intent.

8.40.020    Definitions.

8.40.030    Prohibited public nuisance conditions.

8.40.040    Penalty.

Article II. Administrative Procedures for Abatement of Nuisances

8.40.050    Abatement of public nuisances.

8.40.060    Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abate a public nuisance.

8.40.070    Notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel.

8.40.080    Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures.

8.40.090    Notice and order to vacate buildings or structures.

8.40.100    Sample notice of abatement.

8.40.110    Service of notice.

8.40.120    Right of appeal from a notice of abatement.

8.40.130    Consequence of an untimely appeal.

8.40.140    Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing.

8.40.150    Review by hearing officer.

8.40.160    Decision of hearing officer – Order of abatement.

8.40.170    Abatement of nuisance by responsible persons prior to city abatement actions.

8.40.180    Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard.

8.40.190    Combination of notices.

8.40.200    Establishment of costs of abatement.

8.40.210    Collection of abatement costs by special assessment.

8.40.220    Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien.

8.40.230    Treble the costs of abatement.

8.40.240    Violations and penalties.

Article III. Recordation of Substandard Notice

8.40.250    Recordation of substandard notice.

8.40.260    Applicability of other laws.

Article I. Nuisances Enumerated


8.40.010 Findings, purpose, and intent.

A. Findings. The city council finds and declares as follows:

1. Section VII of Article XI of the California Constitution provides that a city may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws.

2. California Government Code Section 38771 provides that legislative bodies of cities may declare what constitutes a nuisance.

3. California Government Code Section 38772 et seq. further provides that legislative bodies of cities may also provide for the summary abatement of any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it, and by ordinance may make the expense of abatement of nuisances a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner.

4. Nuisance conditions are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent properties or premises (both public and private), and/or are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.

B. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter are as follows:

1. To define as public nuisances and violations those conditions and uses of land that are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent properties or premises (both public and private), and/or are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.

2. To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of property and enhance conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use and safety of all structures and premises in the city.

3. To establish administrative procedures for the city’s use, upon its election, to correct or abate violations of this chapter on real property throughout the city.

4. This chapter is not intended to be applied, construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city, or upon any officer or employee thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the city or outside of the city that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.020 Definitions.

As used in chapter, the following definitions shall apply. For purposes of this chapter, these definitions shall supersede any other definitions of the same terms elsewhere in this code.

A. “Abandoned structure” shall mean real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is vacant and is maintained in an uninhabitable condition or a condition of disrepair or deterioration as evidenced by the existence of public nuisances therein, or that is vacant and under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale, pending tax assessor’s lien sale, or that is vacant and has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. Factors that may also be considered in a determination of an abandoned structure include, without limitation: present operability and functional utility; the presence of nonfunctional, broken or missing doors or windows, such that entry therein by unauthorized persons is not deterred; the existence of real property tax delinquencies for the land upon which the structure is located; age and degree of obsolescence of the structure, and the cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value.

B. “Abandoned personal property” shall mean and refers to any item, object, thing, material or substance that, by its condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, nonuse, obsolescence or location on public real property or on private real property, causes a reasonable person to conclude that the owner has permanently relinquished all right, title, claim and possession thereto, or that the object, thing, material or substance cannot be used for its intended or designed purpose. Abandoned personal property may include junk and vehicles.

C. “Abatement costs” shall mean all costs, fees, and expenses, incidental or otherwise, incurred by the city in investigating and abating a public nuisance.

D. “Attractive nuisance” shall mean any condition, device, equipment, instrument, item or machine that is unsafe, unprotected and may prove detrimental to minors whether in a structure or in outdoor areas of developed or undeveloped real property. This includes, without limitation, any abandoned or open and accessible wells, shafts, basements or excavations; any abandoned refrigerators and abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors. An attractive nuisance shall also include pools, standing water or excavations containing water, that are unfenced or otherwise lack an adequate barrier, thereby creating a risk of drowning, or which are hazardous or unsafe due to the existence of any condition rendering such water to be clouded, unclear or injurious to health due to, without limitation, any of the following: bacterial growth, infectious or toxic agents, algae, insect remains, animal remains, rubbish, refuse, debris, or waste of any kind.

E. “Building” shall mean any structure designed, used, or maintained for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, equipment, or property of any kind, and shall also include structures wherein things may be grown, made, produced, kept, handled, stored, or disposed of, and all appendages, accessories, apparatus, appliances, and equipment installed as a part thereof.

F. “City” shall mean the city of Covina.

G. “City manager” shall mean the city manager or designee thereof.

H. “City personnel” shall mean any city employee, representative, agent, contractor, or service provider designated by the city manager to abate a public nuisance.

I. “Code,” “codes,” and “Covina City Municipal Code” shall mean the Covina Municipal Code and any code, law, or regulation incorporated therein by reference, including the Covina comprehensive zoning ordinance (CMC Title 17), and any adopted and uncodified ordinances.

J. “Code enforcement officer” and “officer” shall mean any city employee with obligations to enforce the Covina Municipal Code. Enforcement officers shall include the personnel of the public works department and Covina police officers. The city manager may designate additional employees of other city departments to act as officers for purposes of implementing the provisions of this chapter.

K. “Commercial vehicle” shall mean any vehicle of a type required to be registered under the state of California Vehicle Code used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property or for other commercial purposes. Passenger vehicles that are not used for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, trailers, recreational vehicles, and vanpool vehicles are not commercial vehicles.

L. “Compliance period” shall mean the period of time and/or required schedule set forth in a notice of abatement and/or an order of abatement within which all nuisance abatement actions referenced in such notice of abatement and/or order of abatement must be completed.

M. “Controlled substances” shall mean any substance that is declared by state or federal law to be a controlled substance.

N. “Fire hazard” shall include, but shall not be limited to, any device, equipment, waste, vegetation, condition, thing, or act which is in such a condition that it increases or could cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire or that otherwise provides a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause; or any device, equipment, waste, vegetation, condition, thing, or act which could obstruct, delay, hinder, or interfere with, or may become the cause of obstruction, delay, or hindrance of, the operations of the fire department or other emergency service personnel or the egress of the occupants in the event of fire.

O. “Graffiti” shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on or otherwise glued, posted, or affixed to or on any real or personal property (including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, and vehicles), regardless of the nature of the material to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof.

P. “Hazardous materials” shall mean any material or substance of any kind that is declared by any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation to be composed of hazardous material.

Q. “Hearing officer” shall mean the city employee or representative appointed by the city manager, or a designee thereof, to hear all timely appeals from a notice of abatement.

R. “Incidental expenses” shall include, but shall not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city, such as preparation of notices, specifications, contracts, inspection of work, costs of printing and mailings required hereunder, costs of any filing and/or recordation with the county recorder’s office or other governmental agency, and the costs of administration and legal services.

S. “Inoperable vehicle” shall mean and include, without limitation, any vehicle that is incapable of being lawfully driven on a street and/or highway. Factors that may be used to determine this condition include, without limitation, vehicles that have a “planned nonoperational” status with the California Department of Motor Vehicles, vehicles lacking a current and valid registration, a working engine, transmission, wheels, inflated tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary for its legal and safe operation on a highway or any other public right-of-way.

T. “Junk” shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked appliance, device, equipment, furniture, fixture, furnishing, object, material, substance, tire, or thing of any kind or composition. Junk may include abandoned personal property, as well as any form of debris, refuse, rubbish, trash or waste. Factors that may be considered in a determination that personal property is junk include, without limitation, its:

1. Condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair or nonuse.

2. Approximate age and degree of obsolescence.

3. Location.

4. Present operability, functional utility and status of registration or licensing, where applicable.

5. Cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value.

U. “Junkyard” means real property of any zoning classification on which junk is kept, maintained, placed or stored to such a degree that it constitutes a principal use or condition on said premises. The existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when it is an expressly permitted use in the applicable zone and it is in full compliance with all provisions of CMC Title 17, and all other applicable provisions of the Covina Municipal Code, as well as all future amendments and additions thereto.

V. “Notice of abatement” shall mean a notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel, as described in CMC 8.40.070.

W. “Order of abatement” shall mean an order issued by a hearing officer following an appeal of a notice of abatement.

X. “Owner” shall mean and include any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor’s office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court-appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of such property.

Y. “Person” shall mean and include any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. “Person” also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city.

Z. “Personal property” means property that is not real property, and includes, without limitation, any appliance, furniture, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance or vehicle.

AA. “Police chief” shall mean the highest-ranking officer of the police department or his/her designee.

BB. “Police department” shall mean the Covina police department.

CC. “Public nuisance” means anything which is, or is likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square, street or highway. All conditions hereafter enumerated in this chapter, or that otherwise violate or are contrary to any provision of the Covina Municipal Code, are public nuisances by definition and declaration, and said enumerated conditions shall not, in any manner, be construed to be exclusive or exhaustive. A public nuisance shall also exist when a person fails to comply with any condition of a city approval, entitlement, license or permit or when an activity on, or use of, real property violates, or is contrary to, any provision or requirement of the Covina Municipal Code.

DD. “Real property” or “premises” means any real property owned by any person and/or any building, structure, or other improvement thereon, or portions thereof. “Real property” or “premises” includes any adjacent sidewalk, parkway, street, alley, or other unimproved public easement, whether or not owned by the city of Covina.

EE. “Responsible person” means any person, whether as an owner as defined in this chapter, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers, or permits a public nuisance, or any violation of the Covina Municipal Code or county or state law, or regulation thereof, to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty. A responsible person shall also include employees, principals, joint venturers, officers, agents, and/or other persons acting in concert with, or at the direction of, and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the lot, building or structure on, or in, which a public nuisance or violation exists or existed. The actions or inactions of a responsible person’s agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person.

FF. “Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an edifice, wall, fence, or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. For purposes of this chapter, this definition shall supersede any other definition of this term in the Covina Municipal Code.

GG. “Vacant” shall mean real property or any building or structure thereon that is not legally occupied. Factors that may be used, either alone or in combination, to determine whether real property, or buildings or structures thereon, is vacant include, but shall not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or other debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential and/or commercial furnishings consistent with the permitted uses within the zone of the real property; statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant.

HH. “Vehicle” means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or other public right-of-way, and includes all vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code and all future amendments thereto. “Vehicle” does not include devices (1) that are propelled exclusively by human power such as bicycles and wheelchairs, or (2) those that are used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

II. “Violation” shall mean and include a public nuisance as described in this chapter, or any condition, activity, or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, inaction, or omission) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of this code, or any applicable county, state, or federal laws or regulations.

JJ. “Weeds” shall include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following:

1. Any plant, brush, growth, or other vegetation that bears seeds of a downy or wingy nature;

2. Any plant, brush, growth, or other vegetation that attains such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire hazard;

3. Any plant, brush, growth, or other vegetation that is noxious or dangerous;

4. Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a threat to the public health; or

5. Dry grass, rubble, brush, or other flammable plant, growth, or other vegetation that endangers the public safety by creating or tending to create a fire hazard. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.030 Prohibited public nuisance conditions.

The city council finds and declares that, notwithstanding any other provision of the Covina Municipal Code, it is a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to allow, cause, create, maintain, or suffer, or permit others to cause, create, or maintain, the following:

A. Any real property or premises in the city in such a manner that any one or more of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:

1. Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of the grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties.

2. Buildings or other structures, or portions thereof, that are partially constructed or destroyed or allowed to remain in a state of partial construction or destruction for an unreasonable period of time. As used herein, an “unreasonable” period shall mean any portion of time exceeding the period given to a responsible person by the city for the complete abatement of this nuisance condition with all required city approvals, permits and inspections. Factors that may be used by the city to establish a reasonable period for the complete abatement of this nuisance include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. The degree of partial construction or destruction and the cause therefor.

b. Whether or not this condition constitutes an attractive nuisance or if it otherwise poses or promotes a health or safety hazard to occupants of the premises, or to others.

c. The degree of visibility, if any, of this condition from public or adjoining private real property.

d. The scope and type of work that is needed to abate this nuisance.

e. The promptness with which a responsible person has applied for and obtained all required city approvals and permits in order to lawfully commence the nuisance abatement actions.

f. Whether or not a responsible person has complied with other required technical code requirements, including requesting and passing required inspections in a timely manner, while completing nuisance abatement actions.

g. Whether or not a responsible person has applied for extensions to a technical code permit or renewed an expired permit, as well as the number of extensions and renewals that a responsible person has previously sought or obtained from the city.

h. Whether or not a responsible person has made substantial progress, as determined by the city, in performing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit that has expired, or is about to expire.

i. Whether delays in completing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit have occurred, and the reason(s) for such delays.

3. Real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is abandoned or vacant (irrespective of whether said structure is secured against unauthorized entry) for a period of more than six months.

4. Exterior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, roofs, balconies, decks, fences, stairs, stairways, walls, signs and fixtures), as well as walkways, pedestrian ways, driveways, parking areas, and any detached or freestanding structure, that have become defective, unsightly or no longer viable, or are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or where such condition creates a hazard to persons using said building, structure, or way, or where such condition interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of adjacent properties, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, this code, or other applicable law.

5. Failure to provide and maintain adequate weather protection to structures or buildings, in such a manner that results in or tends to result in the existence of cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint, stucco or other exterior covering.

6. Broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing windows, doors, or vents in a building or structure, and/or broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing screens for windows, doors, or crawl spaces in a building or structure.

7. Windows or doors that remain boarded up or sealed after 10 calendar days’ written city notice to a responsible person requesting the removal of these coverings and the installation of fully functional or operable windows or doors. City actions to board up or seal windows or doors in order to deter unauthorized entry into structures shall not relieve responsible persons from installing fully functional or operational windows or doors.

8. Obstructions of any kind, cause or form that interfere with required light or ventilation for a building or structure, or that interfere with, hinder, delay, or impede ingress therein and/or egress therefrom.

9. Abandoned personal property that is visible from public or private property.

10. Any form of an attractive nuisance.

11. Interior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, attics, ceilings, walls, floors, basements, mezzanines, and common areas) that have become defective, unsightly, or are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or where such condition interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of properties in the vicinity, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, this code or other applicable law.

12. Items of junk, trash, debris, or other personal property that are kept, placed, or stored inside of a structure or on exterior portions of real property that constitute a fire or safety hazard or a violation of any provision of this code; or items of junk, trash, debris, or other personal property that are visible from public or private real property, or that are otherwise out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when such use and the premises on which such use occurs are in full compliance with all provisions of the Covina comprehensive zoning ordinance (including all approvals and permits required thereby), and all other applicable provisions of this code and any future amendments and additions thereto, as well as applicable county, state, and/or federal laws and regulations.

13. The keeping or disposing of, or the scattering or accumulating of, flammable, combustible or other materials including, but not limited to, composting, firewood, lumber, junk, trash, debris, packing boxes, pallets, plant cuttings, tree trimmings or wood chips, discarded items, or other personal property on exterior portions of real property, or within any building or structure thereon, when such items or accumulations:

a. Render premises unsanitary or substandard as defined by the Covina housing code, the State Housing Law, the Covina building code, or other applicable local, state, or federal law, rule, or regulation;

b. Violate the Covina health code, the Los Angeles County health code, or other any other health code adopted by and/or applicable in the city of Covina;

c. Cause, create, or tend to contribute to a fire or safety hazard;

d. Harbor, promote, or tend to contribute to the presence of rats, vermin and/or insects;

e. Cause, create, or tend to contribute to an offensive odor; or

f. Cause the premises to be out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution of property values; provided, however, that this use of land or condition shall not constitute a nuisance when expressly permitted under the applicable zone classification and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions in CMC Title 17, and all other applicable provisions of this code and any future amendments and additions thereto, as well as applicable county, state, and/or federal laws and regulations.

14. Unsanitary, polluted or unhealthful pools, ponds, standing water or excavations containing water that constitutes an attractive nuisance or that is otherwise likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects or other vectors. The likelihood of insect harborage is evidenced by any of the following conditions: water which is unclear, murky, clouded or green; water containing bacterial growth, algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or bodies of water which are abandoned, neglected, unfiltered or otherwise improperly maintained.

15. The hanging, drying, or airing of clothing or household fabrics on fences, trees, or shrubberies, or the existence of clotheslines, in front yard areas of any real property, or in any yard area that is visible from a public right-of-way.

16. Canopies, tents, tarps, or other similar membrane structures located in the front yard of any real property or in any yard area that is visible from a public right-of-way, unless otherwise authorized pursuant to a permit or other entitlement from the city.

17. Overgrown vegetation including, but not limited to, any one of the following:

a. Vegetation likely to harbor, or promote the presence of, rats, vermin and/or insects.

b. Vegetation causing detriment to neighboring properties, or that is out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or contribute to, a diminution of property values, including, but not limited to:

i. Lawns with grass in excess of six inches in height.

ii. Hedges, trees, lawns, plants, or other vegetation that is not maintained in a neat, orderly, and healthy manner as a result of lack of adequate mowing, grooming, trimming, pruning, fertilizing, watering, and/or replacement.

c. Vegetation that creates, or tends to create, the existence of a fire hazard.

d. Vegetation that overhangs or grows onto or into any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, so as to cause an obstruction to any person or vehicle using such public property.

e. Tree branches or other vegetation within three feet of the rooftop of a structure so as to facilitate rodent or animal access thereto.

18. Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds, ground cover, and other vegetation, or the absence of healthful vegetation, that causes, contributes to, or tends to cause or contribute to, any one of the following conditions or consequences:

a. An attractive nuisance;

b. A fire hazard;

c. The creation or promotion of dust or soil erosion;

d. A diminution in property values; or

e. A detriment to public health, safety or welfare.

19. Lack of landscaping or other ground cover in any yard area as otherwise required by CMC Title 17 or other provisions of this code.

20. Waste containers, yard waste containers, and recycling containers that are kept, placed or stored in driveways or parking areas, or in front or side yards, such that said containers are visible from public streets, except when located in places of collection at times permitted and in full compliance with this code.

21. The use, parking, or storing of any recreational vehicle as temporary or permanent living space.

22. Vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles, and/or other mobile equipment placed, parked or stored in violation of any provision of this code, including CMC Title 17.

23. Vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles, and/or other mobile equipment placed, parked, or stored on any unpaved surface within the front yard setback of any real property.

24. Parking spaces required by this code, including CMC Title 17, that are not maintained in such a manner that said spaces are continuously free, accessible, and available for vehicle parking without the movement of real or personal property.

25. Abandoned, dismantled, inoperable or wrecked boats, campers, motorcycles, trailers, vehicles, or parts thereof, unless kept, placed, parked, or stored inside of a completely enclosed, lawfully constructed building or structure.

26. Commercial vehicles or equipment placed, parked, or stored on any private real property that is located within a residential zone of the city or any other private real property used for residential purposes, except when the commercial vehicle is parked in connection with, and in the aid of, the performance of a service to or on the private real property where it is parked until such service is completed.

27. Vehicles, construction equipment, or other machinery exceeding the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property upon which they are located. A nuisance also exists under this provision when a vehicle, construction equipment, or other machinery is stopped, kept, placed, parked, or stored on private real property and when such vehicle, equipment, or machinery exceeds the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property that were utilized in its placement on said private real property unless pursuant to a valid permit issued by the city.

28. Any equipment, machinery, or vehicle of any type or description that is designed, used, or maintained for construction-type activities that is kept, parked, placed, or stored on public or private real property except when such item is being used during excavation, construction, or demolition operations at the site where said equipment, machinery, or vehicle is located pursuant to an active permit issued by the city or as otherwise authorized by law.

29. Maintenance of signs, or sign structures, on real property relating to uses no longer lawfully conducted or products no longer lawfully sold thereon, or signs and their structures that are in disrepair or which are otherwise in violation of, or contrary to, this code, including CMC Title 17.

30. Specialty structures that have been constructed for a specific single use only, and which are unfeasible to convert to other uses, and which are abandoned, partially destroyed or are permitted to remain in a state of partial destruction or disrepair. Such specialty structures include, but are not limited to, the following: tanks for gas or liquid(s), lateral support structures and bulk-heads, utility high-voltage towers and poles, utility high-rise support structures, electronic transmitting antennas and towers, structures which support or house mechanical and utility equipment and are located above the roof lines of existing buildings, high-rise freestanding chimneys and smoke stacks, and recreational structures such as tennis courts and cabanas.

31. Any personal property or structure that obstructs or encroaches on any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, unless a valid encroachment permit has been issued authorizing said encroachment or obstruction.

32. Causing, maintaining or permitting graffiti or other defacement of real or personal property to be present or to remain on a building, structure or vehicle, or portion thereof, that is visible from a public right-of-way or from private real property.

33. Storage of hazardous or toxic materials or substances, as so classified by any local, state or federal laws or regulations, on real property in such a manner as to be injurious, or potentially injurious or hazardous, to the public health, safety or welfare, or to adjacent properties, or that otherwise violates local, state or federal laws or regulations.

34. Any discharge of any substance or material other than storm water which enters, or could possibly enter, the city’s storm sewer system in violation of the Covina Municipal Code.

35. Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on or over any graded surface or hillside, except in the following circumstances:

a. A state of emergency has been declared by local, county, state, or federal officials directly impacting the area to be covered; and/or

b. Covering with a tarp performed pursuant to an active building or grading permit.

36. Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on or over any roof of any structure, except during periods of active rainfall, or when specifically permitted under an active roofing or building permit.

37. Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering attached to, affixed to, or located on a fence for purposes of screening or for providing shade.

38. The keeping or suffering of any animal, reptile, or insect in a manner that poses a threat, disturbance, or menace to persons or property, or in such a manner or quantity that otherwise violates any provision of this code.

39. Any noise that is made, generated, produced, or continued in such a manner that it unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or that otherwise violates any provision of the Covina Municipal Code. Factors which shall be considered in determining whether the noise is a nuisance shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

a. The volume of the noise;

b. The intensity of the noise;

c. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

d. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

e. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;

f. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

g. The nature of the zoning of the area from which the noise emanates;

h. The density of inhabitation of the area from which the noise emanates;

i. The time of day or night the noise occurs;

j. The duration of the noise;

k. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;

l. Whether the noise is produced by commercial or noncommercial activity; and

m. Whether the noise is a consequence or expected result of an otherwise lawful use.

40. Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of properties in the vicinity as to cause, or that tends to cause, substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such properties in the vicinity.

41. Any condition recognized in local or state law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on real property that constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight, or that is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties.

B. Any “unsafe building,” “unsafe structure,” “substandard building,” or “substandard property” as defined by any provision or provisions in CMC Title 14.

C. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code, and any future amendments thereto.

D. Any building or structure used by any person to engage in acts which are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the United States or the state of California, or the provisions of the Covina Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the following acts:

1. Unlawful possession, use, and/or sale of controlled substances; and/or

2. Prostitution; and/or

3. Unlawful gambling.

E. Any real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is used by persons to cause, allow, contribute to, permit, or suffer any of the following acts:

1. Disturbances of the peace;

2. Excessive and/or loud noise disturbances;

3. Consumption of alcohol in public and/or public intoxication;

4. Urination in public;

5. Harassment of passersby;

6. Theft, assault, battery, or vandalism;

7. Storage or sale of stolen goods;

8. Excessive littering;

9. Illegal parking or traffic violations;

10. Curfew violations;

11. School attendance violations;

12. Lewd and/or lascivious conduct; and/or

13. Excessive responses by the police department or other law enforcement personnel.

F. Any condition, use, or activity that constitutes a public nuisance as defined by Section 3479 or 3480 of the California Civil Code, and any future amendments thereto.

G. Any building, structure, or use of real property that violates or fails to comply with (1) any applicable approval, permit, license, or entitlement or condition relating thereto, (2) any ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to, any provision of this code, or (3) any applicable county, state, or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.040 Penalty.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Covina Municipal Code to the contrary, any person who causes, permits, suffers, or maintains a public nuisance, or any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with CMC 1.16.010(A). A criminal prosecution and/or civil litigation may be initiated without the commencement of the “nuisance abatement” procedures outlined in Article II of this chapter.

B. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)

Article II. Administrative Procedures for Abatement of Nuisances


8.40.050 Abatement of public nuisances.

All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in Article I of this chapter, or that are contrary to, or in violation of, any other provision or requirement of this code, or of any applicable county or state law, or regulation thereof, which shall also constitute a public nuisance, shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or termination. The procedures for abatement in this article shall not be exclusive and shall not, in any manner, limit or restrict the city from pursuing any other remedies available at law, whether civil, equitable or criminal, or from enforcing city codes and adopted ordinances, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.060 Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abate a public nuisance.

A. No person shall allow, cause, create, permit, suffer or maintain a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or termination with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable.

B. The city may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a public nuisance. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.070 Notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel.

A. Whenever a code enforcement officer or other public official determines that city personnel may need to abate a public nuisance, he or she shall serve a written “notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel” (hereafter in this section and in subsequent sections of this chapter, the “notice of abatement”) on the responsible person(s) that contains the following provisions:

1. The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition(s) exist(s).

2. A description of the nuisance condition(s).

3. A reference to the law describing or prohibiting the nuisance condition(s).

4. A brief description of the required corrective action(s); and

5. A compliance period in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable).

6. The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the notice of abatement as set forth in CMC 8.40.120. No such right shall exist when the city is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with city personnel.

7. A statement that the city may record a declaration of substandard property with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the city, within the compliance period specified in the notice of abatement; provided, that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made.

B. The procedure in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to public nuisances constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in CMC 8.40.180, Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard, shall be followed.

C. The city’s election to issue a notice of abatement pursuant to this section shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of a notice of abatement shall not obligate the city to abate a public nuisance. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.080 Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures.

A. The city shall provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to elect between options of repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, as well as a reasonable period of time to complete any of these options, before city personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure pursuant to this article.

B. The city shall serve a notice of abatement on all secured lienholders of record with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office by first class mail in the event abatement actions include demolition of a building or structure.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8.40.130, entry onto any real property to abate a public nuisance by demolition of a building or structure, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, shall be pursuant to a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.

D. The provisions of this section shall not apply if demolition is required to address an imminent hazard. In such situation, the provisions of CMC 8.40.180, Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard, shall apply. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.090 Notice and order to vacate buildings or structures.

A. If the building official, fire chief, and/or health official (or designees thereof) determine that a public nuisance exists at real property (or any buildings or structures thereon) to such an extent that said property (or any building or structure thereon) is immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the occupants of the property or the general public, the building or structure shall be ordered to be vacated.

B. If any building or structure is ordered vacated pursuant to this section, the notice of abatement issued pursuant to CMC 8.40.070, in addition to the information required pursuant to CMC 8.40.070, shall include:

1. A determination that the building official, fire chief, and/or health official (or designees thereof) has determined that the property (and/or any building or structure thereon) constitutes an immediate danger to the life, limb, property, or safety of the occupants of the property or the general public;

2. A reference to the specific building(s) and/or structure(s), or portions thereof, which is/are being ordered vacated;

3. The date and/or time when the order to vacate (and/or to not enter) becomes effective; and

4. Language that substantially states that:

No person shall remain in or enter any building or structure that has been ordered vacated until authorized to do so by the Building Official, Fire Chief, and/or Health Official. No person shall remove, alter, or deface this Notice after it has been posted at the property referenced herein until all required repairs, demolition, or removal have been completed in accordance with this Notice and until such time as the removal of this Notice has been authorized by the Building Official, Fire Chief, and/or Health Official. Any person violating this Order to Vacate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.100 Sample notice of abatement.

The notice of abatement shall be written in a form that is substantially consistent with the following:

Notice of Public Nuisance(s) and Intention to Abate with City Personnel

(“Notice of Abatement”)

[Date]

______________ [Responsible Person(s)]

__________________ [Mailing Address]

_____________ [City, State and Zip Code]

Re: Real Property at

________________________________, Covina, CA

L.A. County A.P.N.:

_________________________________

Legal description [Optional]:

_________________________________

Notice is hereby given that the following public nuisance conditions or activities exist on the premises described above:

(1) [Describe condition or activities] ________________________ in violation of Covina Municipal Code [as well as County and State laws, if applicable] Section(s) __________________________.

(a) Required Corrective Action(s):

_________________________

_____________ (with all required permits, approvals and inspections).

(b) Required Completion Date:

___________________________

[Repeat (1 a-b) for each additional public nuisance to be included in this notice]

The foregoing public nuisance conditions are subject to abatement by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or termination.

Please Take Further Notice that you may appeal this Notice of Abatement by filing an appeal on a City approved form with the Office of the City Clerk – Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 within ten (10) calendar days of service of this notice. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of your right to any further administrative appeal and renders the Notice of Abatement final and binding. A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information, as well as any other information deemed necessary for the processing of the appeal by the City Manager or designee:

1. Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the Notice of Abatement (hereinafter, “appellant”), as well as relationship of appellant to the public nuisance described in the Notice of Abatement.

2. Address and description of real property upon which the City intends to enter and abate a public nuisance.

3. Date of Notice of Abatement being appealed.

4. Specific action or decision being appealed.

5. Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Hearing Officer to understand the nature of the controversy.

6. The signature of at least one appellant.

Following appeal, in the case of a final decision by the City, judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure sections 1094.6 et seq.

Please Take Further Notice that, if the public nuisance violations are not abated within the time specified in this Notice and a timely appeal is not made, such nuisance may be abated by City employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter “City Personnel”), in the manner stated in this Notice of Abatement. On such occasions, all costs of the abatement, including, but not limited to, those defined in CMC 8.40.020(C), shall be assessed against the responsible person(s) and/or the subject property, as a lien, or as a special assessment, or as otherwise allowed by law.

Please Take Further Notice that the City may record a Declaration of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, in the manner and time set forth in this Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made.

Please Take Further Notice that, in the event of abatement by City Personnel, all buildings, structures, and/or personal property constituting a public nuisance may be removed from the subject premises or from public property and destroyed or disposed of, without regard to its actual or salvage value.

Dated: This ___________ day of _______________, 20__.

_________________________________

Public Official [Name and Title]

[End of Form]

……….

A notice of abatement shall be deemed in substantial compliance with this section regardless of form if all substantive information is contained in such notice of abatement. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.110 Service of notice.

A. Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice required by this chapter may be served by personal delivery to any responsible person or by first class mail. The date of service shall be the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle. Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice of abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter.

1. Any notice of abatement that includes an order to vacate shall, in addition to being served upon a responsible party in accordance with this subsection (A), shall also be posted at or upon each exit of the building or structure being ordered vacated.

B. Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice issued to an owner of real property shall be sent to the mailing address on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor’s office. Failure of any owner to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.120 Right of appeal from a notice of abatement.

A. A responsible person may contest a notice of abatement by filing a written request for an appeal with the Office of the City Clerk, Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 and paying an appeal fee in an amount set by council resolution within 10 calendar days after service of the notice of abatement.

1. The filing of a request for an appeal shall not stay an order to vacate any building or structure issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter by the building official and/or fire chief, and/or health official.

B. A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information:

1. Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the notice of abatement (hereinafter, “appellant”).

2. Address and description of real property upon which the city intends to enter and abate a public nuisance.

3. Date of notice of abatement being appealed.

4. Specific action or decision being appealed.

5. Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy.

6. The signature of at least one appellant.

C. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal and payment of the appeal fee constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice of abatement. In this event, the notice of abatement is final and binding.

D. The provisions of this section only apply to instances where the city has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with city personnel. In no event does this chapter limit the right of city officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including, without limitation, by court orders arising from the city’s exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights through the court process. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.130 Consequence of an untimely appeal.

A. If a timely appeal and/or payment of the appeal fee is not received by the city clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the notice of abatement is final and binding. In such instances, the city may, without any administrative hearing, cause the abatement with city personnel of any or all of the nuisance conditions or activities stated in the notice of abatement. Entry onto private real property that is both improved and occupied shall, excepting instances of an imminent hazard, be pursuant to a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The city shall follow the procedures stated in this chapter for recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses (incidental or otherwise).

B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate the city to undertake abatement actions pursuant to a notice of abatement, whether or not there is a timely appeal. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.140 Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing.

A. Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice of abatement at his or her own expense, provided all corrective actions are completed with all required city permits, approvals and inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing.

B. A hearing shall be cancelled if all nuisance conditions or activities are, as determined by the city, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.150 Review by hearing officer.

A. Any responsible person who contests a notice of abatement shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer. The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than 10 calendar days, after receipt of a timely filed request for appeal. The appellants listed on the written request for an appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and location of the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.

B. Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than two business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause or on his/her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar days without stipulation by all parties.

C. At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the appealing person(s), the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisance(s).

D. Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of a notice of abatement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation. The appellant, and the enforcement officer issuing the notice, if present, as well as all other responsible persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to present and cross-examine witnesses. The appellant and the enforcement officer issuing the notice of abatement, or other responsible persons, may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his/her/their sole expense. The city may, at its discretion, record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing.

E. The appellant, or other interested persons, may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the office of the city clerk at least three city business days prior to the hearing. If all appellants and interested persons elect to appear at the hearing by written declaration, the enforcement officer who issued the notice of abatement shall not be required to attend or participate at the hearing.

F. If the appellant fails, or other responsible persons fail, to appear, or to otherwise submit a written declaration or any admissible evidence demonstrating the nonexistence of the alleged nuisance(s), the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the responsible person(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the notice of abatement is final and binding. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.160 Decision of hearing officer – Order of abatement.

A. Not later than 15 calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine if any nuisance condition exists at the subject property. If the hearing officer determines that each nuisance condition described in the notice of abatement is nonexistent, the notice of abatement shall be deemed cancelled. If the hearing officer determines that one or more of the nuisance conditions described in the notice of abatement exists, he/she shall issue a written order of abatement which shall contain the following:

1. A finding and description of each nuisance condition existing at the subject property.

2. The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition or conditions at the subject property, as well as the name of any person who is not responsible therefor.

3. The required corrective action and a compliance period for each unabated nuisance condition.

4. Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the appeal.

5. The following statement:

The decision of the Hearing Officer is final, conclusive and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq.

B. Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive.

C. A copy of the decision shall be served by first class mail on each responsible person to whom the notice of abatement was issued. If the owner is not an appellant, a copy of the order of abatement shall also be served on the owner by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.170 Abatement of nuisance by responsible persons prior to city abatement actions.

A. Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a nuisance in accordance with the hearing officer’s decision prior to the date of entry of city personnel upon the subject real property; provided, that all corrective actions are completed with all required city permits, approvals and inspections, prior to said entry date. In such instances, all administrative proceedings shall be cancelled, with the exception of the city’s right to seek recovery of its incurred incidental expenses, code enforcement fees, and attorney’s fees as provided by and pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.28 CMC.

B. Once the city enters a subject real property to abate a public nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action.

C. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with city personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out to abate a public nuisance.

D. All buildings, structures, and/or personal property that are removed by city personnel from premises in the abatement of a nuisance shall be lawfully disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value, if any. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.180 Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard.

A. Notwithstanding any provision of the Covina Municipal Code to the contrary, the police chief, the fire chief, or the building official, or any of their designees, may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to a person or persons, or to other real or personal property.

B. Prior to abating a nuisance that creates an imminent hazard, the city manager shall attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person; provided, however, that the city manager may dispense with any attempt at prior notification of a responsible person if, in the sole discretion of the city manager, the nature or severity of the hazard does not reasonably allow for such prior notification. If notice has been so given, but, in the sole discretion of the city manager, the responsible person(s) fail(s) to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate the imminent hazard, the city may abate the nuisance with city personnel without further notice, and charge the costs and fees thereof to the responsible person(s).

C. Within 10 business days following emergency action of city personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the city shall serve any responsible person with a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by first class mail. Notice to a property owner shall be mailed to the mailing address set forth in the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor’s office. Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter.

D. A notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard shall contain the following provisions:

1. The name of all known responsible persons who are being served with the notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard and the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present.

2. A brief description of the condition(s) and reasons why it constituted an imminent hazard.

3. A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard.

4. A brief description of the actions city personnel took to abate the imminent hazard.

E. Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of a responsible person to receive said notice, or the failure of the city to issue said notice in a timely fashion, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid.

F. Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by city personnel shall not preclude the city from recording a declaration of substandard property in accordance with the provisions of CMC 8.40.250, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance.

G. The city shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs (incidental or otherwise) for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.190 Combination of notices.

The notices that are authorized by this chapter may be combined in the discretion of the city. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.200 Establishment of costs of abatement.

A. The city shall keep an accounting of the abatement costs.

B. The city shall serve a statement of abatement costs on the responsible persons within 90 calendar days after the city’s completion of nuisance abatement actions. Service of this statement may be made in the manner provided for in CMC 8.40.110.

C. Unless a timely contest of the statement of abatement costs is filed, a responsible person shall tender the abatement costs in U.S. currency to the city within 30 calendar days after the date of service of the statement of abatement costs.

D. A responsible person has the right to contest a statement of abatement costs by filing a written request for contest with the Office of the City Clerk, Covina City Hall, 125 E. College Street, Covina, CA 91723 within 10 calendar days after service of the statement of abatement costs.

1. A written request for contest shall contain the following information:

a. Name, address, telephone number, and signature of each responsible person who is contesting the statement of abatement costs.

b. Address and description of the real property upon which the city abated a public nuisance.

c. Date of the statement of abatement costs being appealed.

d. Description of the specific abatement cost(s) being contested, and a statement of the grounds for contest in sufficient detail to enable the city council to understand the nature of the controversy.

2. No fee shall be due for the filing of a request for contest of the statement of abatement costs.

E. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal request for contest constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a statement of abatement costs. In this event, the statement of abatement costs is final and binding, and the city may proceed to collect its abatement costs as contained in a final statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law.

F. If a timely request for contest is received by the city clerk, a hearing shall be set before the hearing officer no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than 10 calendar days, after receipt of the request for contest. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the statement of abatement costs by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the request form at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person requesting a contest to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter.

G. Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than five business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause or on his or her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 60 calendar days without stipulation by all parties.

H. At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the request to contest the statement of abatement costs, the city manager shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by city personnel, together with any objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs. Testimony and evidence shall be limited to issues related to the abatement costs, and no person shall be permitted to present evidence or testimony challenging the existence of a public nuisance or the manner of abatement as described in the notice of abatement. Thereupon, the city manager may make such revision, correction or modification to the statement as he or she may deem just, after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

I. Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to the contrary, the decision of the city manager is final and binding.

J. The city clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served upon all persons who contested the original statement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the request form. The city clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served on the owner of the property on which city personnel abated a public nuisance by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll (irrespective of whether the owner contested the statement of abatement costs). This document shall also contain the following statement:

The determination of the City Manager is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq.

K. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter.

L. A responsible person shall tender the abatement costs in U.S. currency to the city within 30 calendar days after the date of service of the confirmed statement of abatement costs. The city may thereafter proceed to collect its abatement costs as contained in the confirmed statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.210 Collection of abatement costs by special assessment.

A. The city may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner.

B. A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is imposed which shall contain the following recitals:

The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

C. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use, or consideration by, the tax collector in collecting a special assessment.

D. The notice of special assessment shall be entitled to recordation with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office.

E. The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.220 Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien.

A. As an alternative to the procedure contained in CMC 8.40.210, the city may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.1, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner.

B. A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained with a notice. This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Los Angeles County pursuant to Section 6062 of the California Government Code.

C. The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office in the county in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.

D. A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the city of Covina, the name of the city department or division on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

E. In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (D) of this section shall be recorded by the city. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.

F. A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment.

G. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

H. The amount of a nuisance abatement lien shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.230 Treble the costs of abatement.

Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.7 (or any subsequent amendment thereto), upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public nuisance except for public nuisance conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980 (“State Housing Law”), the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.240 Violations and penalties.

A. Any person who remains in or enters any building or structure that has been ordered to be vacated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

B. Any responsible person who fails to comply with an order of abatement by completing each of the requisite corrective actions in the manner and time set forth in the order of abatement is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

C. Any person who obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any representative of the city engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating, or demolishing and removing any property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

D. Any person who defaces, alters, or removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC.

E. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)

Article III. Recordation of Substandard Notice


8.40.250 Recordation of substandard notice.

A. Notwithstanding any provision of the Covina Municipal Code to the contrary, if the city determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the Covina Municipal Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the city, in the manner and time provided in any written notice to a responsible person, then the city, in its sole discretion, may record a declaration of substandard property with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office against said premises. As used herein, “fully abated or corrected” includes the procurement of all required city approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all city required inspections.

B. A declaration of substandard property shall not be recorded unless the city has first issued a written notice (in any form) to the owner of real property (1) identifying and requiring correction of a public nuisance condition; and (2) disclosing that a declaration of substandard property may be recorded against the real property if the public nuisance condition(s) is/are not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time delineated in said notice, as determined by the city.

1. If the notice required pursuant to this subsection (B) was comprised of a notice of abatement as defined in this chapter or of an administrative citation issued pursuant to Chapter 1.26 CMC, a declaration of substandard property shall not be recorded unless the notice of abatement and/or administrative citation is deemed a final and binding city decision.

C. The form that constitutes a declaration of substandard property shall be approved by the city attorney or the city prosecutor.

D. The city shall record a notice of rescission of declaration of substandard property with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office within 10 business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected.

E. The city shall cause copies of recorded declarations of substandard property and notices of rescission of declaration of substandard property to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor’s office. Service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)


8.40.260 Applicability of other laws.

A. This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the city. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the city, the state or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction.

B. The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 12-2017 § 2, 2013.)1

Code reviser’s note: Section 1 of Ord. 12-2017 provides: “Chapter 8.40 (“Abatement of Real Property Nuisances”) of Title 8 (“Health and Safety”) of the Covina Municipal Code is hereby repealed and deleted in its entirety; however, that such repeal shall not affect or excuse any violation of said Chapter that occurred prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, nor shall such repeal impede, deter, impact, or negate any administrative, civil, or criminal enforcement of any violation of said Chapter that occurred prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.” 


Chapter 8.42 ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY INSPECTION, REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE

Sections:

8.42.010    Purpose – Scope.

8.42.020    Definitions.

8.42.030    Recordation of transfer of loan – Deed of trust – Assignment of rents.

8.42.040    Inspection – Registration.

8.42.050    Maintenance requirements.

8.42.060    Security requirements.

8.42.070    Additional authority.

8.42.080    Fees.

8.42.090    Enforcement – Violation – Special penalty.

8.42.100    Appeals.


8.42.010 Purpose – Scope.

It is the purpose and intent of the Covina city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish an abandoned residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect Covina’s residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned residential properties. This chapter shall apply only to residential property, as defined herein. (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Abandoned property” means real property that is vacant and either: (1) the subject of a current notice of default or notice of trustee’s sale or the subject of a tax assessor’s lien sale; (2) the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; or (3) has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

“Accessible property” means any real property that is freely accessible, including any property that is accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall or similar structure.

“Accessible structure” means a structure or building that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.

“Administrator” means the person or persons designated by the city manager as being responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions contained within this chapter.

“Agreement for sale” means any agreement or written instrument that provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one person to another person after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 

“Assignment of rents” means a written instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one person to another person.

“Beneficiary” means the beneficiary (either the original beneficiary or the assignee) under a note secured by a deed of trust.

“Buyer” means any person who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement for sale, as defined in this section.

“Community development director” means the city’s community development director, or his or her designee.

“Dangerous building” means any building or structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by reference by Chapter 14.16 CMC.

“Day” means a calendar day.

“Deed of trust” means any instrument, including any deed of trust or mortgage, by which legal title to real property, or any interest therein, is transferred to a trustee as security for a real estate loan, including, without limitation, any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc. 

“Deed in lieu of foreclosure” means a document that transfers legal title to a property from the trustor to the trustee, upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

“Default” means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or otherwise.

“Distressed” means real property that is under a current notice of default or notice of trustee’s sale, or pending tax assessor’s lien sale, or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary or trustee by way of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, but which is lawfully occupied.

“Evidence of vacancy” means any condition that, on its own or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past-due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant.

“Foreclosure” means the process by which a property, placed as security for a loan, is sold to satisfy the debt if the trustor defaults.

“Local” means the area within 40 miles of the subject property.

“Neighborhood standard” means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of other residential properties within a 300-foot radius of the subject property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any other abandoned property within the 300-foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority.

“Notice of default” or “notice of trustee’s sale” means a notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale or other similar remedies authorized by law.

“Out of area” means the area in excess of 40 miles from the subject property.

“Owner” means any person having legal title in any property.

“Owner of record” means the person having record title to the property as shown in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office. 

“Person” means and includes any natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

“Property” means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property. 

“Residential property” means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed, built or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on the associated real property. This definition specifically includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as “residential,” whether or not it is legally permitted or zoned for residential use.

“Securing” or its variants means such measures as may be directed by the community development director that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or pad-locking of gates, and the repair or boarding of doors, windows or other openings to a minimum of the current United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required, and consistent with the requirements of CMC 8.42.060.

“Trustee” means the person holding a deed of trust on a property.

“Trustor” means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds the legal title to a property over to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

“Vacant” means a building or structure that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 10-1988 § 21, 2010; Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.030 Recordation of transfer of loan – Deed of trust – Assignment of rents.

Within 10 days following the purchase or transfer of a loan or any deed of trust secured by residential property, the new beneficiary and trustee shall both record, with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office, an assignment of rents that lists the names of the beneficiary and trustee, and the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary and trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the deed of trust. (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.040 Inspection – Registration.

A. Any beneficiary and trustee under a deed of trust, or their designees, on abandoned residential property located within the city of Covina shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office. If the property is vacant, or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned, and the beneficiary and trustee shall, within 10 calendar days following the inspection, register the abandoned property with the administrator on forms provided by the city. 

B. Any distressed property shall be inspected by the beneficiary and trustee, or their designees, at least monthly until either: (1) the trustor or other party remedies the default, or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall, within 10 calendar days following the required inspection, register the property with the administrator on forms provided by the city. 

C. For abandoned or distressed properties, the registration shall contain the names of the beneficiary and trustee, the street address of the beneficiary and trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name, facsimile and phone numbers for the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of an out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the subject property. 

D. An annual registration fee for the beneficiary and trustee shall accompany the registration form. Registration fees will not be prorated. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received by the administrator no later than January 31st of the year due.   

E. This section shall also apply to abandoned or distressed properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

F. Abandoned or distressed properties shall remain under the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain abandoned or distressed.

G. Any person that has registered a property under this chapter must report in writing any change of information contained in the registration within 10 days following the change. (Ord. 10-1988 § 22, 2010; Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.050 Maintenance requirements.

A. Abandoned or distressed properties shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, or large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.

B. The abandoned or distressed property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.

C. Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard existing at the time registration was required.

1. Required landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf or sod specifically designed for residential installation.

2. Required landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar materials.

3. Required maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscaping and removal of all trimmings.

D. Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris, to prevent pools and spas from becoming a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other vectors, or drained and kept dry. In either case properties with pools or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the state of California. 

E. Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary, trustee and owner of any obligations set forth in any other code or law, covenants, conditions and restrictions, or any homeowners’ association rules and regulations that may apply to the property. (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.060 Security requirements.

A. Abandoned or distressed properties shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. A “secure manner” includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of broken windows, “securing” means the reglazing or boarding of the window.

B. If any abandoned property is owned by an out of area beneficiary, trustee or owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 

C. The abandoned property shall be posted with the name and a 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet and shall contain along with the name and 24-hour contact number, the words “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ___________” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL ___________.” The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building or structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with, weather-resistant materials. (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.070 Additional authority.

In addition to the enforcement remedies established by this code, the administrator shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee or owner, or any combination thereof, to implement additional maintenance and security measures, including but not limited to securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the abandoned or distressed property. (Ord. 10-1988 § 23, 2010; Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.080 Fees.

The fee for registering a property subject to this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.090 Enforcement – Violation – Special penalty.

A. Violations of this chapter may be enforced as follows:

1. Under Chapter 1.16 CMC (general penalty);

2. Under Chapter 8.40 CMC (administrative nuisance abatement); or

3. Under Chapter 1.26 CMC (administrative citations). However, notwithstanding any provision of CMC 1.26.040 to the contrary:

a. The courtesy notice issued pursuant to CMC 1.26.040 to a beneficiary, trustee or owner subject to this chapter shall be mailed to the beneficiary’s, trustee’s and/or owner’s address as disclosed in any deed or other instrument recorded against the property, or, if none, as provided in the abandoned property registration form on file with the city; 

b. The courtesy notice shall allow the beneficiary, trustee or owner not less than 30 days from the date of the courtesy notice to abate the violation(s). The city may require abatement of the violation(s) within a shorter period of time only if the city determines that the specific violation(s) occurring on the property threaten(s) public health or safety; and

c. If the violation(s) is/are not abated by the date set forth in the courtesy notice, the city may issue a first administrative citation in the maximum amount of $1,000 and may issue second, third and subsequent administrative citations in the maximum amount of $1,000 for each day that the beneficiary, trustee or owner fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

Except as set forth herein, all other procedures contained in Chapter 1.26 CMC shall be followed when enforcing this chapter through the administrative citation procedure. 

B. The city may also seek the appointment of a receiver in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. 

C. Nothing in this chapter shall be intended to limit any of the civil or criminal remedies available to the city, nor shall it be intended to limit the city from engaging in efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by means of warnings, notices or educational programs. (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


8.42.100 Appeals.

Any beneficiary, trustee, owner or other party responsible for compliance with this chapter may appeal a violation by following the procedures set forth in this code for the particular means of enforcement (CMC 1.26.090(A) if violator is served with an administrative citation; CMC 8.40.080 if violator is subject to an administrative nuisance abatement process; etc.). (Ord. 08-1960 § 1, 2008.)


Chapter 8.44 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND GANG-RELATED CRIME EVICTION PROGRAM

Sections:

8.44.010    Definitions.

8.44.020    Duties of the landlord.

8.44.030    Administrative procedures.

8.44.040    Recovery of possession by landlord.

8.44.050    Enforcement.

8.44.060    Lien authorized.

8.44.070    Penalties.

8.44.080    Civil remedies available.


8.44.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

A. “Controlled substance” shall mean any drug, substance, or immediate precursor as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, California Health and Safety Code Sections 11000 et seq.

B. “Drug-related nuisance” shall mean any activity related to the possession, sale, use, or manufacture of a controlled comfortable enjoyment of life, property, and/or safety of residents of the premises. Such activity includes, but is not limited to, noise, steady traffic day and night to a particular unit, barricaded units, the display or observance of weapons, drug loitering as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11532 or other drug-related occurrences which taken as a whole tend to substantially affect or interfere with any tenant’s beneficial use and enjoyment of any rented property.

C. “Gang-related crime” means any crime in which the perpetrator is a known member of a gang or any crime motivated by gang membership in which the victim or the intended victim of the crime is known as a member of a gang.

D. “Illegal drug activity” means a violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 6 commencing with Section 11350 or Chapter 6.5 commencing with Section 11400 of the California Health and Safety Code or any successor provisions thereto.

E. “Landlord” means any owner of record, lessor, or sublessor, including any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit or the agent, representatives or successor of any of the foregoing.

F. “Premises” means any rental unit and the land on which it and any other buildings of a complex are located and common areas including, but not limited to, garage facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells, elevators, and as the context permits or requires, any public or private property which is immediately adjacent to any exit areas.

G. “Rental unit” means any dwelling as defined in CMC 17.04.210 including, but not limited to, any single- or multi-family residence, duplex, and/or condominium or any part thereof which is rented or offered for rent for residential occupancy in the city. This term shall also include any mobile home, whether rent is paid for the mobile home, land which the mobile home is located, or both. It shall also mean any recreational vehicle as defined in California Civil Code Section 799.24 if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, whether rent is paid for the recreational vehicle, the land upon which it is located or both.

H. “Tenant” means any tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or any person entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any person residing in the rental unit. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.020 Duties of the landlord.

A landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit:

A. Any premises under his or her control to be used or maintained for any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or in such manner as to constitute a drug-related nuisance; or

B. Any tenant to use or occupy premises under the landlord’s control if the tenant commits, permits, maintains, or is involved in any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.030 Administrative procedures.

The city manager or his or her designee may promulgate such administrative procedures as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.040 Recovery of possession by landlord.

Pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1161, a landlord may bring an action to recover possession of a rental unit upon the grounds that the tenant is:

A. Maintaining, committing, or permitting the maintenance or commission of a nuisance upon the premises. A person who illegally sells a controlled substance upon the premises or uses the premises to further that purpose shall be deemed to have committed a nuisance upon the premises.

B. Using the premises for an unlawful purpose. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.050 Enforcement.

A. Provided the owner of record or agent thereof and any known manager of a premises have been served with a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, advising that the chief of police has determined that the landlord is in violation of CMC 8.44.020(A) and has failed to comply with the provisions of the subsection within 10 business days of the date of service of said notice, or to file an appeal within said period as provided herein, then the city may file an action for injunctive relief or utilize any other remedy provided by law to compel compliance including, but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a nuisance.

B. For the purpose of this section, the written notice shall also identify the offending tenant(s) unit number if applicable, the specific violation(s) and shall state the date(s) and time(s) of any observed criminal activity and the resulting arrest(s) and shall further state that as to such tenant(s), the landlord is required to serve and diligently prosecute either a three-day notice to quit or 30-day notice to vacate. The term “diligently prosecute” shall mean such prosecution by the landlord as necessary to cause the subject rental unit to be completely vacated by all occupants. No such vacated unit may be re-rented, leased or otherwise reoccupied by the prosecuted tenant prior to the expiration of a 12-month period following the vacation of the rental unit by the tenant(s).

C. The required notice shall also state that within the 10-day period, the landlord may file a written appeal of the determination of violation with the city manager who shall cause the matter to be set for a hearing. Written notice of the date and time of said hearing shall be served by first-class mail addressed to the landlord’s last known business address. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse or reverse subject to conditions. The city manager’s decision shall be based upon written findings and shall be final.

D. In the event no appeal is filed or an appeal is denied, the city may immediately proceed to enforce the provisions of this chapter against such landlord by way of criminal or civil enforcement action, including an action for injunctive relief or by any other remedy provided by law to compel compliance including, but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a nuisance.

E. A court rendering a judgment pursuant to this section may in addition to any other penalty or remedies provided by law a civil penalty in the maximum amount permitted by law payable to the city and/or require the payment of the city attorney’s fees, cost of investigation, discovery and court costs. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.060 Lien authorized.

Any judgment for money including permitted fees and costs may be recorded as a lien against the subject’s property in an amount not to exceed $5,000, and if multiple defendants exist, they shall be jointly and severally liable for any payment so ordered. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.070 Penalties.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be punished as follows:

A. For three or fewer violations occurring within any 12-consecutive-month period, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation, $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision within any 12-month-consecutive period, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for a third violation of this same provision occurring within a 12-consecutive-month period.

B. A fourth violation of the same provision occurring within any 12-consecutive-month period shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


8.44.080 Civil remedies available.

The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter hereby adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 99-1853, 1999.)


Chapter 8.50 STORM WATER QUALITY AND URBAN RUNOFF CONTROL

Sections:

8.50.010    Purpose.

8.50.020    Definitions.

8.50.030    Illicit discharges.

8.50.040    Illicit connections.

8.50.050    Waste disposal.

8.50.060    BMPs and permits authorized and required.

8.50.070    Monitoring, information collection, and reporting.

8.50.080    Notification of discharge.

8.50.090    Right to enter, inspect, monitor and sample.

8.50.100    Construction sites requiring a building permit and/or a grading plan.

8.50.110    Industrial activity sites.

8.50.120    Low impact development.

8.50.130    Response plans.

8.50.140    Enforcement – Violations.

8.50.150    Enforcement – Administrative remedies.

8.50.160    Enforcement – Civil remedies.

8.50.170    Enforcement – Criminal remedies.

8.50.180    Enforcement – Nonexclusive remedies.

8.50.190    Enforcement – Nonconsecutive violations.

8.50.200    Enforcement – Notices.

8.50.210    Appeals.

8.50.220    Judicial review.

8.50.230    Fees.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 94-1770, 96-1809, 00-1874, 02-1887 and 03-1892.


8.50.010 Purpose.

This chapter implements the federal Water Pollution Control Act (the “Clean Water Act” or “CWA”), 33 U.S.C. 1251 through 1387, and the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act by prohibiting the discharge of any pollutant to navigable waters of the United States from a point source unless the discharge is authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) required by CWA Section 402, 33 U.S.C. 1342, and prohibits non-storm water discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system (“MS4”).

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by:

A. Regulating non-storm water discharge to the municipal storm water system;

B. Providing for the control of spillage, dumping, or disposal of materials into the municipal storm water system;

C. Reducing pollutants in storm water and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by the regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Clean Water Act Section 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions in any applicable permit issued by the Regional Water Board, as appropriate, as such permits may be amended from time to time. 

“Act” or “Clean Water Act (CWA)” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

“Adverse impact” means a detrimental effect upon water quality or beneficial uses caused by a discharge or loading of a pollutant or pollutants to the storm drain system or to receiving waters.

“Authorized discharge” means any discharge that is authorized pursuant to an NPDES permit or meets the conditions set forth in this chapter.

“Automotive service facility” means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Codes. Facilities with SIC Codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 5511 need not be inspected; provided, that these facilities have no outside activities or materials that may be exposed to storm water.

“Basin Plan” means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994, and subsequent amendments thereto.

“Beneficial uses” means existing or potential uses of receiving waters in the permit area as designated by the Regional Board in the Basin Plan.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, physical devices, systems and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the storm drain system and waters of the United States and to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. 

“Biofiltration” means a LID BMP that reduces storm water pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load reduction. Therefore, the term “biofiltration” as used in this chapter is defined to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the Regional Board’s Executive Officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and bioswales.

“Bioretention” means a LID BMP that reduces storm water runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two-foot top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in the municipal NPDES permit, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an underdrain it is regulated by the municipal NPDES permit as biofiltration (modified from: Order No. R4-2012-0175).

“Bioswale” means a LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect storm water runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense vegetation for a period of several minutes. 

“CASQA” means California Stormwater Quality Association.

“City” means the city of Covina, California.

“Clean Water Act (Act)” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

“Commercial development” means any public or private activity not defined as an industrial activity in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14), involved in the storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities or providing professional and/or nonprofessional services. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities; mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes.

“Commercial malls” means any development on private land comprised of one or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise, with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers.

“Construction activity” includes any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation, or any other activity that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety or routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of the facility. Where clearing, grading or excavating of underlying soil takes place during a repaving operation, state general construction permit coverage is required if more than one acre is disturbed or the activities are part of a larger plan.

“Control” means to minimize, reduce or eliminate by technological, legal, contractual, or other means the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities.

“Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool/spa discharges” means discharges from swimming pools/spas and does not include swimming pool/spa filter backwash or swimming pool/spa water containing bacteria, detergents, wastes, or algaecides, or any other chemicals including salts from salt water pools.

“Development” means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

“Directly adjacent” means situated within 200 feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area.

“Director” means the director of public works of the city and his or her authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector.

“Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, disposal, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping, discard or placement, either directly or indirectly, of any substance into or from the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, storm water, wastewater, solid materials, liquids, hazardous material, raw materials, debris, litter or any other substance.

“Discharger” means a person who discharges or causes, facilitates, or allows a discharge.

“Disturbed area” means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation.

“Drinking water supplier distribution system releases” means sources of flows from drinking water supplier storage, supply and distribution systems including flows from system failures, pressure releases, system maintenance, distribution line testing, fire hydrant flow testing; and flushing and dewatering of pipes, reservoirs, vaults, and minor noninvasive well maintenance activities not involving chemical addition(s) where otherwise regulated by NPDES Permit No. CAG674001, NPDES Permit No. CAG994005, or another separate NPDES permit. 

“Essential nonemergency fire fighting activities” means firefighting activities, which simulate emergency responses, and routine maintenance and testing activities necessary for the protection of life and property, including building fire suppression system maintenance and testing (e.g., sprinkler line flushing) and fire hydrant testing and maintenance. Discharges from vehicle washing are not considered essential and as such are not conditionally exempt. 

“Flow-through BMPs” means modular, vault type “high flow biotreatment” devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain.

“General construction permit” means the general NPDES permit adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board which authorizes the discharge of storm water from construction activities under certain conditions.

“General industrial permit” means the general NPDES permit adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board which authorizes the discharge of storm water from industrial activities under certain conditions.

“Good housekeeping practice” means a best management practice related to the transfer, storage, use, or cleanup of materials which when performed in a regular manner minimizes the discharge or potential discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters.

“Green roof” means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a bioretention BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth and may not be designed or constructed with an underdrain.

“Hazardous material” means any material defined as hazardous by Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code or any substance designated pursuant to 40 CFR Part 302. This also includes any unlisted hazardous substance which is a solid waste, as defined in 40 CFR 261.2, which is not excluded from regulation as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.4(b), or is a hazardous substance under Section 101(14) of the Act, if it exhibits any of the characteristics identified in 40 CFR 261.20 through 261.24.

“Hazardous waste” means a hazardous material which is to be discharged, discarded, recycled, and/or reprocessed.

“Hillside” means property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is 25 percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes.

“Illicit connection” means either of the following:

1. Any drain or conveyance whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or

2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the director.

“Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term includes all non-storm water discharges not composed entirely of storm water and discharges that are identified under the discharge prohibitions section of the permit.

“Impervious surface” means any manmade or modified surface that prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil, resulting in runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an increased rate, when compared to natural conditions prior to development. Examples of places that commonly exhibit impervious surfaces include parking lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of these areas commonly results from paving, compacted gravel, compacted earth, and oiled earth.

“Industrial and/or commercial facility” means any facility involved or used in the production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods or commodities, and any facility involved or used in providing professional and nonprofession services. This category of facilities includes, but is not limited to, any facility defined by either the Standard Industrial Classifications or the North American Industry Classification System. Facility ownership and profit motive are not factors in this definition.

“Low impact development (LID)” consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter storm water runoff.

“MS4 or municipal separate storm sewer system” means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm drains which are: (1) owned or operated by the state, city or other public body created by or pursuant to state law having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water or other wastes; (2) designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; (3) which is not a combined sewer; and (4) which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined by 40 CFR 122.2.

“Municipal NPDES permit” means the “Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County, except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4” (Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES No. CAS004001), issued on November 8, 2012, by the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board, and any amendments or successor permit to that permit.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an “approved program.”

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit” means a general, group, or individual permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Act that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States.

“Natural drainage system” means a drainage system that has not been improved (e.g., channelized or armored). The clearing or dredging of a natural drainage system does not cause the system to be classified as an improved drainage system.

“New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

“Non-storm water discharge” means any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is not composed entirely of storm water.

“Parking lot” means land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of 5,000 square feet or more of surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces.

“Permit” means the Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County (Order No. R4-2012-0175) and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit No. CAS004001, including any amendments thereto or successor permit, issued by the Regional Water Board.

“Person” means any individual as well as any corporation, partnership, public agency, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

“Planning priority projects” means development projects subject to permittee conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate storm water pollution, prior to completion of the project(s). Planning priority projects are further defined in CMC 8.50.120.

“Pollutant” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 502(6) of the Act or as incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373. Pollutants include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, chemicals, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous materials or substances, hazardous wastes, fertilizers, pesticides, soot, slag, ash, and sludge);

2. Metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium and arsenic) and nonmetals (such as carbon, chlorine, fluorine, phosphorous and sulfur);

3. Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, oils, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease);

4. Eroded soils, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect any beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state;

5. Animal wastes (such as discharges from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities);

6. Substances having acidic or corrosive characteristics such as a pH of less than six or greater than nine;

7. Substances having unusual coloration or turbidity, levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus, which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state; and

8. Anything which causes the deterioration of water quality such that it impairs subsequent and/or competing uses of the water.

“Pollutants of concern,” when discharged from a drinking water supplier’s distribution system, may include trash and debris, including organic matter, total suspended solids (TSS), residual chlorine, pH, and any pollutant for which there is a water quality-based effluent limitation applicable to discharges from the MS4 to the receiving water. 

“Project” means all development, redevelopment and land disturbing activities. The term is not limited to “project” as defined under CEQA (Pub. Res. Code § 21065).

“Qualified SWPPP developer” means an individual meeting the registration or certification requirements set forth in the general construction permit.

“Rainfall harvest and use” means a LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the director.

“Receiving water” means a “water of the United States” into which waste and/or pollutants are or may be discharged.

“Redevelopment” means land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health, safety or welfare.

“Regional Water Board” means the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board.

“Restaurant” means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshments stands selling prepared food and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC Code 5812).

“Retail gasoline outlet” means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils.

Routine Maintenance. “Routine maintenance” projects include, but are not limited to, projects conducted to:

1. Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.

2. Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.

3. Includes road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts.

4. Update existing lines* and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity.

5. Repair leaks.

Routine maintenance does not include construction of new** lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations.

* Update existing lines includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes.

** New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).

“Runoff” means any runoff, including storm water and dry weather flows, that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface.

“Sidewalk rinsing or washing” means pressure washing of paved pedestrian walkways with average water usage of 0.006 gallons per square foot, with no cleaning agents, and properly disposing of all debris collected, as authorized under Regional Water Board Resolution No. 98-08.

“Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)” means a classification pursuant to the current edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Officer of the President of the United States, Office of Management and Budget, and as the same may be periodically revised. 

“State Water Board” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

Storm Drain System. See “MS4 or municipal separate storm sewer system.”

“Storm water” means storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16, 1990)).

“Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” means a plan, as required by a general construction or industrial permit, identifying potential pollutant sources and describing the design, placement and implementation of BMPs, to effectively prevent non-storm water discharges and reduce pollutants in storm water discharges during activities covered by the general permit.

Storm Water Quality Design Volume (SWQDv). See definition in CMC 8.50.120(E).

“Storm water runoff” means storm water which travels across any surface to the storm drain system or receiving waters.

“Structural BMP” means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water and runoff pollution. The category may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs.

“SUSMP” means the Los Angeles Countywide Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan. The SUSMP was required as part of the previous Municipal NPDES Permit (Order No. 01-182, NPDES No. CAS004001) and required plans that designate best management practices (BMPs) that must be used in specified categories of development projects.

“Treatment control BMP” means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media absorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process.

“Urban runoff” means surface water flow produced by storm and non-storm events. Non-storm events include flow from residential, commercial, or industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water.

“Water quality standards” means those water quality standards and/or water quality objectives adopted by either the State Board and/or U.S. EPA for the Los Angeles region.

“Waters of the state” means any surface water or ground water, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.030 Illicit discharges.

A. Except as otherwise conditionally authorized by the permit or any other NPDES permit, and subject to any requirements specified by the director, no person shall:

1. Discharge non-storm water to the city’s MS4 or to receiving waters except in compliance with the requirements of this chapter;

2. Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge;

3. Discharge, cause, allow or facilitate any discharge that may cause or threaten to cause a condition of pollution or nuisance as defined in Water Code Section 13050 that may cause, threaten to cause or contribute to an exceedance of any water quality standard in Statewide Water Quality Control Plan, California Toxics Rule, or Basin Plan, or that may cause or contribute to the violation of any receiving water limitation.

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, discharges from the following activities are conditionally exempt from the non-storm water discharge prohibition, provided they are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to receiving waters when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act, or this chapter: 

1. Authorized non-storm water discharges from emergency fire-fighting activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property);

2. Landscape irrigation; 

3. Uncontaminated foundation and footing drains; 

4. Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; 

5. Air conditioning condensation; 

6. Uncontaminated nonindustrial roof drains;

7. Natural springs; 

8. Individual residential and occasional non-commercial car washing; 

9. Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool/spa discharges not including swimming pool/spa filter backwash, bacteria, detergents, wastes, or algaecides, or any other chemicals such as salts in excess of applicable water quality standards; and 

10. Street and sidewalk wash waters resulting only from use of high pressure, low volume spray washing using only potable water with no cleaning agents at an average usage of 0.006 gallons per square feet of area.

C. The following categories of non-storm water discharges are conditionally exempt from the non-storm water discharge prohibition, provided they meet all required conditions specified below:

1. Discharges from essential nonemergency fire-fighting activities provided appropriate BMPs specified in the permit;

2. Discharges from drinking water supplier distribution systems, where not otherwise regulated by an individual or general NPDES permit provided appropriate BMPs as specified in the permit. Additionally a drinking water supplier must: (1) provide notification to the city of Covina’s public works director 72 hours prior all planned discharges greater than 100,000 gallons and as soon as possible after an unplanned discharge; (2) monitor for any pollutants of concern in the drinking water supplier distribution system release; and (3) provide record keeping. 

D. The director may limit or prohibit any discharge which is conditionally authorized by subsections (B) and (C) of this section and the permit if the discharge is a source of pollutants or causes or contributes to an exceedance of applicable receiving water limitations or water quality based effluent limitations, including but not limited to imposing conditions on such discharge, requiring control measures and other actions to reduce pollutants, requiring diversion of the discharge to the sanitary sewer, or requiring pretreatment. Any conditionally authorized discharge must comply with all terms and conditions required by the city, state or Regional Water Board.

E. The director may require any person to obtain a permit from the city before discharging, or causing, allowing, or facilitating any discharge, to the MS4. It is unlawful to discharge, cause, allow, or facilitate any discharge to the MS4 in violation of any permit so required. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.040 Illicit connections.

A. No person shall:

1. Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection to the city’s MS4.

2. Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.050 Waste disposal.

A. Generally. Except when deposited into containers or in lawfully established dumping areas, no person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained or kept any refuse, rubbish, food waste, garbage, hazardous materials or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in containers, recycling bags, or other lawfully established waste disposal facilities. No person shall dispose of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal so as to cause a discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 

B. Sidewalks. Each person responsible for any real property adjacent to a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter. Sweepings from sidewalks shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on such real property as required for garbage disposal.

C. Animal Waste. Each person responsible for any animal shall promptly pick up animal waste and properly dispose of it in a trash receptacle.

D. Landscape Debris. No person shall intentionally cause leaves, dirt, or other debris to be deposited in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public right-of-way. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.060 BMPs and permits authorized and required.

A. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day-to-day activities of any site that may discharge any pollutant to the city’s MS4 shall obtain any permit and implement those control measures and BMPs as the director may require. Properties with a high potential threat of discharge may be required to implement a monitoring program that meets standards as determined necessary by the city. 

B. The director may require any person responsible for any industrial or commercial facility or new or redevelopment project to submit documentation demonstrating coverage by and compliance with any applicable permit, including copies of any notice of intent, storm water pollution prevention plans, inspection reports, monitoring results, and other information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this chapter or any NPDES permit.

C. The director may require any person responsible for any industrial or commercial facility or new or redevelopment project to enter into an agreement for the operation and maintenance of any structural control measures and to record such agreement with the county recorder’s office.

D. The following BMPs are hereby required:

1. No vehicle, machinery, device or storage container shall be allowed to leak, spill or discharge in any manner oil, grease, coolant, or other hazardous material onto any street, alley, road, parking area, or surface in the city whereon such pollutants or hazardous materials can or may be conveyed into the MS4 or any receiving water by storm water or non-storm water runoff.

2. Objects such as vehicle motor parts containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas susceptible to storm water runoff or stored so that they may leak into the MS4.

3. Any machine which is to be repaired or maintained in an uncovered outdoor area shall be placed on a pad of absorbent material to contain leaks, spills or small discharges. Any absorbent material used to contain such leaks, spills or discharges shall be properly disposed of.

4. Machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are leaking oil or fluid must be repaired.

5. The uncovered outdoor storage of unsealed containers containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances is prohibited in areas susceptible to runoff.

6. The discharge of wash waters into the MS4 from the cleaning or washing of gas stations, automotive repair facilities and other types of automotive service facilities is prohibited.

7. The discharge of wastewater into the MS4 from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations is prohibited.

8. The discharge of wastewater from the washing of toxic material from paved or unpaved areas or the washing out of concrete trucks or concrete or cement-laden pumps, tools, and equipment into the MS4 is prohibited.

9. The discharge into the MS4 of wastewater from the washing of impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas is prohibited.

10. Commercial/industrial parking lots with more than 25 parking spaces, or fewer than 25 spaces if required by the city, located in areas potentially exposed to storm water shall be kept clear of debris and excessive oil buildup and cleaned no less than two times per month and/or inspected no less than two times per month to determine if cleaning is necessary. In no case shall a parking lot be cleaned less than once a month.

11. The discharge of chlorinated/brominated swimming pool water and filter backwash into the MS4 is prohibited.

12. In areas exposed to storm water, the use of best management practices (including but not limited to the practices set forth in subsections (D)(1) through (11) of this section) and/or removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, and other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality shall be required. Treatment control best management practices must be properly operated and maintained to prevent the breeding of vectors.

13. Dumping or disposal of the following materials into the MS4 system is prohibited: construction debris; any state or federally banned or unregistered pesticides; food and food processing wastes; and fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, and other materials that have potential adverse impacts on water quality. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.070 Monitoring, information collection, and reporting.

A. The director may require any person discharging or causing, allowing, or facilitating a discharge to the MS4 or receiving waters to take any or all of the following actions, at that person’s cost:

1. To submit information necessary to comply with the general permit or to confirm that person’s compliance with this chapter;

2. To monitor discharges and submit reports of discharge activities;

3. To maintain records of monitoring and discharging; and

4. To take any other action necessary to comply with the permit or this chapter. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.080 Notification of discharge.

A. Notwithstanding any other requirement of law, any known or suspected release of materials, pollutants or waste, which may result in pollutants or non-storm water discharges entering storm water, the storm drain system or waters of the state or United States, shall be reported immediately in the following manner by any person in charge of a premises or responsible for the premises’ emergency response: 

1. The release of a hazardous material shall be immediately reported to emergency services by emergency dispatch services (911).

2. The release of a nonhazardous material shall be reported as follows:

a. To the director and to the 24-hour storm water hotline by phone no later than 5:00 p.m. on the same business day, Monday through Thursday; 

b. If the release occurs after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, on a Friday, weekend or holiday, to the 24-hour storm water hotline on the same day and to the director by telephone on the next business day;

c. A written notification of the release shall also be made to the director within five business days of the release. A copy of the written notice shall be retained at the premises for at least three years.

B. In addition to the above requirements, the release of any hazardous materials or substances, sewage, oil, or petroleum to any waters of the state, or discharged or deposited where it is or probably will be discharged in or on any waters of the state, shall be reported to the State Office of Emergency Services, as required by Sections 13271 and 13272 of California Water Code. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.090 Right to enter, inspect, monitor and sample.

A. Right to Inspect. The director shall have the authority to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to ascertain whether the purposes of this chapter are being met. 

B. Entry to Inspect. The director may enter both public and private property to investigate the source or potential source of any discharge of a pollutant to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the MS4 located within the jurisdiction of the city. 

C. Compliance Assessments. The director may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter.

D. Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the director may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment. 

E. Records Review. When required by the director, by this chapter, or by any law or regulation, maintenance records must be kept on site and remain available for inspection. Failure to keep records on site and available for inspection shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The director may inspect, review and copy all records relating to any discharge to the MS4 or receiving waters.

F. Sample and Test. The director may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any contained contents) and treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. The director may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the private property using appropriate tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The director may take photographs or videotapes, make measurements or drawings and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 

G. Monitoring. The director may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the MS4. 

H. Interference with Inspector Prohibited. No person shall, during reasonable hours, refuse, restrict, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the director into any building, factory, plant, yard, construction project or other place or portions thereof in the performance of the duties conferred by law.

I. Cost Recovery. If an inspection pursuant to this section results in an enforcement action, the city may issue an invoice of costs and/or recover its inspection costs pursuant to CMC 8.50.150(G). (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.100 Construction sites requiring a building permit and/or a grading plan.

A. Generally. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, prior to obtaining a grading or building permit, each operator of any construction activity shall submit evidence to the director that all applicable permits have been obtained, including but not limited to the State Water Board’s Construction Permit and State Water Board 401 Water Quality Certification. Each operator of any construction activity shall implement such an erosion and sediment control plan and BMPs required by the director to ensure that discharges of pollutants are effectively prohibited and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards. A SWPPP prepared in accordance with the general construction permit may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan. All construction and grading activities shall comply with applicable laws and regulatory documents, including all applicable city ordinances and the city’s permit regulating discharges into and from the storm drain system.

B. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Required. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, prior to obtaining a grading or building permit, each operator of any construction site of less than one acre shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the city an erosion and sediment control plan. No operator of any construction activity shall commence any construction activity prior to receiving written approval of the erosion and sediment control plan from the director.

C. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Contents. An erosion and sediment control plan must address the following elements, at a minimum:

1. For construction sites of less than one acre:

Best management practices designed to control erosion and sediment, and manage waste and non-storm water in accordance with the permit; and

2. For construction sites of one acre or more:

a. All elements of a storm water pollution prevention plan;

b. Methods to minimize the footprint of the disturbed area and to prevent soil compaction outside of the disturbed area;

c. Methods to protect native vegetation and trees;

d. Sediment and erosion control;

e. Controls to prevent tracking on and off the site;

f. Non-storm water control (e.g., vehicle washing, dewatering, etc.);

g. Material management (delivery and storage);

h. Spill prevention and control;

i. Waste management (e.g., concrete washout, waste management, sanitary waste management);

j. Identification of site risk level as identified per the construction permit;

k. Rationale for the selection and design of the proposed BMPs, including quantifying the expected soil loss from different BMPs; and

l. Any other element required by the director.

D. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Development. For construction sites one acre or greater, erosion and sediment control plans must be developed and certified by a qualified SWPPP developer. Structural BMPs shall be designed by a licensed California engineer.

E. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Certification. For construction sites one acre or greater, erosion and sediment control plans shall be signed by the landowner or landowner’s agent, certifying as follows:

I certify that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the information submitted is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that submitting false or inaccurate information, failing to update the erosion and sediment control plan to reflect current conditions, or failing to properly or adequately implement the erosion and sediment control plant may result in revocation of grading and other permits and other sanctions provided by law.

(Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.110 Industrial activity sites.

A. In addition to any other requirement imposed by this chapter, every person responsible for industrial and commercial facilities or operations, or owning commercial or industrial facilities or property which will, or may, result in pollutants entering storm water, the storm drain system, or receiving waters, shall first obtain any required NPDES storm water permit and shall install and maintain BMPs consistent with the CASQA Industrial/Commercial BMP Handbook or equivalent. BMPs must be designed to implement the requirements of this chapter and any applicable permit. 

B. At a minimum, every person responsible for industrial and commercial facilities shall implement effective BMPs to control the following pollutant generating activities: 

1. Accidental spills and leaks;

2. Vehicle and equipment fueling, cleaning and repair;

3. Outdoor liquid and raw materials storage;

4. Outdoor equipment operations;

5. Storage and handling of solid waste;

6. Building and grounds maintenance;

7. Parking and storage area maintenance;

8. Storm water conveyance system maintenance practices;

9. Sidewalk washing – remove all trash, debris and free standing oil, grease spills and leaks from the area before washing; and

10. Street washing – divert wash water away from MS4. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.120 Low impact development.

A. Objective. The provisions of this section contain requirements for construction activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to comply with the current “Los Angeles Municipal NPDES Permit,” lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID design principles to mimic predevelopment hydrology through infiltration, evapotranspiration and rainfall harvest and use. LID shall be inclusive of SUSMP requirements.

B. Scope. This section contains requirements for storm water pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the city of Covina to further define and adopt storm water pollution control measures, develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, alternative compliance for technical infeasibility from the requirements of the on-site retention requirements, and collect funds for projects that are granted alternative compliance for technical infeasibility. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city of Covina shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 

C. Applicability. The following development and redevelopment projects, termed “planning priority projects,” shall comply with the requirements of this section:

1. All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area that adds more than 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area.

2. Industrial parks 10,000 square feet or more of surface area.

3. Commercial malls 10,000 square feet or more of surface area.

4. Retail gasoline outlets with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area. 

5. Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5812) with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.

6. Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces.

7. Street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area.

8. Automotive service facilities (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532 through 7534 and 7536 through 7539) 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.

9. Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to, an environmentally sensitive area (ESA), where the development will:

a. Discharge storm water runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and

b. Create 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area.

10. Single-family hillside homes.

11. Redevelopment Projects.

a. Land disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site on planning priority project categories. 

b. Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than 50 percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.

c. Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than 50 percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development.

d. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade.

e. Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area. 

D. Effective Date. The planning and land development requirements contained in Section 7 of Order No. R4-2012-0175 became effective 90 days from the adoption of the permit (February 6, 2013). This includes planning priority projects that are discretionary permit projects or project phases that have not been deemed complete for processing, or discretionary permit projects without vesting tentative maps that have not requested and received an extension of previously granted approvals within 90 days of adoption of the permit. Projects that have been deemed complete within 90 days of adoption of the permit are not subject to the requirements of this section. 

E. Storm Water Pollution Control Requirements. The site for every planning priority project shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use.

1. A new single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation measures to:

a. Conserve natural areas;

b. Protect slopes and channels;

c. Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;

d. Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and

e. Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 

2. Street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area (and street and road redevelopment that results in the creation or addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site), in addition to complying with all other applicable provisions of this section shall employ green street strategies per the U.S. EPA guidance manual, “Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets” (EPA-833-F-08-009, December 2008) to the maximum extent practicable.

3. The remainder of planning priority projects shall prepare a LID plan to comply with the following: 

a. Retain storm water runoff on site for the storm water quality design volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from:

i. The eighty-fifth percentile 24-hour runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County eighty-fifth percentile precipitation isohyetal map; or

ii. The volume of runoff produced from a three-quarter-inch, 24-hour rain event, whichever is greater.

b. When, as determined by the director, 100 percent on-site retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or fully, the infeasibility shall be demonstrated in the submitted LID plan. The technical infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are not limited to: 

i. The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than three-tenths inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv on site;

ii. Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five to 10 feet of surface grade;

iii. Locations within 100 feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water;

iv. Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern;

v. Locations with potential geotechnical hazards;

vi. Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the on-site volume retention requirement. 

c. If partial or complete on-site retention is technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate one and one-half times the portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained on site. Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications and requirements specified in the municipal NPDES permit. 

i. Additional alternative compliance options such as off-site infiltration may be available to the project site. The owner, operator, or applicant for the project site shall contact the city of Covina to determine eligibility. 

d. The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered on site must be treated on site to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as required per the municipal NPDES permit. Flow-through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of:

i. Two-tenths inches per hour; or

ii. The one-year, one-hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater.

e. A multi-phased project may comply with the standards and requirements of this section for all of its phases by: (i) designing a system acceptable to the director to satisfy these standards and requirements for the entire site during the first phase, and (ii) implementing these standards and requirements for each phase of development or redevelopment of the site during the first phase or prior to commencement of construction of a later phase, to the extent necessary to treat the storm water from such later phase. For purposes of this section, “multi-phased project” shall mean any planning priority project implemented over more than one phase and the site of a multi-phased project shall include any land and water area designed and used to store, treat or manage storm water runoff in connection with the development or redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment.

F. Non-Planning Priority Projects. For new development or redevelopment projects not meeting the “planning priority projects” thresholds, but which may potentially have adverse impacts on post-development storm water quality, a site-specific plan including post-construction design, source and/or treatment control to mitigate storm water pollution shall be required where one or more of the following project characteristics exist: 

1. Vehicle or equipment fueling areas;

2. Vehicle or equipment maintenance areas, including washing and repair;

3. Commercial or industrial waste handling or storage;

4. Outdoor handling or storage of hazardous materials; 

5. Outdoor manufacturing areas;

6. Outdoor food handling or processing; 

7. Outdoor animal care, confinement, or slaughter; or

8. Outdoor horticultural activities.

G. Other Agencies. The city, in conjunction with one or more cities or with the county, may apply to the Regional Water Board for approval of a regional or subregional storm water mitigation program to substitute in part or wholly for the provisions of this chapter for the area covered by the regional or subregional storm water mitigation program. If the Regional Water Board approves the program, the provisions of the program shall apply in lieu of any conflicting provisions of this chapter.

H. Conditional Use Permit. For any development project requiring a conditional use permit (“CUP”) or other discretionary entitlement required under CMC Title 17, or other applicable title of the Covina Municipal Code, the LID plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of any such CUP or other discretionary entitlement.

I. Certification. As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for a new development or redevelopment project the applicant, facility operators and/or owners, as appropriate, shall:

1. Construct and/or employ all storm water control BMPs identified in the approved development planning documents;

2. Prepare and obtain the director’s approval of an operation and maintenance plan and monitoring plan for all LID/SUSMP BMPs and LID/SUSMP control features incorporated into the project;

3. Submit a signed certification stating that the project site and all BMPs will be employed and maintained in compliance with the city’s LID/SUSMP ordinance and other applicable regulatory requirements until the responsibility for such maintenance is legally transferred; and 

4. The owner of the project shall record a covenant agreement, or similar document, in the office of the Los Angeles County registrar-recorder/county clerk indicating that the owner of the subject development is aware of and agrees to the requirements of this section and to operate and maintain all LID/SUSMP BMPs and control features. The covenant agreement shall also include a diagram of the development project indicating the location(s) and type(s) of LID/SUSMP BMPs incorporated into the development project.

J. Fees. City council may establish fees for services provided under this chapter, as authorized under Sections 66016 and 66018 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.130 Response plans.

The director may, together with the city attorney, develop and implement a progressive enforcement policy setting forth enforcement procedures and actions to address repeat and continuing violations of this chapter, a spill response plan setting forth the procedures, roles and responsibilities for investigating, cleaning up and reporting spills, and landscape water use efficiency guidelines. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.140 Enforcement – Violations.

A. A violation of this chapter shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 

B. The director may, in addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter or available under applicable law, take enforcement action against violators of this chapter through any combination of the enforcement options set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.150 Enforcement – Administrative remedies.

A. Notice of Violation. The director may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge, a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be delivered in accordance with CMC 8.50.200. 

1. The notice of violation shall identify the provision(s) of this chapter or the applicable permit which has been violated. The notice of violation shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person. 

2. The notice of violation shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed 90 days unless the director extends the compliance deadline an additional 90 days where good cause exists for the extension. Uncontrolled sources of pollutants shall be abated immediately and in no case longer than 30 days. 

B. Administrative Compliance Orders. Separate from, in addition to, or in combination with a notice of violation or cease and desist order, the director may issue an administrative compliance order against the owner and occupant of any public or private property and any other person responsible for a violation of this chapter. Issuance of a notice of violation or cease and desist order is not a prerequisite to the issuance of an administrative compliance order. 

C. Cease and Desist Orders. The director may issue a cease and desist order directing the owner or occupant, or other person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property and any other person responsible for a violation of this chapter, to immediately or by a specified day or time: 

1. Discontinue any illicit connection, or illicit discharge to the MS4;

2. Contain or divert any flow of non-storm water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter; 

3. Discontinue any other violation of this chapter;

4. Clean up the area affected by the violation; and

5. Implement BMPs and take other actions necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

D. Monetary Penalty. In addition to, or in combination with, a notice of violation, administrative compliance order or cease and desist order, the director may issue a civil penalty for violations of this chapter. The notice of violation, administrative compliance order, or cease and desist order to which the penalty will attach shall allege the act(s) or failure(s) to act that constitute violations of this chapter and shall set forth the penalty for the violation. 

1. The director may impose the following monetary penalties, in addition to other appropriate corrective action requirements: 

a. An amount that shall not exceed $100.00 for each day a person fails or refuses to provide the city with any report or information required by this chapter. 

b. An amount that shall not exceed $200.00 for each day a person fails or refuses to timely comply with a notice of violation or cease and desist order or fails or refuses to remedy any source of a continuing violation as required by the director or this chapter. 

c. An amount that shall not exceed $1,000 per day for each day on which a person violates CMC 8.50.030 or 8.50.040. 

2. The amount of any penalties imposed under this section which have remained delinquent for a period of 60 days may become a special assessment against the real property of the person violating this chapter.

3. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment.

4. If the identity of the owner of the real property can be determined, the city shall make its best effort to provide notice of the special assessment to the owner by certified mail at the time of imposing the assessment. Such notice will specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. Assessment of administrative fines as provided hereunder does not preclude assessment of other costs of abatement of any nuisance against the same property at a later date.

5. If any real property against which the special assessment relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

6. A sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of a special assessment imposed pursuant to this chapter is delinquent may be conducted, subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

7. Notices or instruments relating to the special assessment shall be entitled to recordation.

E. City’s Performance of Work. The director may enter property to perform abatement activities or conduct cleanup work in the event abatement or cleanup activities ordered pursuant to this chapter are not conducted by the established deadline. In the event a violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the director may enter the property from which the violation emanates, conduct abatement activities and restore any property affected by the violation. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 

F. Judicial Confirmation. The city may, at its option, elect to petition the superior court to confirm any order establishing administrative penalties and enter judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1285 to 1287.6, inclusive, of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 

G. Recovery of Costs. The director may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of violation or other administrative order an invoice for costs documenting any and all costs incurred by the city in cleaning up, mitigating and/or remediating a site and issuing the notice of violation or other administrative order and directing payment to the city. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with CMC 8.50.200. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and enforcing any notice or order. If any owner or occupant, permittee or any other person subject to an invoice for costs fails to either pay the invoice for costs or successfully appeal the invoice for costs in accordance with CMC 8.50.210, then the city attorney may institute collection proceedings. 

H. Decision Final. Unless timely appealed, an administrative compliance order shall be effective and final as of the date it is issued by the director. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.160 Enforcement – Civil remedies.

A. Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. 

1. City Abatement. In the event the owner of property, the operator of a facility, a permittee or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, operator, permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the director may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to subsection (A)(3) of this section. 

a. Court Order to Enjoin or Abatement. At the request of the city manager, the city attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. 

b. Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the city manager shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring. 

2. Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the director may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 

3. Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under state law shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance. 

4. Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. At the direction of the city manager, the city attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. 

B. Injunction. At the request of the city manager, the city attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. 

C. Order for Reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law. 

D. Damages. The city manager may cause the city attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of (1) all costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages, (2) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health, and (3) damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 

E. Damages from Trespass or Nuisance on Public Land. The city attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the MS4 from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the MS4. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.170 Enforcement – Criminal remedies.

A. Infractions. Any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor under this chapter may be charged, at the discretion of the city attorney, with an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation occurring within one year. 

B. Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.180 Enforcement – Nonexclusive remedies.

Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be nonexclusive and it is within the discretion of the director or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.190 Enforcement – Nonconsecutive violations.

Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.200 Enforcement – Notices.

Delivery of Notice. Any notice of violation, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following: 

A. The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in CMC 8.50.210. 

B. Delivery shall be deemed complete upon personal service to the recipient; deposit in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid for first class delivery; facsimile service with confirmation of receipt; or by any other means permitted by law. 

C. Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the city. 

Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the director, a notice of violation or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of five business days. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.210 Appeals.

Any person subject to a notice of violation, administrative compliance order, or cease and desist order aggrieved by the issuance of an order may request a hearing and may appeal from the decision thereof in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.26 CMC. A person subject to an order to remedy a condition which poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall comply with that order during the pendency of any appeal. To the extent that any provision of this section conflicts with the provisions of Chapter 1.26 CMC, the provisions contained in Chapter 1.26 CMC shall control. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.220 Judicial review.

The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall file such action within 90 days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


8.50.230 Fees.

Fees to be charged for plan checking, inspections, monitoring, mitigation, remediation or cleanup efforts and any other activities carried out by the city under this chapter shall be set by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 15-2038 § 1, 2015.)


Chapter 8.60 FIREWORKS, PYROTECHNICS AND PRODUCTION EFFECTS

Sections:

8.60.010    Definitions.

8.60.020    Possession, manufacture, sale, use or discharge of fireworks without valid permit and license unlawful.

8.60.030    Discharge or utilization of pyrotechnic device or production effect without permit unlawful.

8.60.040    Permit for public display.

8.60.050    Enforcement of chapter.

8.60.060    Severability.

8.60.070    Violation and penalty.

8.60.080    Los Angeles County Fire Code, Article 77, Explosive materials, general – Section 7701.1, scope amended – Deletion of exceptions.


8.60.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Pyrotechnic device” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 12526, but shall not include any emergency signaling device such as a flare when used solely for its intended purpose, any devices used by authorized military personnel or peace officer while on duty.

B. “Dangerous fireworks,” as used in this section, shall mean as defined in Section 12505 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California or any successor provision thereto.

C. “Fireworks,” as used in this section, shall mean as defined in Section 12511 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California or any successor provision thereto.

D. “Person,” as used in this section, shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or other entity of any nature.

E. “Public display of fireworks,” as used in this section, shall mean as defined in Section 12524 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California or any successor provision thereto.

F. “Safe and sane fireworks,” as used in this section, shall mean as defined in Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California or any successor provision thereto. (Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.020 Possession, manufacture, sale, use or discharge of fireworks without valid permit and license unlawful.

It shall be unlawful for any person to display, possess, manufacture, sell, give away, fire, use or discharge fireworks kits of any class, including Class C “Safe and Sane” fireworks, and fireworks known as snappers or poppers, unless a permit authorizing such has been issued to that person by the fire chief, and unless such person is in possession of a valid pyrotechnic operator’s license issued by the office of the State Fire Marshal. The issuance of the permit is subject to fees established by the city council. (Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.030 Discharge or utilization of pyrotechnic device or production effect without permit unlawful.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or utilize any pyrotechnic device or production effect unless a permit for such use or discharge has been issued to that person by the fire chief, Fire Marshal and has paid the fees established by the city council.

B. The fire chief may establish reasonable rules, regulations and safety requirements for the issuance of such permits. The fire chief may waive the requirement for a permit when a production effect poses no more than an insignificant risk to public safety and environmental safety, but in no event shall the requirement for a valid pyrotechnics operator’s license be waived when possession of such license is mandated by Division 11, Part 2 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.040 Permit for public display.

A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, the fire chief of the city of Covina may grant permits for public displays of fireworks if the fire chief determines that all requirements of the law are or will be complied with by the applicant and that granting any such permit will not be detrimental to the public peace, health or safety; otherwise said application shall be denied. Applications for such permits shall be filed with the fire chief not less than 10 days before the proposed public display and shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the items of the proposed display. If the permit is granted, no items shall be displayed except as are contained in the statement and the fire chief may, in granting the permit, eliminate from the statement such items as he deems hazardous or impose conditions upon such permit as deemed necessary to protect the public peace, safety and health; and it shall be unlawful for the grantee of the permit to exhibit or display the eliminated items or to conduct such display in violation of any conditions so imposed. The public display shall be under the supervision of the fire chief and such persons as he shall designate and authorize. The permit for fireworks shall be subject to the fee-for-service ordinance. A separate permit is required for each display. The display shall be at the place and time designated in the permit. Such permit shall include the right to possess and transport said fireworks for the purpose of conducting said public display. Unless permitted by the fire chief, it is unlawful to discharge fireworks in the city of Covina between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

B. Appeal from Denial of Permit. If the fire chief denies the application, then the applicant may make an appeal from such action by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council. Such written notice shall be filed with the city clerk within 10 days of the date of the action of the fire chief and shall set forth the reasons for appeal. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, a hearing shall be set before the city council not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date of filing the appeal. Upon such hearing the council may deny the application or grant the application upon such conditions as the council deems proper. (Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.050 Enforcement of chapter.

In addition to any other persons authorized by law, the fire chief, Fire Marshal, members of the fire prevention bureau, and arson investigators shall have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In connection with such enforcement, they are authorized to enter, free of charge, at a reasonable time, any place of business, or to approach any person apparently conducting or employed in the operation of a business, to verify compliance with the provisions of this code and with the Uniform Fire Code and any other Covina Municipal Code provisions related to fireworks enforcement. Such persons are hereby authorized to issue citations to persons violating any of the provisions of this code to appear in Citrus Municipal Court or other court having jurisdiction at a time fixed in the citation, not less than five days from the date of issuance of the citation unless a shorter period of time is requested by the person(s) to whom the citation is given. Such citation shall be deemed to be a complaint charging violations of this chapter. (Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.060 Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or void, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The people of the city of Covina hereby declare that they would have adopted and passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, therefore irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or void. (Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.070 Violation and penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter will be prosecuted pursuant to CMC 1.16.010. (Ord. 16-2055 § 1, 2016; Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


8.60.080 Los Angeles County Fire Code, Article 77, Explosive materials, general – Section 7701.1, scope amended – Deletion of exceptions.

Section 7701.1 of the Los Angeles County Fire Code shall be amended by deleting the following exceptions: 

(1) The armed forces of the United States, Coast Guard, or National Guard; and (3) The sale, possession or use of Class C, common fireworks. 

(Ord. 98-1824 § 2, 1998; Ord. 95-1790, 1995; Ord. 95-1788, 1995.)


Chapter 8.70 REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES

Sections:

8.70.010    Legislative purpose.

8.70.020    Definitions.

8.70.030    Limitations on sales.

8.70.040    Penalties.


8.70.010 Legislative purpose.

A. The city council finds that there is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous and that chemicals, compounds, substances, by-products and wastes which are associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens.

B. The city council finds that there has been a dramatic increase of sales, reports of sales, thefts and possession of over-the-counter drugs which contain substances known as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, ephedrine hydrochloride, and pseudoephedrine sulfate along with other substances and products associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine and that retailers are regularly victimized by those persons who steal these substances, drugs and products on a regular basis.

C. The city council finds that the general public does not normally purchase the described products in multiple quantities and it is not the city council’s intent to restrain legitimate businesses or customers from selling or purchasing the described products.

D. No provision of this chapter shall hinder or supersede any other applicable state or federal statute. (Ord. 98-1825 § 1, 1998.)


8.70.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

A. “Ephedrine” means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal that contains ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine sulfate, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine or ephedrine.

B. “Retailer” means any single geographic location of any retail business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate who furnishes, distributes, sells, or gives away products described in this section.

C. “Customer” means any person who purchases or acquires the products described in this section, or persons who are present for the purchase or acquisition of the products described in this section.

D. “Sell” means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, or supply whether for monetary gain or not.

E. “Count” means the number of pills, tablets, capsules, or individual units of a substance contained within an individual package, box or container. (Ord. 98-1825 § 1, 1998.)


8.70.030 Limitations on sales.

No retailer shall sell to a single customer more than two packages of a product containing ephedrine in counts of 24 or fewer per transaction, or more than one package per transaction if the count is in excess of 24 per package, or if the total weight or the amount of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine contained in the packages exceeds a weight of 3,000 milligrams or three grams.

No customer shall purchase or acquire more than two packages of a product containing ephedrine in counts of 24 or fewer per transaction, or more than one package per transaction if the count is in excess of 24 per package, or if the total weight or the amount of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine contained in the packages exceeds a weight of 3,000 milligrams or three grams. (Ord. 98-1825 § 1, 1998.)


8.70.040 Penalties.

Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 98-1825 § 1, 1998.)


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY

Chapters:

Division I. Offenses By or Against Public Officers

9.04    False Personation of Police Officer

9.10    Police Dogs

Division II. Offenses Against the Person (Reserved)

Division III. Offenses Against Decency

9.20    Gambling

9.30    Adult-Oriented Businesses

9.34    Display of Books, Magazines and Other Publications

Division IV. Offenses Against Public Peace

9.40    Noise

9.42    Environmental Disturbances

9.44    Playing Ball in Streets

9.46    Wilderness Park

9.48    Conduct in Parks

9.50    Use of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places

9.52    Automatic Calling Devices

9.54    Prohibited Conduct

9.56    Repealed

9.58    Host Obligations to Protect Minors from Alcoholic Beverages at Gatherings

Division V. Offenses Against Property

9.60    Posting and Distribution of Advertising

9.65    Prevention and Removal of Graffiti

Division VI. Consumer Protection (Reserved)

Division VII. Offenses By or Against Minors

9.72    Curfew and Truancy

9.74    Civil Penalties for Failure to Control Minor

9.76    Minors Prohibited from Certain Places

Division VIII. Weapons

9.84    Discharging Weapons

9.86    Concealable Firearms – Retail Sales


Chapter 9.04 FALSE PERSONATION OF POLICE OFFICER1

Sections:

9.04.010    False personation prohibited.

9.04.020    Wearing uniform prohibited.


9.04.010 False personation prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person to:

1. Falsely personate a police officer of the city;

2. Cause, aid or abet the false personation of such officer;

3. Falsely represent himself or another to be a policeman, agent, investigator or representative of the police department of the city; or

4. Falsely represent himself to be connected with or employed by the police department.

B. No provision of this section shall be deemed to prohibit any act or representation prohibited by Sections 529, 530 and 650-1/2 of the Penal Code of California or any other state law. (1964 Code § 17.38.)


9.04.020 Wearing uniform prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person other than a police officer of the city to:

A. Wear the duly prescribed uniform of a police officer of the city;

B. Wear any distinctive part of such uniform; or

C. Wear a uniform any part of which is similar to a distinctive part of such uniform. (1964 Code § 17.39.)1

For statutory provisions regarding false personation of peace officers, see Penal Code § 538d. 


Chapter 9.10 POLICE DOGS

Sections:

9.10.010    Conduct toward police dogs.


9.10.010 Conduct toward police dogs.

No person shall assault or torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by any law enforcement officer in the performance of the functions or duties of such officer or interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by such officer in the performance of any of the functions or duties of such officer. (Ord. 1520 § 1, 1982.)


Chapter 9.20 GAMBLING1

Sections:

9.20.010    Gambling place – Keeping prohibited.

9.20.020    Gambling place – Permitting operation prohibited.

9.20.030    Playing or betting at or against games.


9.20.010 Gambling place – Keeping prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or maintain within the city any house, room, apartment or place used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place where any game not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value. (1964 Code § 17.6.)


9.20.020 Gambling place – Permitting operation prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or under his charge or control, in the city, to be used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place for playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on any game not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representation of value. (1964 Code § 17.7.)


9.20.030 Playing or betting at or against games.

It is unlawful for any person to play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value in any house, room, apartment or place described in CMC 9.20.010, in the city. (1964 Code § 17.8.)1

For statutory provisions regarding gambling, see generally Penal Code § 330 et seq. 


Chapter 9.30 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

9.30.010    Legislative purpose.

9.30.020    Definitions.

9.30.030    Permits required.

Article II. Applications and Permits

9.30.040    Adult-oriented business regulatory permit required.

9.30.050    Applications.

9.30.060    Investigation and action on application.

9.30.070    Permit denial.

9.30.080    Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.

9.30.090    Adult-oriented business performer permit.

9.30.100    Investigation and action on application.

9.30.110    Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory permits and adult-oriented business performer permits.

9.30.120    Appeal of denial – Suspension or revocation.

Article III. Facilities and Employees

9.30.130    Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.

9.30.140    Register and permit number of performers.

9.30.150    Display of permit and identification cards.

9.30.160    Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years prohibited.

Article IV. Miscellaneous Provisions

9.30.170    Inspection.

9.30.180    Regulations nonexclusive.

9.30.190    Employment of persons without permits unlawful.

9.30.200    Time limit for filing application for permit.

Article I. General Provisions


9.30.010 Legislative purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials.

Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Adult-oriented businesses” means any one of the following:

1. “Adult arcade,” as used in this chapter, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2. “Adult bookstore,” as used in this chapter, is an establishment that has 30 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

3. “Adult cabaret,” as used in this chapter, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear seminude; and/or (3) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

4. “Adult hotel/motel,” as used in this chapter, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description or specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

5. “Adult motion picture theater,” as used in this chapter, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

6. “Adult theater,” as used in this chapter, means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

7. “Modeling studio,” as used in this chapter, means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities.

8. “Adult enterprise,” as used in this chapter, means a car wash, massage parlor, barber shop, lingerie show and/or any other economic organization and/or activity which includes any display of specified anatomical areas, but which is not an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult hotel/motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater and/or modeling studio.

B. “Adult-oriented business operator” (hereinafter “operator”) means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

C. “Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business.

D. “Bar” is defined as any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.

E. “Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3d 151 (1981).

F. “Figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

G. “Health officer” means the health officer of the city of Covina or his or her duly authorized representative.

H. “Nudity or a state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

I. “Operate an Adult-Oriented Business.” As used in this chapter, to “operate an adult-oriented business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.

J. “Permittee” means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit or performer permit is issued.

K. “Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

L. “Police chief” means the police chief of the city of Covina or the authorized representatives thereof.

M. “Regularly features” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact the live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occur on two or more occasions within a 30-day period, three or more occasions within a 60-day period, or four or more occasions within a 90-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

N. “Seminude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

O. “Specified anatomical areas,” as used herein, shall mean and include any of the following:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human (a) genitals or pubic region; (b) buttocks; and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

3. Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (O)(1) and (2) of this section.

P. “Specified sexual activities,” as used herein, shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

2. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

3. Masturbation, actual or simulated;

4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (P)(1) through (3) of this section. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.030 Permits required.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city of Covina, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect an adult-oriented business regulatory permit from the city of Covina as herein required.

B. It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect an adult-oriented business performer permit from the city of Covina as herein required. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)

Article II. Applications and Permits


9.30.040 Adult-oriented business regulatory permit required.

Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult-oriented business in the city of Covina shall file an application with the police chief upon a form provided by the city of Covina and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.050 Applications.

A. Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with CMC 9.30.080. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information:

1. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.

2. If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3. If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

B. If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a 10 percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

C. If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

D. A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site.

E. The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

F. The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by CMC 9.30.090 to obtain an adult-oriented business performer license (for ongoing reporting requirements, see CMC 9.30.090).

G. A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

H. A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and: (1) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within 500 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is requested; and (2) the property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone or use within 500 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business.

I. A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by CMC 9.30.130(C).

J. If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of 10 days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

K. The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.060 Investigation and action on application.

A. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

B. Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the police chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

1. The police chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

3. If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

4. The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first-class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

C. The police chief shall grant the application and issue the adult-oriented business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of CMC 17.55.030; and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of CMC 9.30.130, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in CMC 9.30.070. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises.

D. If the police chief grants the application or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in CMC 9.30.050(J)), the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of CMC 9.30.130. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.070 Permit denial.

The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

A. The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city and the state of California, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations.

B. The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

C. An applicant is under 18 years of age.

D. The required application fee has not been paid.

E. The adult-oriented business does not comply with the zoning ordinance locational standards, CMC 17.55.030 through 17.55.050.

Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.080 Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.

A. A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit.

B. A permit fee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the police chief stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the police chief in accordance with CMC 9.30.040 and 9.30.050, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and the police chief determines in accordance with CMC 9.30.060 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit.

C. No permit may be transferred when the police chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

D. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.090 Adult-oriented business performer permit.

A. No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business performer permit issued by the city. All persons who have been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by CMC 9.30.040, with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, within 30 days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

B. The police chief shall grant, deny and renew adult business performer permits.

C. The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the police chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the police chief.

D. The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

1. The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

2. Age, date and place of birth;

3. Height, weight, hair and eye color;

4. Present residence address and telephone number;

5. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:

a. Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered;

b. The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state of California;

6. Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution;

7. State driver’s license or identification number;

8. Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

9. The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;

10. If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed;

E. The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

F. Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application.

G. If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than 10 days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days, of the time for the city manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.100 Investigation and action on application.

A. Within five days after receipt of the properly completed application, the police chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

1. The police chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

3. If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business performer permit.

4. The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first-class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

B. The police chief shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

C. If the police chief grants the application or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in CMC 9.30.090(G)), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought.

D. The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

1. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;

2. The applicant is under 18 years of age;

3. The adult-oriented business performer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law;

4. The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute;

5. The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in CMC 9.30.090(D)(5) or convicted of an offense outside the state of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the state of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application.

E. Each adult-oriented business performer permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for permits. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.110 Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory permits and adult-oriented business performer permits.

An adult-oriented business regulatory permit or adult-oriented business performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

A. On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the police chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the police chief, but at a minimum shall include the following:

1. All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The police chief’s decision may be appealed in accordance with CMC 9.30.120.

B. A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business:

1. The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city.

2. The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent, the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performer, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business:

a. Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

b. Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.

c. Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

d. The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, 318 or 647(b) of the California Penal Code.

e. Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4.

f. Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.

3. Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official.

C. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the police chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the police chief shall impose one of the following:

1. A warning;

2. Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months;

3. Revocation of the permit. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.120 Appeal of denial – Suspension or revocation.

After denial of an application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit or an adult-oriented business performer permit, or after denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or person to whom the permit was granted may seek review of such administrative action by the planning commission in the same fashion and in accordance with the provisions for review of CUP decisions, as described in Chapter 17.62 CMC. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review, if sought by the permittee. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)

Article III. Facilities and Employees


9.30.130 Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.

A. Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and building regulations and standards adopted by the city of Covina.

B. No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

C. All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.

D. The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

E. Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight on any particular day.

F. The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development director or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.

G. All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times.

H. Any adult-oriented business which is also an adult arcade shall comply with the following provisions:

1. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

2. The view area specified in subsection (H)(5) of this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.

3. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

4. The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

5. Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.

6. The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator’s license to conduct the adult-oriented establishment.

I. All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

	Area	Foot-Candles

	Bookstores and other retail establishments	20

	Theaters and cabarets	5

(except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)

	Arcades	10

	Motels/hotels	20

(in public areas)

	Modeling studios	20

J. The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

K. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission:

1. No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer. “Performer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, engages in or participates in any live performance for patrons of an adult-oriented business.

2. The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for performers which are exclusively dedicated to the performers’ use.

3. The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

4. The adult-oriented business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers.

5. No performer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer either before, during or after performances by such performer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

6. Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this subsection.

7. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.

8. No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

L. Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

1. At least one security guard shall be present at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.

2. Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.140 Register and permit number of performers.

Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides live performances depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their performer permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or health officer of the city of Covina. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.150 Display of permit and identification cards.

A. Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.

B. The police chief shall provide each adult-oriented business performer required to have a permit pursuant to the chapter with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer.

C. An adult-oriented business performer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented business. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.160 Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years prohibited.

A. It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least 18 years of age.

B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least 18 years of age. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)

Article IV. Miscellaneous Provisions


9.30.170 Inspection.

An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning division, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.180 Regulations nonexclusive.

The provisions of this chapter regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of the city of Covina. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.190 Employment of persons without permits unlawful.

It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live performances depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business performer permit. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


9.30.200 Time limit for filing application for permit.

All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit must apply for and obtain such a permit within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult-oriented business or the continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 97-1813 § 3, 1997.)


Chapter 9.34 DISPLAY OF BOOKS, MAGAZINES AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS

Sections:

9.34.010    Definitions.

9.34.020    Sealing of materials.

9.34.030    Exemption to sealing.

9.34.040    Posting of signs.

9.34.050    Minor need not view or gain control of material.

9.34.060    Defense in prosecution.

9.34.070    Exemption of parent or guardian.

9.34.080    Persons exempt.

9.34.090    Exemption of business person.

9.34.100    Penalties, prior convictions.


9.34.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Harmful Matter.” The terms, or meaning of the terms, “harmful matter to minors” has no applicability to this chapter.

B. “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or legal entity. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.020 Sealing of materials.

No person shall for commercial purposes knowingly display, cause to be displayed or permit to be displayed in any business open to minors, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, any book, magazine, or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or pictorial representation of any of the anatomical parts of a person’s genitals or anus, or any of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, masturbation or bestiality, whether actual or simulated, when to the average adult person such photograph or pictorial representation has as its primary purpose, design or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront; unless such book, magazine, or other publication or matter is sealed in a plastic wrapper, is stapled closed, or is by any other means sealed in such a manner as to reasonably restrict and deter its being opened prior to sale, whereby such photograph or pictorial representation may become exposed to the view of any minor. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.030 Exemption to sealing.

Any book, magazine, or other publication or matter need not be wrapped, stapled closed or sealed when displaying from an area which places such book, magazine, or other publication or matter reasonably beyond the reach of any minor; provided, that no such book, magazine, or other publication or matter depicts any photograph or pictorial representation, as set forth in CMC 9.34.020, on its cover or elsewhere, whereby such photograph or pictorial representation may by virtue of its display be readily viewed by a minor in which case such photograph or pictorial representation shall be covered from view whether or not wrapped, stapled closed or by any other means sealed as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.040 Posting of signs.

Any business in which, for commercial purposes, there is displayed any book, magazine, or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or pictorial representation as set forth in CMC 9.34.020 and which is not wrapped, stapled closed, sealed or covered, as required by CMC 9.34.020 and 9.34.030, shall have a sign posted at each of its doors normally used or intended to be used for public admittance, which shall read: “Notice, this business displays sexually explicit materials. Admission to minors is prohibited by law unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. Covina Municipal Code Chapter 9.34.” The sign shall be not less than one square foot in area and the letters shall be not less than two inches in height. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.050 Minor need not view or gain control of material.

To commit a violation of CMC 9.34.020 or 9.34.030, it is not required that a minor have actually viewed or physically gained control of any book, magazine, or other publication or matter as set forth in CMC 9.34.020 or 9.34.030, when such book, magazine, or other publication or matter is not wrapped, stapled closed, sealed or covered as required by CMC 9.34.020 or 9.34.030. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.060 Defense in prosecution.

It shall be a defense in any prosecution for any violation of this chapter that the book, magazine, or other publication or matter by virtue of its apparent character, outward appearance or contemporary Los Angeles County-wide reputation would not cause the average adult person to reasonably know or suspect that it depicted any photograph or pictorial representation as set forth in CMC 9.34.020. It may also be evidence of a violation of this chapter in any such prosecution, that the book, magazine, or other publication or matter by virtue of its apparent character, outward appearance, or contemporary county-wide reputation would cause the average adult person to reasonably know or suspect that it depicted any photograph or pictorial representation as set forth in CMC 9.34.020. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.070 Exemption of parent or guardian.

Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any parent or guardian from having his child or ward accompany him into any business otherwise in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.080 Persons exempt.

The provisions of this chapter, with respect to the displaying of, causing to be displayed or permitting to be displayed any book, magazine, or other publication or matter as set forth in CMC 9.34.020 or 9.34.030, shall apply only to persons having proprietary interests in or managerial control of the ordinary and routine operation of the business wherein and at which time there occurs a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.090 Exemption of business person.

Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from admitting a minor into any business which displays any unwrapped, unstapled, unsealed or uncovered book, magazine, or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or pictorial representation as set forth in CMC 9.34.020; provided, that the minor is accompanied by an adult who represents himself to be the parent or guardian of the minor and whom the person, by the exercise of reasonable care, does not have reason to know is not the parent or guardian of the minor, or that a minor who when not accompanied by a parent or guardian, presented false documentation of being at least 18 years of age, when to the average and prudent person such documentation would appear legitimate. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


9.34.100 Penalties, prior convictions.

Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Every person who having been twice convicted for any violation of this chapter is upon each subsequent violation guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days, or both; provided, that both of the prior violations occurred within a two-year period of the subsequent violation. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1980.)


Chapter 9.40 NOISE1

Sections:

9.40.010    Declaration of policy.

9.40.020    Definitions.

9.40.030    Loud party.

9.40.031    Disturbance violation service fee.

9.40.040    Exterior noise level limits.

9.40.050    Time duration correction factors.

9.40.060    Interior noise level limits.

9.40.070    Noise measurement procedure.

9.40.080    General guidelines.

9.40.090    Controlled hours of operation.

9.40.100    Noise sensitive areas.

9.40.110    Construction.

9.40.120    Loud and/or unusual noises.

9.40.130    Truck routes.

9.40.140    Exceptions.

9.40.150    Pre-existing noise sources.

9.40.160    Violations.

9.40.170    Continuing or subsequent violations.

9.40.180    Severability.


9.40.010 Declaration of policy.

It is declared to be the policy of the city to use its police power to reduce noise in the community by prohibiting unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noises from all sources. At certain levels, noise can be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the citizenry. Therefore, in the public interest, it shall be restricted. In order to better implement the goals of the noise element of the city’s general plan and to more effectively prohibit unwanted and unnecessary sounds of all types within the community, this chapter has been amended. This chapter shall be referred to and cited as the “Covina noise ordinance.” (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.020 Definitions.

Terminology used in this chapter shall be in conformance with definitions in the Covina zoning ordinance and as follows:

1. “A-weighted sound level” means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.

2. “Ambient noise level” means an existing level of all-encompassing noise, from sources both near and far, that is associated with a given environment. Such a noise level does not include intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources.

3. “Commercial area” means land utilized for business purposes other than residential or industrial uses.

4. “Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

5. “Day-night average sound level (Ldn)” means the 24-hour average of the A-weighted sound pressure level, with levels during the period 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day increased by five decibels.

6. “Decibel (dB)” means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.

7. “Demolition” means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property.

8. “Emergency” means any threat to the public health or safety or any unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action as declared by the city manager.

9. “Emergency work” means any work performed necessary to restore property that has been damaged by an emergency to a safe condition.

10. “Enforcement officer” means either the chief of police or the chief planning official, or their designees, who may enforce the provisions of this chapter.

11. “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sounds, including, but not limited to, agricultural, commercial, industrial, or residential machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

12. “Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)” means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.

13. “Impulsive sound” means a sound of short duration (usually less than one second) with an abrupt onset and rapid delay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.

14. “Industrial area” means land utilized for industrial, manufacturing, wholesaling, and related uses as defined in the city’s M-1 (light manufacturing) ordinance.

15. “Intrusive noise” means a noise that intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location.

16. “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed source.

17. “Motor vehicle” means a self-propelled vehicle as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under the above code.

18. “Muffler or sound dissipative device” means a device used for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and reducing the noise that is emitted.

19. “Noise disturbance” means any sound that, as judged by the chief of police or the chief planning official, or their designees, (a) endangers or injures the safety of humans or animals, (b) annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, (c) endangers or injures personal or real property, or (d) violates the factors set forth in CMC 9.40.030 through 9.40.060.

20. “Noise sensitive area” means a use such as, but not limited to, a hospital, nursing home, church, school or other outdoor recreational area, or library that contains activities more sensitive to noise than most activities. Existing noise sensitive areas shall be considered as such until otherwise designated.

21. “Person” means any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or public or private entity, including any officer, employee, department, or agency of such entity.

22. “Powered model vehicle” means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle that is not designated to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.

23. “Residential area” means land that is utilized or zoned for residential purposes.

24. “Residential estate or agricultural” means land that is zoned “A” (agricultural and residential) or “E” (estate residential).

25. “Residential low density” means land that is zoned “R-1” (single-family residential).

26. “Residential medium and high density” means property that is zoned “RD” (multiple-family residential).

27. “Sound amplifying equipment” means any device used for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. Excluded are standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is held or installed. Also excluded are warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.

28. “Sound level meter” means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for Type S2A meters in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, 51.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.

29. “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.

30. “Vibration perception threshold” means the minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. The threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 inches/second over the range of one to 100 HZ.

31. “Weekday” means any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.030 Loud party.

It is unlawful for any person or persons to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unnecessary, loud or unusual noise which is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare of others due to a party, gathering or unruly assemblage at a premises. (Ord. 1686 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.031 Disturbance violation service fee.

A. When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs and in the event that the senior police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, then that senior officer shall personally notify the owner of the premises or the person in charge of the premises or the person responsible for the assemblage that that person, or if that person is a minor, that the parents and guardians of that person will be held personally liable for the costs of providing police personnel on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided by the police department to those premises. A first warning shall be deemed to be the normal services provided. The personnel utilized after the first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided. The accounting and billing procedures as set forth in subsection (B) of this section shall apply.

B. 1. The costs of the special security assignment described in subsection (A) of this section shall include personnel and equipment costs expended during the second and any subsequent returns to the premises, including costs for the total number of officers involved and total minutes expended after the officers arrive on the scene. In addition, such costs may include damages to city property and/or injuries to city personnel. The fee assessed against said person or persons for such costs shall be in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council.

2. All fees and charges levied for city services described in subsection (A) of this section shall be due and payable upon presentation.

3. All fees and charges for such services shall constitute a valid and subsisting debt in favor of the city and against the owner of the premises, the person in charge of the premises and the person responsible for the assemblage or if any of the foregoing persons are a minor, the parents and guardians of that such person. If an amount remains unpaid after reasonable and practical attempts have been made by the city to obtain payment, a civil action may be filed with the court for the amount due and payable, together with any penalties, any related charges and fees accrued due to nonpayment, and all fees and charges required to file and pursue such civil action.

4. Fees and charges shall be levied for recovering city costs for notification and collection of delinquent accounts and shall be established by resolution of the city council. Such fees and charges are a part of the fees and charges established for the services rendered and shall be collected as such.

C. If any paragraph, sentence, phrase, portion or part of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The city council declares that it intends and desires that the remaining parts of the section continue to be effective without any parts that have been declared invalid.

D. The city reserves its legal options to elect any other legal remedies when said costs exceed $500.00. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1686 § 2, 1989.)


9.40.040 Exterior noise level limits.

The allowable noise level or sound level referred to in CMC 9.40.030 shall be the higher of the following:

A. Actual measured ambient level; or

B. The sound level limit as determined from the following table:

	Receiving Land Use Category	Time	Sound Level (A-Weighted) Decibels

	Residential estate or agricultural	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.	50

40

	Residential low density	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.	55

45

	Residential medium and high density	 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.	60

50

	Commercial	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.	65

55

	Industrial	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.	70

60

1. Noises generated shall not exceed the noise standard for that land use for any period in any hour except as provided within this chapter;

2. If the measurement location is on a boundary between a commercial or industrial land use category and a residential category, the noise level limit of the lower category plus five decibels shall apply;

3. In the event the alleged offensive noise, as judged by the enforcement officer, contains a steadily, audible tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, the standard limits set forth in the above table shall be reduced by five decibels. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.050 Time duration correction factors.

The time duration allowances set forth below shall apply to those noise level limits listed in the table in CMC 9.40.040 during all hours of any day. Any noise created in a manner described in CMC 9.40.030 shall not exceed:

A. The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour; or

B. The noise standard plus 10 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

C. The noise standard plus 15 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

D. The noise standard plus 20 dB(A) for any period. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.060 Interior noise level limits.

A. The interior noise standards for residential dwellings as presented in the following table shall apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, within all dwellings with windows in their closed configuration unless the unit does not have adequate heating, air conditioning and mechanical ventilation:

	Allowable Interior Land Use	Time Interval	Noise Level dB(A)

	Residential (All densities)	10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.	35

45

B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise that causes the noise level, when measured inside a neighboring dwelling unit, for any cumulative period in any hour, to exceed the above standard.

C. No person shall operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level, when measured inside a neighboring receiving dwelling unit, to exceed:

1. The noise standard plus five dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

2. The noise standard plus 10 dB or the maximum measured ambient, for any period of time.

D. In the event the alleged offensive noise, as judged by the noise control officer, contains a steady, audible tone such as a whine, screech, a hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, the standard limits set forth in the above table shall be reduced by five dB.

E. No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, in any area of the city a commercial or industrial development in an area adjacent to residential properties that will increase noise levels above the standards listed in this section and CMC 9.40.040, unless the person provides mitigation measures to reduce the increased noise levels. Prior to the issuance of building permits for such a project, a registered engineer shall certify that the construction plans provide for noise reduction features. In addition, prior to occupancy a random selection of adjacent residential units shall be tested to provide evidence that all required noise levels are achieved.

F. All newly constructed residential dwellings located in areas that are exposed to ambient noise levels in excess of 60 dB(A) LDN shall be designed and built so that all habitable rooms comply with subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.070 Noise measurement procedure.

Whether a complaint from a citizen or a request to inspect a noise source has been made, the enforcement officers, or their designees, may investigate the matter. The investigation shall consist of the recording of measurement(s) and the gathering of data in order to adequately define the noise problem. The investigation must include the following:

A. Type of noise source;

B. Location of noise source relative to complainant’s property;

C. Time period during which noise source is considered by complainant to be intrusive;

D. Total duration of noise produced by noise source; and

E. Date and time of noise measurement survey. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.080 General guidelines.

Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9.40.030 through 9.40.060, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the city, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area.

The characteristics and conditions to be considered in determining a violation of the provisions of this section include, but are not limited to, the following:

A. The sound level of the objectionable or intrusive noise;

B. The sound level of the ambient noise;

C. Whether the nature of the objectionable noise is usual or unusual;

D. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

E. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise is heard or from which it emanates;

F. The number of persons in the area within which the noise is heard or from which it emanates;

G. The time of day or night the objectionable noise occurs;

H. The duration of the noise and its tonal, informational, or music content;

I. Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent, or intermittent;

J. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

The above factors shall be considered in addition to the noise levels set forth in CMC 9.40.040 and 9.40.060 in determining a violation. However, noises do not necessarily need to exceed those noise level limits to be considered unnecessary or unusual so as to cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity in the area. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.090 Controlled hours of operation.

It is unlawful for any person to operate, permit, use, or cause to operate, any of the following, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of any one day:

A. Powered model vehicles;

B. Loading and unloading vehicles such as garbage trucks, forklifts or cranes in a residential area or within 500 feet of a residence;

C. Domestic power tools;

D. Lawn equipment, including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, edgers, cultivators, chain saws, and leaf blowers in any residential area or within 500 feet of any residence;

E. Equipment associated with the repair and maintenance of real property. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.100 Noise sensitive areas.

It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, or cause to be created or maintained any noise or sound near any school, outdoor recreational area, library, hospital, nursing home, or church while any of the above is in use, which exceeds the noise standards as specified in CMC 9.40.040 prescribed for the residential low density land use category; or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the working of such installations or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or nursing home; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed on such street, sidewalk, or public place indicating the presence of a school, hospital, nursing home, or church. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.110 Construction.

A. It is unlawful for any person within any residential land use category or within a radius of 500 feet therefrom to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on any building, structure, or project; or to operate any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, electric saw, grinder, steam or electric hoist, or other construction-type equipment or device between the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day, at any time on any Sunday or at any time on any public holiday in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance, unless beforehand a permit therefor has been duly obtained in accordance with the provisions of subsection (B) of this section. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work.

“Public holiday” as used in this subsection shall mean the day upon which each of the following holidays is recognized and celebrated as a holiday by the employees of the city: Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve, New Year’s Day, Washington’s Birthday, Memorial Day, or any other holiday recognized as such by the city.

B. A permit may be issued authorizing the work prohibited by this section whenever it is found that the public interest will be served thereby. An application for such a permit shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth in detail facts showing that the public interest will be served by the issuance of such permit, and the application shall be made to the planning division of the community development department. The chief planning official shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and shall have the authority to issue such permits. He/she shall coordinate the processing of each application for a permit with such departments and divisions as he/she deems will be affected by the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.120 Loud and/or unusual noises.

The following acts, among other things, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of CMC 9.40.080, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:

A. Mufflers – Sound Dissipative Devices. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle in violation of the exhaust noise levels as established by the State of California Vehicle Code Division 12, Chapter 5, Article 2, or any successor thereto.

B. Horns and Signaling Devices. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle horn, siren, or amplification device in violation of the State of California Vehicle Code Division 12, Chapter 5, Article 1 or any successor thereto.

C. Motorized Recreational Vehicles Operating off Public Right-of-Way. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorized recreational vehicle off a public right-of-way in such a manner that the sound levels emitted therefrom violate the provisions of this chapter.

D. Standing Motor Vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight (GVWR) in excess of 10,000 pounds, or of any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day while the vehicle is stationary and within 150 feet of a residential area or designated noise sensitive area, except when movement of said vehicle is restricted by other traffic. This provision shall not apply to vehicles owned and operated by utility companies regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. It shall also not apply to garbage trucks and street sweepers.

E. Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs and Testing. It is unlawful for any person to repair, rebuild, modify, or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise level that exceeds the standards listed in CMC 9.40.030 through 9.40.060.

F. Hawkers and Peddlers. It is unlawful for any person to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city utilized for residential or commercial purposes. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and similar licensed public entertainment events or auctions.

G. Use of Sound Devices on Vehicles for the Purpose of Advertising Goods or Attracting or Calling Attention to Such Vehicle. No person at any time shall operate, drive, or park, or cause to be operated, driven, or parked, upon any street, sidewalk, or public property within the city any advertising vehicle or commercial vehicle with its sound amplifying equipment in operation for the purpose of advertising goods, wares, or merchandise sold at or from such vehicle, or for the purpose of attracting or calling attention to such vehicle for the purpose of selling goods, wares, or merchandise. Also, no person shall make, or cause, permit, or allow to be made, any noise of any kind by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, megaphone, or similar mechanical device, for the purpose of advertising or selling any goods, wares, or merchandise, or of attracting the attention or inviting the patronage of any person, from any vehicle which is driven, operated, or parked upon any street, sidewalk, or public property within the city.

H. Animals and Fowl. No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, upon any premises, owned, occupied, or controlled by such person any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept, which by any sound, cry or behavior shall cause discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area.

I. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment. All such equipment, including air conditioners, pumps, transformers, antennas, and heating and ventilating systems, shall be located and operated in a manner that does not disturb adjacent uses and activities. The noise level generated from any mechanical or electrical equipment shall not exceed the standards listed in CMC 9.40.030 through 9.40.060. This provision shall not apply to mechanical and electrical equipment owned and operated by utility companies regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.

J. Vibration. It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any device that creates a vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of an average individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at 150 feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way. (Ord. 97-1810 § 3 1997; Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.130 Truck routes.

In order to prevent unnecessary noise and vibration on residential local and collector streets, Chapter 10.44 CMC, which establishes truck routes throughout the city, shall be followed. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.140 Exceptions.

The following noise sources are specifically excluded from the standards and provisions documented in CMC 9.40.030 through 9.40.080 and 9.40.100:

A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;

B. Domestic power tools;

C. Lawn equipment including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, edgers, cultivators, chainsaws, and leaf blowers in any residential area;

D. Cars, trucks, and buses on residential streets, providing such vehicles do not violate California exhaust noise levels;

E. Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property;

F. City- or school-approved activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds, and public or private school grounds, including athletic and school entertainment events; however, the city shall reasonably address noise impacts at city-sponsored events;

G. Occasional outdoor gatherings, dances, shows, fairs, and fundraising promotional sales, and seasonal sales activities; provided, said events are conducted pursuant to the approval of an administrative conditional use permit by the city;

H. Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law;

I. Noise associated with the operation of garbage trucks and street sweepers;

J. Any noise generated from an activity, device, or vehicle that pertains to the functioning of a utility company regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. However, in the event complaints about a utility company operation, activity or equipment arise, the company in question shall attempt to resolve the problem as expeditiously as possible;

K. Any activity conducted by personnel from the city of Covina, the county of Los Angeles, a regional agency, or a special district, whether the activity is conducted on public or private property. (Ord. 11-1995 § 8, 2011; Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.150 Pre-existing noise sources.

Those residential, commercial and/or industrial noise sources in existence prior to the date of adoption of this chapter or annexation by the city, which exceed the levels specified in this chapter, shall have a five-year period from the date of adoption with which to comply with the chapter. If at the end of the five-year period it can be shown that compliance with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a hardship in terms of technical and economic feasibility, the time to comply may be extended by the city council following a hearing on the matter on an annual basis until such time as compliance may be effected. However, this amortization process shall not apply to intrusive noise sources that have been identified as such by city officials prior to the date of adoption of this chapter or date of annexation. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.160 Violations.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.170 Continuing or subsequent violations.

Any person having been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter who thereafter commits a violation of the same provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)


9.40.180 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be invalidated. (Ord. 1665 § 2, 1988.)1

For statutory provisions regarding disturbing the peace and noise, see Penal Code § 415. 


Chapter 9.42 ENVIRONMENTAL DISTURBANCES

Sections:

9.42.010    Declaration of policy.

9.42.020    Sources of environmental disturbances.

9.42.030    Exemption.

9.42.040    Violations.

9.42.050    Continuing or subsequent violations.

9.42.060    Severability.


9.42.010 Declaration of policy.

It is declared to be the policy of the city to use its police power to prevent persons living or working on one property from being disturbed due to annoying and unnecessary odors, glare, smoke, temperature changes, electrical interference, and ground water pollution. At certain degrees, such disturbances can be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the citizenry. Therefore, in the public interest, they shall be restricted. In order to effectively prohibit unwanted and unnecessary environmental disturbances, this chapter has been created. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 1988.)


9.42.020 Sources of environmental disturbances.

The following disturbances, when imposed upon residential uses only, are declared to be unnecessary and contrary to the intent of this chapter. Such disturbances, however, shall not be deemed exhaustive:

A. Odors. No operation or activity of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable, which is detectable with or without the aid of instruments, shall be permitted at or beyond the lot line of the property generating the odorous gases or matter.

B. Glare. No operation, activity, sign, or lighting fixture shall create illumination that exceeds five foot-candles on any adjacent property, whether the illumination is direct or indirect light from the source. Glare levels shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve adopted by the International Commission on Illumination. For purposes of this subsection, a foot-candle is the illumination produced by a light of one international candle upon a surface one foot away.

C. Smoke. No operation or activity is permitted to have operations that emit excessive smoke, fumes, or dust that exceeds the requirements or levels specified by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

D. Temperature Change. No operation or activity shall emit heat or cold that would cause a temperature increase or decrease on any adjacent property in excess of 10 degrees Fahrenheit, whether the change is in the air, on the ground, or on any structure.

E. Electrical Interference. No operation or activity shall transmit, generate, or otherwise cause any electrical or magnetic radiation disturbance that affects persons in the operation of any use, equipment (including, but not limited to, television and radio reception), or process employed by any use beyond the boundary of the site.

F. Ground Water Pollution. No operation or activity shall cause the seeping into the ground of any area of wastes, whether liquid or not, that are determined by the State Department of Health Services to be toxic or of a similar hazardous nature. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 1988.)


9.42.030 Exemption.

Utility companies regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, in the event complaints about a utility company operation, activity, or equipment arise, the company in question shall attempt to resolve the problem as expeditiously as possible. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 1988.)


9.42.040 Violations.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 1988.)


9.42.050 Continuing or subsequent violations.

Any person having been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter who thereafter commits a violation of the same provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 1988.)


9.42.060 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be invalidated. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 1988.)


Chapter 9.44 PLAYING BALL IN STREETS

Sections:

9.44.010    Prohibited.


9.44.010 Prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person within the city to engage in playing ball, shinny or other similar games on the public streets of the city. (1964 Code § 17.15.)


Chapter 9.46 WILDERNESS PARK

Sections:

9.46.010    Definitions.

9.46.020    Compliance.

9.46.030    Severability.

9.46.040    Short title.

9.46.050    Deputy or authorized person.

9.46.060    Enforcement.

9.46.070    Liability.

9.46.080    Specific regulations.

9.46.090    Golf in parks.

9.46.100    Harmful objects.

9.46.110    Rubbish.

9.46.120    Shooting.

9.46.130    Firecrackers, etc.

9.46.140    Structure, flora, turf, etc.

9.46.150    Fires.

9.46.160    Disturbances.

9.46.170    Animals.

9.46.180    Dogs and cats.

9.46.190    Horses, etc.

9.46.200    Grazing.

9.46.210    Molesting animals.

9.46.220    Changing clothes.

9.46.230    Washing.

9.46.240    Swimming.

9.46.250    Children visiting park waters.

9.46.260    Posted property.

9.46.270    Motor vehicles.

9.46.280    Model airplanes, etc.

9.46.290    Solicitation.

9.46.300    Intoxication.

9.46.310    Alcoholic beverages and narcotics and dangerous drugs.

9.46.320    Hours.

9.46.330    House trailers.

9.46.340    Overnight camping.

9.46.350    Nudity and disrobing.

9.46.360    Penalty for violation.


9.46.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Access service route” means any access roads or easements designated or identified by the director for use by authorized emergency or utility vehicles.

B. “Alcoholic beverages” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

C. “Director” means the field operations director, his deputy, or other person authorized by him, pursuant to law, to act in his stead.

D. “Motor vehicles” means any multi-wheeled, treaded, or sled-type vehicle that is propelled by a motor or engine. “Motor vehicles” includes any vehicle commonly known as a “motorized recreation vehicle,” and any self-propelled vehicle that is presently defined by Sections 400 and 405 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California as a motorcycle or a motor-driven vehicle.

E. “Narcotics and dangerous drugs” means those narcotics and drugs listed or defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California as now or hereafter amended.

F. “Park” means a wilderness park located in the city and identified as such by posted signs.

G. “Park waters” means any lake, reservoir, pond, or other body of water within the park.

H. “Section” means a section of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned. (Ord. 1394 § 7, 1978; Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.020 Compliance.

A person shall not enter, be or remain in the park unless he complies with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such park and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. A violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, in addition to any other penalty provided for in this chapter or by any other law, shall result in the person so violating being a trespasser ab initio, and the director or any peace officer may eject such person from the park. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.030 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.040 Short title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “wilderness park ordinance.” (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.050 Deputy or authorized person.

Wherever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the director or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a deputy of the public officer or other person so authorized, pursuant to law, by the director, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.060 Enforcement.

The director and chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.070 Liability.

A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this chapter does so at his own risk without liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees, and agents for death or injury to persons or damage to property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.080 Specific regulations.

The following rules and regulations apply to all parks as defined in CMC 9.46.010(F), except as otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.090 Golf in parks.

A person shall not drive, chip or pitch golf balls or play the game of golf in the park. This section shall not apply to activities conducted and supervised by the public recreation department. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.100 Harmful objects.

A person shall not place, throw, leave, keep, or maintain any object in such a manner or in such a place that any person or animal may be injured or any structure or vehicle may be damaged thereby. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.110 Rubbish.

A person shall not throw, place, or dispose of any garbage, refuse, wastepaper, bottles, or cans in any place in a park other than into a garbage can or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.120 Shooting.

A person shall not discharge or shoot any firearms, air gun, slingshot, or bow and arrow in any park except at ranges designated for such purpose by the director. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.130 Firecrackers, etc.

A person shall not take or transport into the park, or have in his possession therein, or fire or discharge therein, any firecracker, rocket, torpedo, fireworks, or other explosive substance unless he first obtains a permit to do so from the city and complies with all other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.140 Structure, flora, turf, etc.

A person, other than a duly authorized park employee in the performance of his duties, shall not do the following:

A. Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any tree, plant, shrub, grass, fruit, or flower or any portion thereof growing in the park;

B. Remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, or gravel from the park;

C. Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in the park or any portion thereof; or mark or place thereon or on any portion thereof any mark, writing, or printing; or attach thereto any sign, card, display, or other similar device. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.150 Fires.

A person shall not light or maintain any fire in the park other than in a stove area circle, or area designated for such purpose, except upon written authorization from the city. All fires lighted or maintained pursuant to this section shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Covina fire department. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.160 Disturbances.

A person shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the park by any of the following:

A. Unduly loud or unusual noise; or

B. Tooting, blowing, or sounding any siren, horn, signal, or noise-making device; or

C. Any obscene, violent, or riotous conduct; or

D. The use of any vulgar, profane, or indecent language. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.170 Animals.

A person shall not bring into the park any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat, or other animal of any kind except as hereafter specifically provided or as otherwise permitted by the director. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.180 Dogs and cats.

A person may bring and maintain in the park a dog or cat if such dog or cat is kept on a leash or chain and under full control of its owner or custodian, or upon written permission of the director when required for authorized park programs. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.190 Horses, etc.

A person may only lead or ride a horse, mule, donkey, or other similar animal on designated trails or in designated equestrian areas subject to all rules and regulations governing their use or in other park areas upon written permission of the director, subject to the regulations of such use permit. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.200 Grazing.

A person shall not permit any cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, or any domestic animal to graze in the park, except on property designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.210 Molesting animals.

A person shall not molest, hunt, disturb, injure, shoot at, take, net, poison, wound, harm, kill, or remove from the park or riding and hiking trail any kind of animal except as follows:

A. When necessary to avoid bodily harm;

B. When fishing is permitted by the director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.220 Changing clothes.

A person shall not change clothes or disrobe in the park except in that portion of a comfort station or other facility, if any, which is designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.230 Washing.

A person shall not place in any park waters any edible matter, dish, or utensil or wash or cleanse in any park waters any such edible matter, dish, or utensil or commit any nuisance in or near such waters or pollute any park waters or, except as provided in CMC 9.46.240, bathe, swim, or wade in park waters, except at places and times designated by the director. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.240 Swimming.

A person shall not swim in any park waters except at places and times designated by the director. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.250 Children visiting park waters.

No parent or guardian or any person having the custody of any child under the age of eight years shall cause, permit or allow such child to enter or visit any park having a body of water within the boundaries of such park, unless such child is accompanied by a person of not less than 16 years of age. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.260 Posted property.

A person shall not operate any motor vehicle on or over any firebreak or any fire protection roads which are posted against public use and provided with locked gates or operate any motor vehicle on or over any riding or hiking trail. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.270 Motor vehicles.

A person shall not bring to or operate in any park any motor vehicle except at such times and at such places as permitted by the director in written regulations or permits issued by him from time to time, and any such operation of a motor vehicle shall be in accordance with the conditions contained in such regulation or permit. A person shall not park any motor vehicle in the park, except in areas designated by the director for parking. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.280 Model airplanes, etc.

A person shall not operate model airplanes, boats, or crafts except in areas designated for said use and subject to all rules and regulations contained in such written permission. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.290 Solicitation.

A person shall not solicit in any manner or for any purpose or sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise therein except as follows:

A. Pursuant to a concession or other agreement authorized by the city council; and

B. When found by the director to be consistent with the policies of the parks and recreation department or to promote the program of said department, under conditions prescribed by him. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.300 Intoxication.

A person shall not enter, remain in, or be in the park while he is under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or narcotic and dangerous drug. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.310 Alcoholic beverages and narcotics and dangerous drugs.

A person shall not enter, be, or remain in the park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away, or consuming any alcoholic beverage except at a concession facility duly authorized by the city council and properly licensed. A person shall not enter, be, or remain in the park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away or consuming any narcotics and dangerous drugs. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.320 Hours.

A person shall not enter, be, or remain in the park or in any building in any park between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. The director may, from time to time, change the hours of use as stated above. All persons shall comply with such changed hours. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.330 House trailers.

A person shall not bring a house trailer or other recreation travel-trailer-type vehicle which can be used for overnight sleeping purposes into the park except when authorized by the director. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.340 Overnight camping.

A person shall not camp or sleep overnight in the park, except when authorized by the director. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.350 Nudity and disrobing.

No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk, change clothes, disrobe, or be in any park in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view, except in those portions of a comfort station, if any, expressly set aside for such purpose. (Ord. 1361 § 1, 1977.)


9.46.360 Penalty for violation.

A. Any person who, within the city limits of Covina, violates any provision of this chapter, the conditions of any permit issued pursuant thereto, or any rule or regulation relating to parks and recreation areas is guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction thereof, he shall be punishable by:

1. A fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation;

2. A fine of not more than $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision of this chapter within one year;

3. A fine of not more than $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision of this chapter within one year.

B. A repetition or continuation of any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any order or direction of the director on successive days, constitutes a separate offense for each day during any portion of which such violation is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 1641 § 1, 1987.)


Chapter 9.48 CONDUCT IN PARKS1

Sections:

9.48.010    Definitions.

9.48.020    Compliance.

9.48.040    Deputy or authorized person.

9.48.050    Rules and regulations.

9.48.060    Enforcement authority.

9.48.070    Restrictions on games.

9.48.075    Bicycles, skates, skateboards prohibited where sign is posted.

9.48.076    Pedestrian right-of-way.

9.48.077    —

9.48.079    Reserved.

9.48.080    Golf prohibited.

9.48.085    Bounce houses prohibited.

9.48.086    Exemption.

9.48.087    —

9.48.089    Reserved.

9.48.090    Harmful objects.

9.48.100    Rubbish.

9.48.110    Shooting.

9.48.120    Firecrackers, etc.

9.48.130    Structure, flora, turf, etc.

9.48.135    Use of metal detectors at parks.

9.48.136    Metal detector permit.

9.48.137    —

9.48.139    Reserved.

9.48.140    Fires.

9.48.150    Disturbances.

9.48.155    Sound amplification.

9.48.156    Exemption.

9.48.157    Special sound permit.

9.48.158    —

9.48.159    Reserved.

9.48.160    Animals.

9.48.165    Dogs.

9.48.166    —

9.48.169    Reserved.

9.48.170    Changing clothes.

9.48.180    Nudity and disrobing.

9.48.190    Motor vehicles.

9.48.200    Solicitation.

9.48.210    Intoxication.

9.48.220    Alcoholic beverages, narcotics and dangerous drugs.

9.48.225    Smoking prohibited.

9.48.226    Disposal of cigars, cigarettes, pipes.

9.48.227    —

9.48.229    Reserved.

9.48.230    Overnight camping.

9.48.240    House trailers.

9.48.250    Obedience to park authorities.

9.48.260    Hours of use.

9.48.270    Liability.

9.48.280    Grazing.

9.48.290    Molesting animals.

9.48.300    Swimming.

9.48.310    Children visiting park waters.

9.48.320    Model airplanes, etc.

9.48.325    Signage and posting.

9.48.330    Penalty for violation.


9.48.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Alcoholic beverages” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

B. “Bicycle” means a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having one or more wheels.

C. “Director” means a person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities, and to whom all park or recreation personnel of such area are responsible, or other person authorized by him, pursuant to law, to act in his stead.

D. “Motor vehicle” means any multi-wheeled, treaded, or sled-type vehicle that is propelled by a motor or engine. “Motor vehicles” includes any commonly known as a “motorized recreation vehicle,” and any self-propelled vehicle that is presently defined by Sections 400 and 405 of the Vehicle Code of the state as a motorcycle or motor-driven vehicle.

E. “Narcotics and dangerous drugs” means those narcotics and drugs listed or defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state as now or hereafter amended.

F. “Park” means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city, owned, managed, used or controlled by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. “Park” shall include the entire site of the park, including, without limitation, all structures thereon, any parking lots, and any public sidewalk adjacent to the park site.

G. “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

H. “Roller skate” or “in-line skate” means any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels are attached and includes roller blades.

I. “Scooter” means any platform of any composition or size mounted between two or more wheels with an upright steering handle attached thereto.

J. “Smoke” or “smoking” means possessing, carrying, holding or burning of a cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any form of tobacco, weed, plant or any other similar combustible substance. “Smoke” or “smoking” also includes inhaling, exhaling or emitting the fumes of any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any form of tobacco, weed, plant, or any other similar combustible substance.

K. “Skateboard” means any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels are attached and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one or more persons standing or kneeling upon it and to which there is not affixed any seat or any other device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels. (Ord. 11-1995 § 1, 2011; Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.020 Compliance.

A person shall not enter, be or remain in a park unless he complies with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such park and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. A violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, in addition to any other penalty provided for in this chapter or by any other law, shall result in the person so violating being a trespasser ab initio, and the director, or person designated by him to act in his stead, or any peace officer may eject such person from the park. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.040 Deputy or authorized person.

Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the director or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a deputy of the public officer or other person so authorized, pursuant to law, by the director except as otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.050 Rules and regulations.

The council may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations governing conduct in, and the operation of, parks within the city. All city functions shall have priority use of all park facilities. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.060 Enforcement authority.

The director and chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.070 Restrictions on games.

No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as tackle football or hockey is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas specifically designated for such purpose by the director. (Ord. 11-1995 § 2, 2011; Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.075 Bicycles, skates, skateboards prohibited where sign is posted.

It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, in-line skates, roller skates, scooter, skateboard, or similar coaster device upon any park so long as such sign is posted so as to give reasonable notice of such prohibition.

It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, in-line skates, roller skates, scooter, skateboard, or similar coaster device upon any park’s walls, steps, stairways, railings, benches, access ramps, driveways or parking lots. (Ord. 11-1995 § 3, 2011.)


9.48.076 Pedestrian right-of-way.

Any person lawfully riding in, on, or by means of a bicycle, in-line skates, roller skates, scooter, skateboard, or similar coaster device shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. (Ord. 11-1995 § 3, 2011.)


9.48.077 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 3, 2011.)


9.48.078 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 3, 2011.)


9.48.079 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 3, 2011.)


9.48.080 Golf prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to drive, chip or pitch golf balls or to play the game of golf in any public park within the city. This section shall not apply to activities conducted and supervised by the parks and recreation department. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.085 Bounce houses prohibited.

Bounce houses, astro jumps, jumpers, moonwalks or other similar, temporary play structures designed to be inflated are prohibited in all parks. (Ord. 11-1995 § 4, 2011.)


9.48.086 Exemption.

City-sponsored events and activities conducted on any park are exempt from the prohibition of CMC 9.48.085. (Ord. 11-1995 § 4, 2011.)


9.48.087 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 4, 2011.)


9.48.088 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 4, 2011.)


9.48.089 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 4, 2011.)


9.48.090 Harmful objects.

A person shall not place, throw, leave, keep or maintain any object in such a manner or in such a place that any person or animal may be injured or any structure or vehicle may be damaged thereby. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.100 Rubbish.

A person shall not throw, place or dispose of any garbage, refuse, wastepaper, bottles, or cans in any place in a park other than into a garbage can or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.110 Shooting.

A person shall not discharge or shoot any firearms, air gun, slingshot, or bow and arrow in any park except at ranges designated for such purpose by the director. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.120 Firecrackers, etc.

A person shall not take or transport into any park, or have in his possession therein, or fire or discharge therein, any firecracker, rocket, torpedo, fireworks, or other explosive substance unless he first obtains a permit to do so from the city and complies with all other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.130 Structure, flora, turf, etc.

Except as otherwise provided in CMC 9.48.135, a person, other than a duly authorized park employee, approved landscape contractor, or others as authorized by the director in the performance of his duties, shall not do the following:

A. Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any tree, plant, shrub, grass, fruit, or flower or any portion thereof growing in any park;

B. Remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any park;

C. Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in any park or any portion thereof; or mark or place thereon or on any portion thereof any mark, writing, or printing; or attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device. (Ord. 11-1995 § 5, 2011; Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.135 Use of metal detectors at parks.

The use of metal detector devices is permitted in any park under the following conditions:

A. A person wishing to use a metal detector device must apply for and obtain a permit from the director prior to using a metal detector in any park.

B. Metal detectors are limited to portable, hand-held devices only. Digging equipment is limited to small hand tools; all motorized digging devices are prohibited.

C. Any digging may be done only to a maximum depth of three inches. Any area disturbed by digging must be restored as nearly as possible to its original condition immediately before the person leaves the area.

D. A person using a metal detector is required to use a trash apron to store all materials found. The collector may retain articles found, subject to subsection (E) of this section. Any material the person does not wish to retain shall be placed in an approved waste receptacle. Any material that may pose a safety hazard to other park users shall be reported to the director.

E. No person shall collect, excavate, remove, injure, disfigure, deface, destroy or appropriate any object of archaeological, or historical interest or value except with written permission of the director. (Ord. 11-1995 § 6, 2011.)


9.48.136 Metal detector permit.

The director is hereby authorized to and shall establish procedures for the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits for the use of metal detector devices in any park. (Ord. 11-1995 § 6, 2011.)


9.48.137 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 6, 2011.)


9.48.138 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 6, 2011.)


9.48.139 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 6, 2011.)


9.48.140 Fires.

A person shall not light or maintain any fire in any park other than in a stove area circle, or area designated for such purpose, except upon written authorization from the city. All fires lighted or maintained pursuant to this section shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Covina fire department. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.150 Disturbances.

A person shall not disturb the peace and quiet of any park by any of the following:

A. Unduly loud or unusual noise; or

B. Tooting, blowing, or sounding any siren, horn, signal, or noise-making device; or

C. Any obscene, violent, or riotous conduct; or

D. The use of any vulgar, profane, or indecent language. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.155 Sound amplification.

It is unlawful for any person to use sound amplifiers, speakers or similar devices in any park in such a manner that the sound is amplified so as to be audible at a distance of 150 feet or more, unless a special sound permit is obtained from the director. (Ord. 11-1995 § 7, 2011.)


9.48.156 Exemption.

City-sponsored events and activities conducted on any park are exempt from the prohibition of CMC 9.48.155; however, the city shall reasonably address noise impacts at city-sponsored events. (Ord. 11-1995 § 7, 2011.)


9.48.157 Special sound permit.

The director is hereby authorized to and shall establish procedures for the issuance, suspension, and revocation of special sound permits for the use of sound amplifiers, speakers or similar devices in any park. Such procedures shall be established and implemented on a content neutral basis. (Ord. 11-1995 § 7, 2011.)


9.48.158 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 7, 2011.)


9.48.159 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 7, 2011.)


9.48.160 Animals.

A person shall not bring into any park any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, cat, or other animal of any kind except as hereafter specifically provided or as otherwise permitted by the director. (Ord. 11-1995 § 10, 2011; Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.165 Dogs.

Dogs are allowed in all city parks subject to the following rules and regulations:

A. All dogs must be securely restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, of sufficient strength to prevent the escape of such dog at all times.

B. All dogs must be at least four months of age, vaccinated for rabies, currently licensed by the city’s animal control authority and wear a collar with current tags while in the park.

C. All dogs must be in the care, custody and control of a person at least 18 years old. Any person under 18 years of age must be accompanied by and be under the direct supervision of an adult to enter the park with the on-leash dog. All dogs must be under the voice control of their caretakers at all times. Dogs shall not be left unattended at any time.

D. No adult may have more than two dogs in the park at any time.

E. Dogs are not permitted in or around child play areas, at organized sporting events or at city-sponsored events and activities.

F. Any person having care, custody or control of a dog in the park shall quiet or remove the dog if the dog barks excessively.

G. Any person having care, custody, or control of a dog in the park shall promptly remove and properly dispose of any waste deposited by such dog. The dog owner or caretaker shall carry a suitable container, bag, or instrument for the removal and disposal of dog feces.

H. Dogs shall not interfere with, bother or harass park users, groups, or other animals or wildlife.

I. No dog that is sick, in heat, injured or which displays aggressive behavior toward other dogs or humans is permitted in any park.

J. If signs of aggression occur, the dog must be removed from the park immediately. It shall be the dog owner or caretaker’s responsibility for any of the dog’s actions, even if the dog was provoked by another animal or another person. The dog owner or caretaker shall immediately remove the dog from the park if the dog bites or attempts to bite or attack any person or dog.

K. Any dog which has been repeatedly aggressive or attempted to attack or bite another dog or a person may be barred from any park by notice and order of the city, in its discretion.

L. The presence of a dog in the park shall constitute implied consent of the dog’s owner or any person having the care, custody or control of the dog, to strictly follow the rules of this section and shall constitute a waiver of liability to the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, an assumption of all risks, an agreement and undertaking to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, and employees, for any injury or damage to persons or property during any time that the dog is in the park. (Ord. 11-1995 § 11, 2011.)


9.48.166 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 11, 2011.)


9.48.167 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 11, 2011.)


9.48.168 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 11, 2011.)


9.48.169 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 11, 2011.)


9.48.170 Changing clothes.

A person shall not change clothes or disrobe in any park except in that portion of a comfort station or other facility, if any, which is designated for such purpose. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.180 Nudity and disrobing.

No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk, change clothes, disrobe, or be in any park in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view, except in those portions of a comfort station, if any, expressly set aside for such purpose. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.190 Motor vehicles.

A person shall not bring to or operate in any park any motor vehicle except at such times and at such places as permitted by the director in written regulations or permits issued by him from time to time, and any such operation of a motor vehicle shall be in accordance with the conditions contained in such regulation or permit. A person shall not park any motor vehicle in the park, except in areas designated by the director for parking. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.200 Solicitation.

A person shall not solicit in any manner or for any purpose or sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise therein except as follows:

A. Pursuant to a concession or other agreement authorized by the city council; and

B. When found by the director to be consistent with the policies of the parks and recreation department or to promote the program of the department, under conditions prescribed by him. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.210 Intoxication.

A person shall not enter, remain in, or be in any park while he is under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or narcotic or dangerous drug. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.220 Alcoholic beverages, narcotics and dangerous drugs.

A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away, or consuming any alcoholic beverage. A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away, or consuming any narcotics or dangerous drugs. (Ord. 11-1995 § 12, 2011; Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.225 Smoking prohibited.

Smoking is hereby prohibited in all public parks within the city limits of the city of Covina. (Ord. 11-1995 § 13, 2011.)


9.48.226 Disposal of cigars, cigarettes, pipes.

No person shall dispose of lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes, or cigar or cigarette butts, or any other tobacco-related waste in or upon any public park. (Ord. 11-1995 § 13, 2011.)


9.48.227 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 13, 2011.)


9.48.228 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 13, 2011.)


9.48.229 Reserved.

(Ord. 11-1995 § 13, 2011.)


9.48.230 Overnight camping.

A person shall not camp or sleep overnight in any park, except when authorized by the director. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.240 House trailers.

A person shall not bring a house trailer or other recreation travel-trailer-type vehicle which can be used for overnight sleeping purposes into any park, except when authorized by the director. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.250 Obedience to park authorities.

No person in a park shall:

A. Fail to obey the directions of the director or other park attendants to cease and desist from any activities prohibited by this chapter, or by rules and regulations adopted pursuant to CMC 9.48.050;

B. Fail to leave any park premises when directed to do so by the director or other park or recreation personnel because of such violation; or

C. Return to the park on the same calendar day after having complied with a direction to leave the park. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.260 Hours of use.

It is unlawful for any person to remain, stay or loiter in any park, other than Covina, Hollenbeck and Kelby Parks, or building therein, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, and, as to Covina, Hollenbeck and Kelby Parks between the hours of 10:30 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. the following day, without special permission from the director of parks and recreation, or his authorized representative. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.270 Liability.

A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this chapter does so at his own risk without liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees, and agents for death or injury to persons or damage to property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.280 Grazing.

A person shall not permit any cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine or any domestic animal to graze in the park, except on property designated for such purposes. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.290 Molesting animals.

A person shall not molest, hunt, disturb, injure, shoot at, take, net, poison, wound, harm, kill, or remove from the park or riding and hiking trail any kind of animal except as follows:

A. When necessary to avoid bodily harm;

B. When fishing is permitted by the director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.300 Swimming.

A person shall not swim in any park waters except at places and times designated by the director. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.310 Children visiting park waters.

No parent or guardian or any person having the custody of any child under the age of eight years shall cause, permit or allow such child to enter or visit any park having a body of water within the boundaries of such park, unless such child is accompanied by a person of not less than 16 years of age. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.320 Model airplanes, etc.

A person shall not operate model airplanes, boats, or crafts except in areas designated for such use and subject to all rules and regulations contained in such written permission. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)


9.48.325 Signage and posting.

In order to provide reasonable notice to the public, the director shall post signs in one or more conspicuous and visible area(s) of any park, specifying the requirements of CMC 9.48.070, 9.48.075, 9.48.076, 9.48.085, 9.48.130, 9.48.135, 9.48.155, 9.48.220, 9.48.225, 9.48.226 and other prohibited activities described in this chapter. The signs required pursuant to this section shall cite the respective code section being invoked and shall state that any person failing to comply with such code section shall be subject to citation or other applicable enforcement authority available to the city. The manner of such posting, including the wording, size, color, design and place of posting, shall be determined by the director. (Ord. 11-1995 § 14, 2011.)


9.48.330 Penalty for violation.

A. Any person who, within the city limits, violates any provision of this chapter, the conditions of any permit issued pursuant thereto, or any rule or regulation relating to parks and recreation areas, is guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction thereof, he shall be punished by:

1. A fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation;

2. A fine of not more than $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision of this chapter within one year;

3. A fine of not more than $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision of this chapter within one year.

B. A repetition or continuation of any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any order or direction of the director on successive days, constitute a separate offense for each day during any portion of which such violation is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 92-1745 § 1, 1992.)1

Prior history: 1964 Code § 17.34; Ords. 1501, 1506, 1588, 1641, 1669 and 1677. 


Chapter 9.50 USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:

9.50.010    Prohibited – Exception.

9.50.020    Prohibited at spectator events.

9.50.030    Consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain locations.

9.50.040    Enforcement of provisions.

9.50.050    Exemptions to chapter applicability.


9.50.010 Prohibited – Exception.

It is unlawful for any person to use, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage in any public building within the city. “Public building,” for the purpose of this section, means any building owned or leased by the city.

This prohibition shall not apply to those rooms or areas within public buildings designated by the city council as appropriate for the consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 1327 § 1, 1976.)


9.50.020 Prohibited at spectator events.

It is unlawful for any person to use, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage in any city park where a spectator event is held during the course of such an event. “Spectator event,” for the purpose of this section, means any athletic or sports event scheduled or authorized by the city where spectators of such event are provided fixed seats from which to observe the event. Park areas to which this prohibition applies shall be appropriately posted. (Ord. 1327 § 1, 1976.)


9.50.030 Consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain locations.

A. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or have upon his person or in his personal possession any open container of any alcoholic beverage upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, parkway or alley way.

B. No person shall, while in or on any parking lot open to the public, consume any alcoholic beverage or have upon his person or in his personal possession any open container of any alcoholic beverage.

C.1. The term “parking lot open to the public,” as used in this section, means any outdoor lot used for the parking of motor vehicles and includes publicly owned parking lots open to members of the public generally and private parking lots open to members of the public or to visitors or to patrons of a particular business or entertainment establishment.

2. The term “alcoholic beverage,” as used in this section, includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wines, beer, ale and every liquid containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume.

3. The term “open container,” as used in this section, includes any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken or the contents of which have been partially removed. (Ord. 1523 § 1, 1982; Ord. 1359 § 1, 1977.)


9.50.040 Enforcement of provisions.

Violation of any of the provisions set out in CMC 9.50.030 shall be prosecuted as an infraction as provided for in Section 19 of the California Penal Code. Any person convicted of three or more infractions of this chapter shall be subject to misdemeanor prosecution upon further violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1523 § 2, 1982.)


9.50.050 Exemptions to chapter applicability.

This chapter shall not apply to amusements, exhibitions, meetings and shows which have applied for and received a city permit for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages (CMC 5.08.160). (Ord. 1523 § 3, 1982.)


Chapter 9.52 AUTOMATIC CALLING DEVICES

Sections:

9.52.010    Prohibitions.


9.52.010 Prohibitions.

No person, except a public utility engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities, shall use or operate, or attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used and operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate an intrastate call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public telephone company, without the prior written consent of such subscriber. “Telephone number” includes any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect with the subscriber to a primary number when such primary telephone number is in use.

The city council finds and determines that, in addition to the penal sanctions provided for violations of this code, the violation of this section is a public nuisance subject to civil abatement and the city may bring such legal action as is necessary to secure the removal of such equipment. (1964 Code § 17.37.)


Chapter 9.54 PROHIBITED CONDUCT

Sections:

9.54.010    Disorderly conduct.

9.54.020    Loitering.

9.54.030    Disturbing the peace prohibited.


9.54.010 Disorderly conduct.

No person shall engage in any disorderly or boisterous conduct; or disturb the peace by assaulting, striking or fighting; or be found in public in an intoxicated or drunken condition upon any premises within the city; or expose his person or any part thereof in a lewd and offensive manner in any place in the city where there are other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; or to make in any place, or suffer to be made on his premises or upon premises under his control, any disorder or tumult, to the disturbance of the public peace. (Ord. 1695 § 1, 1989.)


9.54.020 Loitering.

No person shall loiter or stand or sit in or at the entrance of any hall, theater, church, private or public parking area which is open to the public, or place of public assemblage so as to in any manner obstruct such entrance. No person shall loiter or stand outside of a motor vehicle or in a private or public parking area which is open to the public between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the next morning. No person shall urinate or defecate in any public place which is not designed for such act, whether or not in public view. (Ord. 1695 § 1, 1989.)


9.54.030 Disturbing the peace prohibited.

Every person who shall, in the frequented streets of the city, pursue any amusements calculated to impede travel, or frighten animals or persons, or injure or endanger any property or person, or who shall be found loitering or strolling about in a manner tending to produce disturbance, mischief or crime, or who shall, by loud noise or offensive behavior, disturb the peace or quiet of any community, assembly, meeting or congregation, or who shall, by throwing stones or missiles or other objects, or by striking or threatening to assault, disturb or annoy any person, or who shall enter or remain upon any parking lot, shopping center property, drive-in property, or any other place open to the public, without the implied or express consent of the owner, his agent or person in lawful possession thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1695 § 1, 1989.)


Chapter 9.56 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 17-06)


Chapter 9.58 HOST OBLIGATIONS TO PROTECT MINORS FROM ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT GATHERINGS

Sections:

9.58.010    Definitions.

9.58.020    Host obligations.

9.58.030    Violation – Penalty.

9.58.040    Collection of enforcement costs.


9.58.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth in this section:

A. “Alcohol” shall have the same meaning as in California Business and Professions Code Section 23003, as it may be amended from time to time, or any successor section.

B. “Alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as in California Business and Professions Code Section 23004, as it may be amended from time to time, or any successor section.

C. “Controlled substance” shall mean any controlled substance listed in the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.) or the federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), as they may be amended from time to time.

D. “Gathering” means a group of two or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity at a residence or on other public or private property.

E. “Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

F. “Harmful substances” shall include all of the following, as defined in this chapter: alcohol, alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, inhalant, marijuana and tobacco products.

G. “Inhalant” includes but is not limited to any aerosol or aerosol spray, any volatile solvent including but not limited to toluene or any substance or material containing toluene, any gas including but not limited to nitrous oxide or any substance containing nitrous oxide, nitrites (commonly known as “poppers,” “snappers,” or “whippets”), and any other chemical substance or chemical compound that is inhaled for the purpose of becoming intoxicated.

H. “Marijuana” shall have the same meaning as in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018 or United States Code, Title 21, Section 802, as they may be amended from time to time, or any successor sections.

I. “Minor” means any person under 21 years of age for purposes of alcohol, alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, inhalants and marijuana, and under the age of 18 years of age for purposes of tobacco products.

J. “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.

K. “Premises” means any residence or other private property, individual unit or place, including any commercial or business premises.

L. “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

M. “Tobacco products” shall have the same meaning as in Chapter 17.74 CMC. (Ord. 13-2026 § 2, 2013.)


9.58.020 Host obligations.

A. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, or host a gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public place, or any other premises under his or her control where any harmful substances have been consumed by a minor, if such person either knows or reasonably should know that a minor has consumed any harmful substances.

B. Any person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering shall be rebuttably presumed to have actual or constructive knowledge that minors have consumed harmful substances if such person is present at the premises of the gathering at the time any minor consumes a harmful substance, or if that person has not taken all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the consumption of harmful substances by minors, as set forth in subsection (E) of this section.

C. This section shall not apply to gatherings where religious services and/or activities protected by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution are exercised, nor shall the prohibition apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or guardian.

D. This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control.

E. It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering at his or her place of residence, other private property, public place, or any other premises under his or her control, where minors will be present, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of harmful substances by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps shall include, at a minimum, the following: (1) preventing any access by minors to any harmful substances at the gathering; (2) controlling access to alcoholic beverages and tobacco products at the gathering; (3) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products at the gathering to an amount which can be monitored and its access controlled effectively; (4) verifying the age of persons who consume alcoholic beverages or tobacco products at the gathering by inspecting driver’s licenses or other government-issued identification cards; (5) prohibiting the use of controlled substances and marijuana at the gathering; (6) prohibiting the defined use of inhalants at the gathering (e.g., inhaled for the purpose of becoming intoxicated); and (7) monitoring the activities of all persons at the gathering, including minors.

F. A person who hosts a gathering shall not be in violation of this chapter if he or she, before any other person makes a complaint to the Covina police department or other law enforcement agency, seeks assistance from the Covina police department or other law enforcement agency to either: (1) remove any person who refuses to abide by the host’s rules or requirements with respect to his or her performance of the duties imposed by this chapter; or (2) terminate the gathering because the host has been unable to prevent minors from consuming harmful substances, despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so. (Ord. 13-2026 § 2, 2013.)


9.58.030 Violation – Penalty.

A. Criminal violations of this chapter shall be misdemeanors and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 CMC.

B. Amounts of fines and/or penalties for violations of this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council.

C. Nothing in this chapter in any way limits any other remedy that may be available to the city, or any penalty that may be imposed by the city. (Ord. 13-2026 § 2, 2013.)


9.58.040 Collection of enforcement costs.

Every violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and abated by the city. The city may seek reimbursement for actual costs associated with the enforcement of this chapter pursuant to Chapters 1.28 and 8.40 CMC, as well as any other applicable law. (Ord. 13-2026 § 2, 2013.)


Chapter 9.60 POSTING AND DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING1

Sections:

9.60.010    Posting prohibited in certain places.

9.60.020    Flammable material – Posting prohibited.

9.60.030    Handbill distribution prohibited – Exception.


9.60.010 Posting prohibited in certain places.

No person shall post, either by means of nails, paste, or in any other manner, any cloth, tin, paper or other posters or advertising matter on any sidewalk, curb or tree or any public property in any public street, avenue or place in the city. (1964 Code § 3.1.)


9.60.020 Flammable material – Posting prohibited.

It is unlawful to post any bill or advertisement made of flammable material on any billboard, building, post or pole made of wood or flammable material within the city. (1964 Code § 3.2.)


9.60.030 Handbill distribution prohibited – Exception.

It is unlawful for any person to distribute or throw upon any street, alley or public place or upon any private yard, lawn, driveway, sidewalks, porch or steps of any residence or upon or in any part of any structure, automobile or other vehicle or upon any vacant property in the city any advertising sample, handbill, dodger, circular, booklet or other notice of commercial advertising, whether or not enclosed in or attached to a newspaper; provided, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the distribution and delivery of any newspaper which is capable of being entered as second-class matter under the provisions of the United States Post Office Regulation of March 3, 1879, and other United States statutes. (1964 Code § 3.3.)1

For statutory provisions regarding city regulation of outdoor advertising, see Government Code § 38774. 


Chapter 9.65 PREVENTION AND REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI

Sections:

9.65.010    Definitions.

9.65.020    Graffiti prohibited.

9.65.030    Possession of graffiti implement.

9.65.040    Removal policy.

9.65.050    Authorization to remove.

9.65.060    Notice to abate graffiti.

9.65.070    Recovery of costs.

9.65.080    Failure to remove graffiti upon notice.

9.65.090    Alternative actions.

9.65.100    Sale of graffiti implements.

9.65.110    Reward for information.

9.65.120    Parental responsibility.

9.65.130    Penalty for violation of chapter.

9.65.140    Community service.

9.65.150    Suspension or delay of driving privileges.

9.65.155    Graffiti resistant paints and coatings.

9.65.160    Severability.

9.65.170    Remedies cumulative.

9.65.180    Transmittal/notification of ordinance.

9.65.195    Policy of cost recovery.


9.65.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning was intended:

“Aerosol container” means any aerosol-based container, bottle, spray device or other mechanism, six ounces or less which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, ink, dye or other similar substance.

“Bona fide evidence of majority and identity” means any document evidencing the age and identity of an individual which has been issued by a federal, state or local government entity, and includes, but is not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued by a member of the armed forces.

“City” means the city of Covina, California.

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Covina or his or her designee.

“Felt tip marker” means any indelible marker, pen or similar implement which contains a fluid which is not soluble in water and has a flat, pointed or angled tip which at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth inch.

“Graffiti” means the unauthorized application of paint, ink, chalk, dye or the use of any other instrument capable of defacing, damaging, or destroying public and private buildings, structures, or any portion thereof.

“Graffiti implement” means an aerosol container, a felt tip marker, paint stick, etching instrument, or any other device containing paint, ink, chalk, polish, dye or similar substance which when used or applied is capable of defacing glass, metal, plastic, stone, concrete or wood.

“Paint stick or graffiti stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance that is not water soluble and is capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth inch in width. (Ord. 05-1926 § 1, 2005; Ord. 94-1763 § 1, 1994; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.020 Graffiti prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any public or privately owned building, fence, window, wall, structure, or trash receptacle, located on public or privately owned real property within the city.

B. The exterior of all privately owned buildings, fences, windows, walls, structures and trash receptacles shall be free from graffiti when such graffiti is visible from a public street, alley, or right-of-way.

C. It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession of a lot or parcel of land within the city to (1) permit graffiti to remain upon such lot or parcel of land, or (2) to maintain any building, fence, window, wall, structure or trash receptacle affixed to such lot or parcel of land with graffiti on such building, fence, window, wall, structure, trash receptacle or any portion thereof, for a period in excess of 72 hours following service by the city of a notice to abate graffiti. Each day the graffiti is maintained beyond the initial 72-hour period constitutes a separate offense and is subject to the penalties set forth in CMC 9.65.080. (Ord. 05-1926 § 2, 2005; Ord. 94-1763 § 2, 1994; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.030 Possession of graffiti implement.

No person under the age of 18 years and not in the presence of a parent or legal guardian shall have in his or her possession a graffiti implement, as defined by this chapter, while in any public place or public right-of-way in the city unless necessary in order to participate in any city sponsored function. This section shall not apply to authorized employees of the city nor shall it apply to the authorized agents or contractors under contract with the city. (Ord. 94-1763 § 3, 1994; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.040 Removal policy.

The city manager or his designee shall develop a graffiti removal program to assist property owners in the expeditious removal of graffiti from their property. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall be authorized to recover its costs incurred in the removal of graffiti from private property if:

A. The removal of graffiti or other inscribed material from privately owned real property with the prior written consent of the owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession exceeds three requests per privately owned real property during one calendar year;

B. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city manager or his designee from waiving the provisions of subsection (A) of this section if it can be determined that the affected property owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession has demonstrated a conscientious effort to prevent graffiti or other inscribed material from being affixed to their property as evidenced by, but not limited to, the installation of security devices such as surveillance cameras, security lighting, sprinklers linked to motion sensors, protective or covering landscaping; graffiti resistant building materials; or the application of graffiti resistant paint or coatings;

C. The city is required to abate graffiti or other inscribed material from privately owned real property, in accordance with CMC 9.65.050(B)(3) or (B)(4);

D. Notwithstanding giving his or her written consent to removal of graffiti or other inscribed material, costs shall be recoverable from a private property owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession that has persuaded, allowed or encouraged the affixing of graffiti or other inscribed material upon the subject private property. (Ord. 05-1926 § 3, 2005; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.050 Authorization to remove.

Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:

A. Wherever graffiti or other inscribed material as defined in this chapter is so located on public or privately owned property within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any street, alley or public right-of-way in the city, the city manager is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material upon the following conditions:

1. In removing the graffiti or other inscribed material, the painting or repair of a more extensive area shall not be encouraged.

2. Where a building, fence, wall, window, structure or trash receptacle is owned by a public entity other than this city, the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material may be authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the building, fence, wall, window, structure or trash receptacle and such entity executes a release and waiver, approved as to form by the city attorney, and agrees to an assumption of costs incurred by the city for the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material.

3. Where a building, fence, wall, window, structure or trash receptacle is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material may be authorized in accordance with subsection (B) of this section.

B. Graffiti which is located on privately owned buildings, fences, walls, windows, structures or trash receptacles on privately owned real property within the city and which can be viewed by a person utilizing any street, alley or public right-of-way within the city may be removed by the city under the following circumstances:

1. The city may immediately enter upon private property and remove graffiti or other inscribed material from privately owned buildings, fences, walls, windows, structures or trash receptacles; provided, that the city shall have secured written advance consent of the owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession of the private property to enter upon the private property for purposes of graffiti removal, and the owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession has executed a written release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney in conjunction with said advance written consent.

2. The city may enter upon private property and remove graffiti or other inscribed material from privately owned buildings, fences, walls, windows, structures or trash receptacles; provided, that the city shall have subsequently secured the written consent of the owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession of the private property to enter upon private property for purposes of graffiti removal, and the owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession has executed a written release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney in conjunction with said written consent.

3. Where either (a) the owner, lessee, legal occupant or other person having present legal possession refuses to consent to its removal, or (b) the owner’s, lessee’s, or legal occupant’s written consent cannot otherwise be obtained; the city may declare graffiti or other inscribed material upon privately owned buildings, fences, walls, windows, structures or trash receptacles to be a public nuisance and may abate said graffiti or other inscribed material after providing notice to the owner in accordance with CMC 9.65.060.

4. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city may immediately enter upon private property and remove graffiti or other inscribed material from privately owned buildings, fences, walls, windows, structures or trash receptacles upon finding that said graffiti or other inscribed material constitutes an immediate hazard to public health and safety that must be abated without delay. Under such circumstances, the city shall provide written notice of emergency abatement to the owner as soon as practicable after the abatement is concluded. The city may recover its costs of emergency abatement in accordance with those procedures set forth in CMC 9.65.070. (Ord. 05-1926 § 4, 2005; Ord. 94-1763 § 4, 1994; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.060 Notice to abate graffiti.

Whenever the city manager determines that graffiti is being maintained upon the premises within the city in violation of CMC 9.65.020, the city manager shall send, by registered or certified mail, or post, at a conspicuous place on the premises where the graffiti is located, written notice to the owner, and to any lessee, occupant or other person having present possession of a lot or parcel of land within the city that the graffiti must be removed within 72 hours from the date of service of the notice. The notice shall be entitled “Notice to Abate Graffiti” in letters not less than one inch in height, and shall cite this chapter as authority for such abatement. The notice shall contain a general description of the property on which the graffiti is located.

A. The notice shall be on city letterhead in substantially the following form:

NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that under the provisions of Section 9.65.020 of Covina Municipal Code Chapter 9.65 you are required at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as _____________, Covina, California, which is visible to public view, within seventy-two (72) hours after the date of service of this notice. The graffiti is visible to public view and therefore constitutes a public nuisance. If you fail to comply with this order, the City or its contractor will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance. The cost of the abatement by the City or its contractor will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matter are hereby notified to submit an appeal to the Office of the City Manager within seventy-two (72) hours from the date of this notice.

At the conclusion of this seventy-two (72) hour period the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti on your property at your expense without further notice.

B. If an appeal has been made to the office of the city manager within 72 hours from the date of the notice to abate graffiti, the city manager, or his designee, shall hold an administrative hearing on the appeal. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final and conclusive.

C. If an appeal has not been submitted as set forth in subsection (B) of this section, or if the appeal has been denied following an administrative hearing, and if the private property owner fails to remove or fails to cause the graffiti to be removed by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as approved by the city manager, then the city manager shall cause the graffiti to be abated as a public nuisance by the city or its contractor, and the city or its contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purpose. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.070 Recovery of costs.

Should the city manager be required to abate the graffiti as a public nuisance as set forth in CMC 9.65.060(C), the city shall recover, pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773, the costs of abatement through the assessment of a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained.

A. Prior to the recordation of a lien against property for the recovery of abatement and related administrative costs, the city, in accordance with Sections 38773.1 or 38773.5 of the California Government Code, shall provide written notification, by registered or certified mail, to the property owner that a lien will be assessed against their property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid. The notice of lien shall for purposes of this chapter be in the form substantially as follows:

    NOTICE OF LIEN

    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773 and the authority of Chapter 9.65 of the Covina Municipal Code, the City Manager of the City of Covina did on or about the _______ day of _________, 20___ cause the removal of graffiti at the premises hereinafter described in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of Covina did on the ______ day of _______, 20___ assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of Covina does hereby claim a lien for such costs of abatement in the amount of said assessment to wit: the sum of ____________________ dollars; and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.

The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Covina, County of Los Angeles, State of California and particularly described as follows: ______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________.

DATED this ________ day of ________________, 20___.

________________________________ City Clerk, City of Covina.

B. Between the first and the fifteenth day of July of each year, the city manager shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the city a notice that any person affected or aggrieved by any act or determination of the city in connection with the provisions of this section may appeal to the city council. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the office of the city clerk not later than the fifteenth day of June. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council after the fifteenth day of July, or from time to time thereafter as may be determined by the council, the city council shall hear and render a decision upon each appeal, and the determination of the council shall be final and conclusive. In the event any determination of the city is modified by determination of the city council or any assessment changed or corrected, the city manager shall cause the correction to be made upon the record showing the assessment.

C. At the expiration of the time for appeal, or upon the determination by the city council of all appeals so filed, and in compliance with the requirements of any determination so made, the city manager shall deliver to the county auditor of the county of Los Angeles an abstract of each lot or parcel of land within the city affected by this section and the amount of each such charge to be placed upon the assessment roll against the respective parcel. Thereafter, the charges shall be of the same character and effect, subject to the same penalties, and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as city taxes. The provision of this section shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land if the charge against it has been paid prior to the delivery of the abstract to the county auditor. (Ord. 05-1926 § 5, 2005; Ord. 94-1763 § 5, 1994; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.080 Failure to remove graffiti upon notice.

In addition to any costs incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti from private property, failure to voluntarily abate graffiti after notification shall result in the following penalties:

A. The failure of any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to remove graffiti within the prescribed 72-hour period as set forth in CMC 9.65.020 constitutes an infraction and is punishable by a fine of $100.00 upon first conviction thereof.

B. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating CMC 9.65.020 for a second time shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine of $250.00.

C. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating CMC 9.65.020 for a third time or any subsequent number of times shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00.

D. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation previously convicted three times under this section, violating the provisions of CMC 9.65.020, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in CMC 9.65.130(A). (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.090 Alternative actions.

The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through a civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner available to the city under provisions of applicable ordinance or state law. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.100 Sale of graffiti implements.

A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or give any graffiti implement, as defined by this chapter, to any individual under the age of 18 years, who is not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity.

B. Any person, firm or corporation offering for sale to the public any graffiti implement, as defined by this chapter, shall keep, store and maintain such material in a place that is locked and secure, or otherwise inaccessible except by special request.

C. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the retail sale of any graffiti implement, as defined by this chapter, must display at a conspicuous location a legible sign measuring not less than 12 inches by 12 inches with letters at least one-half inch in height which states:

Any person who maliciously defaces real property is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful, pursuant to Section 594.1 of the California Penal Code, for any person, firm, or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, to sell or give or in any way furnish to another person who is under the age of 18 years any aerosol container containing six ounces or more of paint, without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity.

E. Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in CMC 9.65.130. (Ord. 94-1763 § 6, 1994; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.110 Reward for information.

The city council may, by resolution, offer and pay a reward for information leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person who places graffiti or other inscribed material as defined herein upon public or privately owned structures within the city. In addition to any fines levied by the city for violation of this chapter, any person who has damaged property by inscribing graffiti on public or private property shall be liable for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this chapter and Section 53069.5 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.120 Parental responsibility.

Pursuant to Section 1714(b) of the California Civil Code, where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of civil damages resulting from the misconduct of the minor in an amount not to exceed $25,000 for each such offense. (Ord. 05-1926 § 6, 2005; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.130 Penalty for violation of chapter.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.

A. Except as provided in CMC 9.65.080, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of its requirements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter.

B. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in subsection (A) of this section, any person who maliciously defaces, damages or destroys property with a graffiti implement is guilty of vandalism, pursuant to Section 594 of the California Penal Code, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison or in a county jail for a period not to exceed one year, or by a fine of $5,000, but no more than $50,000, depending upon the severity and the amount of defacement, damage or destruction to property, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.140 Community service.

A. Upon conviction of any person for violation of CMC 9.65.020, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the city shall petition the sentencing court to impose community service time, pursuant to Section 640.6 of the California Penal Code. The sentencing court may require the performance of community service within the city in addition to any monetary penalties imposed. In the event the sentencing court approves community service, the city shall request any adult or emancipated minor convicted of vandalism, as defined by Section 594(a)(1) of the California Penal Code, to: (1) complete a minimum of 48 hours, but not more than 200 hours, of community services, over a period of 180 calendar days and during any time other than hours of school attendance or employment, cleaning up, removing and repairing property damaged by graffiti for the first conviction; and (2) complete 96 hours, but no more than 400 hours, of community services, over a period of one-three hundred fifty calendar days and during any time other than hours of school attendance or employment, cleaning up, removing, and repairing property damaged by graffiti for each subsequent conviction.

B. Any person who is under the age of 18 when he or she violates any provision of this chapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, and is found to be a person described in Section 602 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of vandalism, may be required to perform community service time pursuant to Section 728 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code. For any minor adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the city will petition the juvenile court and the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed by the city, require the unemancipated minor to provide the necessary labor to clean up, repair, or replace defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or otherwise make restitution to the property owner.

C. If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating any provision of this chapter or is otherwise unable to make restitution for damages, the minor’s parent or legal guardian shall be liable for payment of the fine or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make restitution, the sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or community service time by the parent or legal guardian upon finding of good cause. If the sentencing court waives payment of the fine by the parent or legal guardian, the city shall petition the sentencing court, and the court, at the court’s option, may order the parent or legal guardian to provide the necessary labor, equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor adjudicated guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, to clean up, repair, or replace property damaged by the unemancipated minor. (Ord. 05-1926 § 7, 2005; Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.150 Suspension or delay of driving privileges.

For each conviction of a person aged 13 to 21 for violation of CMC 9.65.020, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the city shall petition the sentencing court to suspend driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.155 Graffiti resistant paints and coatings.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, all owners, lessees, legal occupants, or persons in legal control of real property within the city shall, as a condition to the issuance of any land use entitlement (including, but not limited to, variances, conditional use permits or site plan reviews), building permit or other city approval, apply graffiti resistant paints, coverings, or coatings to any newly constructed or reconstructed buildings, fences, walls, windows, structures or trash receptacles, or portions thereof, which are visible from a public street, alley or right-of-way, upon those reasonable conditions that may be prescribed by the city. (Ord. 05-1926 § 8, 2005.)


9.65.160 Severability.

The city council declares that, should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this chapter be rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences, and words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.170 Remedies cumulative.

The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of applicable ordinances of the city and the laws of the state of California. All provisions of the Los Angeles County Code, as heretofore adopted by the city of Covina, which are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are repealed. (Ord. 93-1752 § 2, 1993.)


9.65.180 Transmittal/notification of ordinance.

The finance department, in cooperation with the police department, will use its best efforts to identify businesses in the city which may offer for sale to the public aerosol spray paint containers, writing instruments and/or glass etching tools, and cause a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be transmitted to such persons and businesses by first-class United States mail at the earliest feasible date. (Ord. 94-1763 § 7, 1994.)


9.65.195 Policy of cost recovery.

A. It shall be the policy of the city to recover all allowable costs for removal and repair due to vandalism and/or graffiti from those who commit the act(s) and/or from their parents or guardians.

B. It shall also be the policy of the city to seek to have imposed all available penalties upon those persons who deface property in the city. (Ord. 94-1763 § 8, 1994.)


Chapter 9.72 CURFEW AND TRUANCY

Sections:

9.72.010    Curfew.

9.72.020    Truancy.

9.72.030    Cost recovery.


9.72.010 Curfew.

It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in any public place, or any private business open to the public, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and sunrise of the immediately following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply when:

A. The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse 18 years of age or older;

B. The minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or parents or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse 18 years of age or older;

C. The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place of public entertainment such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity;

D. The presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged;

E. The minor is involved in an emergency situation;

F. The minor is emancipated pursuant to law.

Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 98-1832 § 1, 1998; Ord. 95-1786, 1995; Ord. 1688 § 1, 1989; 1964 Code § 17.2.)


9.72.020 Truancy.

It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in any public place, or any private business open to the public, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on days when schools are in session; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply when:

A. The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse 18 years of age or older;

B. The minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or parents or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse 18 years of age or older;

C. The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity;

D. The presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged;

E. The minor is involved in an emergency situation;

F. The minor is emancipated pursuant to law;

G. The minor is properly excused from school for any reason permitted under California statute, including, but not limited to, Section 48205 of the California Education Code. For the purpose of this section, “properly excused” means those minors who have fully complied with all statutory procedures necessary to excuse their attendance under the applicable California statute.

Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 99-1843 § 1, 1999; Ord. 98-1832 § 1, 1998; Ord. 95-1786, 1995.)


9.72.030 Cost recovery.

A. When a minor under 18 years of age is detained for violating any public offense, and the minor is detained for a period of time in excess of one-half hour, and said detention required the supervision of the juvenile offender by Covina police department personnel or volunteer staff, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody or control of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such personnel in excess of one-half hour.

B. As determined by the chief of police or his designee, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody or control of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs of police services for the detention, processing, transportation, and supervision of said minor, except that supervision costs may only be assessed when the minor is detained in excess of one-half hour, said time period to begin from the moment of the initial detention.

C. Billing for services of volunteer personnel shall accrue at the rate of an “A” step police officer.

D. Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this section may, within 15 days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of the charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal the billing. Any appeal regarding billing shall be heard by the city manager or his or her designee, as the hearing officer. Within 10 days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within 30 days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer.

E. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council of the city of Covina hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, work or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, work, or portion may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 95-1786, 1995.)


Chapter 9.74 CIVIL PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO CONTROL MINOR

Sections:

9.74.010    Parental responsibility.

9.74.020    Failure to supervise.

9.74.030    Civil penalty.

9.74.040    Remedy cumulative.


9.74.010 Parental responsibility.

Every parent or legal guardian who, by any act or omission, or by threats, contributes to, induces or endeavors to induce any dependent child or ward to fail or refuse to conform to any lawful order of law enforcement personnel or of the juvenile court, or to conform to the requirements of the Covina Municipal Code, shall be subject to a civil penalty. For purposes of this section, a parent or legal guardian to any person under the age of 18 years shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care, supervision, protection and control over their minor child or ward. (Ord. 94-1768 § 1, 1994.)


9.74.020 Failure to supervise.

Every parent or legal guardian who fails to exercise reasonable care and supervision, and by such failure or omission allows, either knowingly or unknowingly, any dependent minor child or ward to violate any lawful order of law enforcement personnel or of the juvenile court, or the requirements of the Covina Municipal Code regarding curfew and vandalism shall be subject to a civil penalty. (Ord. 94-1768 § 1, 1994.)


9.74.030 Civil penalty.

Any person who violates the provisions of CMC 9.74.020 shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each violation, which shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought by the city attorney. (Ord. 94-1768 § 1, 1994.)


9.74.040 Remedy cumulative.

The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to the remedies and penalties available under the Covina Municipal Code and all other laws of this state. (Ord. 94-1768 § 1, 1994.)


Chapter 9.76 MINORS PROHIBITED FROM CERTAIN PLACES1

Sections:

9.76.010    Pool rooms and gambling places – Visiting prohibited.

9.76.020    Pool rooms and gambling places – Allowing minors to enter prohibited.

9.76.030    Pool rooms and gambling places – Sending minor on premises prohibited.

9.76.040    Pool rooms or gambling places – Minor permitted when.


9.76.010 Pool rooms and gambling places – Visiting prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to enter, visit, be in or remain in any gambling house or place where gambling is conducted or is being carried on, or in any public billiard or pool room in the city. (1964 Code § 17.11.)


9.76.020 Pool rooms and gambling places – Allowing minors to enter prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person, either as proprietor or employee in charge or control of any place where gambling is conducted or is being carried on or of any public billiard or pool room in the city, to suffer, allow or permit any person under the age of 18 to visit, enter or remain in a place where gambling is conducted or is being carried on or in such public billiard or pool room. (1964 Code § 17.11.)


9.76.030 Pool rooms and gambling places – Sending minor on premises prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person either as employer or otherwise to send or direct any person under the age of 18 years either to any place where gambling is conducted or is being carried on or to any public billiard or pool room in the city. (1964 Code § 17.11.)


9.76.040 Pool rooms or gambling places – Minor permitted when.

Except where prohibited by any law or regulation pertaining to premises upon which alcoholic beverages are served or consumed, a person under the age of 18 years of age may, at hours other than between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., enter, visit or remain in any public billiard or pool room, licensed as such under this code, if such minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, and such parent or guardian is in such proximity as to be able to exercise supervision over such minor at all such times as such minor is in or about such pool room; if not so accompanied, such minor shall be prohibited from entry as provided in CMC 9.76.010.

No proprietor or employee in charge or control of any poolroom shall permit or allow any person under 18 years of age to enter, visit or remain in or about any poolroom except when such minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, and no proprietor or person in charge or control of any public billiard or pool room, licensed as such under this code, shall permit or allow any person under the age of 18 years of age, whether or not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, to enter or remain in such poolroom between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day for the purpose of engaging in or taking part in any game of any kind, and no such person shall enter or remain in such pool room between such hours for such purpose. (1964 Code § 17.11.)1

For statutory provisions prohibiting sending minors into places where gambling takes place, see Penal Code § 273f. 


Chapter 9.84 DISCHARGING WEAPONS1

Sections:

9.84.010    Prohibition – Exceptions.


9.84.010 Prohibition – Exceptions.

It is unlawful for any person to discharge or use any pistol, shotgun, rifle, air gun, spring gun, catapult, sling or other device for throwing stones, shot or metal slugs within the city. This section shall not apply to any person over the age of 21 years who has secured a permit from the police chief which shall be good for six months, nor to peace officers in the performance of the duties of their office, nor to persons shooting at a duly authorized shooting gallery. (1964 Code § 17.32.)1

For statutory provisions regarding control of deadly weapons, see Penal Code § 12000 et seq. 


Chapter 9.86 CONCEALABLE FIREARMS – RETAIL SALES

Sections:

9.86.010    Short title.

9.86.020    Definitions.

9.86.030    Permit – Required.

9.86.040    Written applications – Fees.

9.86.050    Application – Investigation.

9.86.060    Application – Denial.

9.86.070    Permit – Form.

9.86.080    Permit – Duration.

9.86.090    Permit – Conditions – Revocation.

9.86.100    Permit – Assigning prohibited.

9.86.110    Revocation for cause.

9.86.120    Surrender of permit.

9.86.130    Permit – Appeal procedure.

9.86.140    Confidentiality.

9.86.150    Exemption of sales to government officers – Identification.

9.86.160    Enforcement of provisions.


9.86.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as “the concealable firearms – retail sale chapter.” (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.020 Definitions.

“Pistol,” “revolver,” and “firearm capable of being concealed upon the person,” as used in this chapter, mean “pistol,” “revolver,” and “firearm capable of being concealed upon the person,” as defined by the California Penal Code as said definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to read. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.030 Permit – Required.

No person shall engage in the business of selling or otherwise transferring, or advertise for sale, or offer or expose for sale, or transfer any pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person, unless he has been issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.040 Written applications – Fees.

An application for a permit required by this chapter, or for the renewal thereof, shall be filed with the finance department; shall be in writing on forms provided by the city; shall be in duplicate; and shall be accompanied by a paid receipt issued by city for payment of the application fee. The application fee for the initial permit is in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council, and for a renewal permit is in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council. The application fee is established to cover part of the cost of investigation and processing an application and permit and is not refundable. Every application shall be verified as provided by the California Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. In addition to the application form, any applicant for a permit shall submit the following information:

A. The full name and present address of applicant, and all persons having a financial or profit sharing interest in the business;

B. The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of applicant and the dates of residence at each;

C. Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 21 years;

D. Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

E. Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

F. The business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation;

G. All convictions and the reasons therefor;

H. Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application, including such personal references as the department deems necessary;

I. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny to the police department the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained herein be construed to deny the right of the department to confirm the height and weight of the applicant. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.050 Application – Investigation.

The police department may fingerprint any person applying for a permit required by this chapter. The police chief shall conduct an appropriate investigation of the applicant to determine whether the permit shall be issued. The police chief may require additional information of applicants which he deems necessary to conduct his investigation. The police chief may dispense with the investigation upon being furnished with an authenticated copy of a current permit issued by another governmental agency located in the county. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.060 Application – Denial.

The permit shall be denied by the police chief if:

A. The character or reputation of the applicant is determined to be inimical to the safety or general welfare of the community; or

B. The applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving the violation of any law or ordinance relating to the owning, carrying, sale, use or registration of any firearm or dangerous or deadly weapon; or

C. The applicant, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false or misleading statement of a material fact in the application for a permit; or

D. The applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.070 Permit – Form.

All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in the form prescribed by the Attorney General of the state. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.080 Permit – Duration.

All permits so issued shall expire:

A. One year after the date of issuance; or

B. Upon the cessation or change of location of business for which such permit is issued, whichever occurs sooner; provided, however, that such permits may be renewed for additional permits of one year upon the approval of the police chief. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.090 Permit – Conditions – Revocation.

Any permit issued shall be subject to all of the following conditions, the breach of any of which shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the permit by the police chief:

A. The business shall be carried on only in the building designated in the permit.

B. The permit or a copy thereof, certified by the police chief, shall be displayed on the premises where it can easily be seen by anyone patronizing the premises.

C. No pistol or revolver shall be delivered:

1. To anyone other than the purchaser thereof;

2. To the purchaser within 15 days of the application for the purchase;

3. To the purchaser unless he is personally known to the seller or presents clear evidence of his identity to the seller;

4. Unless it is unloaded and securely wrapped.

D. No pistol or revolver, or imitation thereof, or placard advertising the sale or other transfer thereof, shall be displayed in any part of the premises where it can readily be seen from the outside.

E. The applicant shall not conduct the business of selling or otherwise transferring, or advertise for sale, or offer or expose for sale, or transfer any pistol, revolver or other firearm in any residential zone of the city as designated pursuant to CMC Title 17. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.100 Permit – Assigning prohibited.

The assignment or attempt to assign any permit issued under this chapter is unlawful and any such assignment or attempt to assign a permit shall render the permit null and void. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.110 Revocation for cause.

A permit shall be revocable by the police chief for cause, which shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, violation of CMC 9.86.090 or falsification of information in the permit application. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.120 Surrender of permit.

When a permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the police department. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.130 Permit – Appeal procedure.

Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the police chief when in his opinion the applicant is violating any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable state law.

In the event that any such permit is revoked by the police chief, an appeal may be taken to the city council within 30 days after the date of said denial or revocation. If such an appeal is taken, it shall be by written notice of appeal, filed with the city clerk and served upon the police chief by the applicant. The city council shall set a day for hearing the appeal and shall designate the time and place where such hearing is to be held. A notice of said hearing shall be given the applicant by the city clerk for mailing the same to the last known address of said applicant not less than five days prior to the date set for hearing. At any such hearing, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard and/or defend himself, and may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. The police chief or his representative shall attend the hearing. Upon conclusion of such hearing, the city council shall make findings and shall sustain or overrule, by a majority vote, the decision of the police chief. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.140 Confidentiality.

The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.150 Exemption of sales to government officers – Identification.

The provisions of this chapter do not apply to sales of concealable firearms made to persons properly identified as full-time paid officers of a city police department, sheriff’s department, district attorney’s office, the California Highway Patrol, or the State Department of Justice, nor to sales of concealable firearms made to authorized representatives of cities, cities and counties, counties, or state or federal governments for use by such governmental agencies. Proper identification is defined as verifiable written certification from the head agency by which the purchaser is employed, identifying the purchaser and authorizing the purchase. The certification shall be delivered to the seller at the time of purchase and the purchaser shall identify himself as the person authorized in such certification. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 1982.)


9.86.160 Enforcement of provisions.

The conviction of any person for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of the conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any permit fee shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee. (Ord. 1518 § 2, 1982.)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    Definitions

10.08    Administration

10.12    Enforcement

10.16    Traffic Control Devices

10.20    Turning Movements

10.24    One-Way Streets and Alleys

10.28    Roads Under Construction

10.32    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.36    Loading and Unloading Vehicles

10.40    Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations

10.44    Truck Routes

10.48    Pedestrians

10.52    Bicycles and Wheeled Toys

10.56    Parades

10.57    Interference with Special Event Prohibited

10.60    Motor Vehicles Emitting False Alarms While Parked in Public Parking Facilities

10.64    Valet Parking

10.68    Speed Limits


Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS1

Sections:

10.04.010    Definitions generally.	

10.04.020    Definitions – Vehicle Code definitions apply when.

10.04.030    Alley.

10.04.040    Bus loading zone.

10.04.050    City.

10.04.060    City council.

10.04.070    City manager.

10.04.080    Commercial loading zone.

10.04.090    Director of public works.

10.04.100    Highway.

10.04.110    Holidays.

10.04.120    Metered space.

10.04.130    Metrolink lot.

10.04.140    Metrolink structure.

10.04.150    Municipal parking district lot.

10.04.160    Official traffic control devices.

10.04.170    Official traffic signals.

10.04.180    Operator.

10.04.190    Park.

10.04.200    Parking meter.

10.04.210    Parking meter zone.

10.04.220    Parkway.

10.04.230    Passenger loading zone.

10.04.240    Pay-by-space machine.

10.04.250    Pay-and-display machine.

10.04.260    Pedestrian.

10.04.270    Person.

10.04.280    Police officer.

10.04.290    Public transit parking lots.

10.04.300    Roadway.

10.04.310    Safety zone.

10.04.320    Section.

10.04.330    Sidewalk.

10.04.340    Stop.

10.04.350    Stop or stand.

10.04.360    Street.

10.04.370    Traffic.

10.04.380    Vehicle.


10.04.010 Definitions generally.

For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1.)


10.04.020 Definitions – Vehicle Code definitions apply when.

Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions are incorporated in this chapter and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this title as though set forth in this chapter in full. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.1.)


10.04.030 Alley.

“Alley” means any highway, as defined in this chapter, unnamed and having a width of less than 25 feet, and not provided with a sidewalk or sidewalks. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.040 Bus loading zone.

“Bus loading zone” means the space adjacent to the curb or edge of a roadway if no curb exists reserved for the exclusive use of buses during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.050 City.

“City” means the city of Covina. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.060 City council.

“City council” or “council” means the city council of the city of Covina. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.070 City manager. 

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Covina, or designee thereof. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 1, 2007. Formerly 10.04.005.)


10.04.080 Commercial loading zone.

“Commercial loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway if no curb exists reserved for the exclusive use of commercial vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials marked and designated as hereinafter provided in this title. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.090 Director of public works.

“Director of public works” or “director” means the director of public works of the city of Covina or designee thereof. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.100 Highway.

“Highway” means every way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and set apart for public travel, except bridle trails and footpaths. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.110 Holidays.

“Holidays” means the first day of January, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday of September, November 11th, the fourth Thursday in November, the Friday following the fourth Thursday in November, and the twenty-fifth day of December. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1636 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1310 § 1, 1975; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.030.)


10.04.120 Metered space. 

“Metered space” means any space within a parking meter zone, regulated by a parking meter, or controlled by a pay-by-space machine or pay-and-display machine, which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street, lot or structure. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 2, 2007. Formerly 10.04.042.)


10.04.130 Metrolink lot. 

“Metrolink lot” means the parking lot adjacent to and servicing the Covina Metrolink Station, located at 600 North Citrus Avenue, Covina, California. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 3, 2007. Formerly 10.04.044.)


10.04.140 Metrolink structure.

“Metrolink structure” means the Covina Metrolink parking structure, located at 559 North Citrus Avenue, Covina, California. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 4, 2007. Formerly 10.04.046.)


10.04.150 Municipal parking district lot.

“Municipal parking district lot” means the public parking lots owned and operated by the city of Covina Vehicle Parking District No. 1 and the publicly owned and operated parking lot adjacent to the Shoppers Lane commercial area. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.160 Official traffic control devices.

“Official traffic control devices” means all official traffic signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.050.)


10.04.170 Official traffic signals.

“Official traffic signals” means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.060.)


10.04.180 Operator.

“Operator” means any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.190 Park.

“Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.070.)


10.04.200 Parking meter. 

“Parking meter” means any mechanical or electronic device or meter not inconsistent with this title which is designed to indicate the lawful parking of a vehicle within its individual corresponding metered space upon payment of the appropriate fee by United States coins or currency, credit card, debit card, or city prepaid parking card. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 6, 2007. Formerly 10.04.074.)


10.04.210 Parking meter zone.

“Parking meter zone” means any public roadway, right-of-way, lot, structure or area within the city designated by the city council pursuant to CMC 10.32.111 for public parking, which parking is regulated by parking meters, pay-by-space machines, or pay-and-display machines. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 7, 2007. Formerly 10.04.078.)


10.04.220 Parkway.

“Parkway” means that portion of a highway other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.080.)


10.04.230 Passenger loading zone.

“Passenger loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway if no curb exists reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during loading and unloading of passengers, marked and designated as hereinafter provided in this title. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.090.)


10.04.240 Pay-by-space machine. 

“Pay-by-space machine” means any mechanical, electrical or electronic device not inconsistent with this title which is designed to regulate multiple metered spaces, without the dispensing of a receipt to be posted on the vehicle, and designed to indicate the lawful parking of vehicles within said metered spaces, upon payment of the appropriate fee by United States coins or currency, credit card, debit card, or city prepaid parking card. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 8, 2007. Formerly 10.04.093.)


10.04.250 Pay-and-display machine. 

“Pay-and-display machine” means any mechanical or electronic device not inconsistent with this title which is designed to regulate multiple metered spaces and which, upon payment of the appropriate fee by United States coins or currency, credit card, debit card, or city prepaid parking card, dispenses a receipt to be posted in a vehicle parked in an identified metered space regulated by the pay-and-display machine. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 9, 2007. Formerly 10.04.096.)


10.04.260 Pedestrian.

“Pedestrian” means any person afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled exclusively by human power other than a bicycle. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.100.)


10.04.270 Person.

“Person” means and includes every individual, firm and corporation. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.280 Police officer.

“Police officer” means every officer of the police department of the city of Covina. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.110.)


10.04.290 Public transit parking lots.

“Public transit parking lots” are those parking lots and/or parking structures owned by the city or any other public agency that are maintained for the primary purpose of allowing users of public transportation to park their motor vehicles during those times that they utilize public transportation to travel to another location. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 04-1905 § 1, 2004. Formerly 10.04.115.)


10.04.300 Roadway.

“Roadway” means that portion of the highway between the regularly established curb lines or, when no curbs exist, that portion improved, designated, and ordinarily used for vehicular travel and parking. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.310 Safety zone.

“Safety zone” means that portion of the roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, marked and designated as hereinafter provided in this title. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.320 Section.

“Section” means a section of the ordinance codified in this title unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.330 Sidewalk.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway between the curb lines or outer edge of traversable roadway and the adjacent property lines, other than a parkway, and delineated for pedestrian travel. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.340 Stop.

“Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.120.)


10.04.350 Stop or stand.

“Stop or stand,” when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.130.)


10.04.360 Street.

“Street” means the same as “roadway.” (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)


10.04.370 Traffic.

“Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses or other conveyances either singularly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.1. Formerly 10.04.140.)


10.04.380 Vehicle.

“Vehicle” means every device or animal by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon rails or tracks. (Ord. 11-2002 § 1, 2011.)1

For statutory definitions of words in the Vehicle Code, see Vehicle Code § 100 et seq. 


Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION1

Sections:

10.08.010    Traffic division – Establishment.

10.08.020    Traffic division – Accident studies.

10.08.030    Traffic division – Accident reports.

10.08.040    Traffic engineer – Office established.

10.08.050    Traffic engineer – Designated.

10.08.060    Traffic engineer – Duties generally.


10.08.010 Traffic division – Establishment.

There is established in the police department of the city a traffic division to be under the control of a police officer appointed by and directly responsible to the police chief. (Ord. 11-2002 § 2, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.5.)


10.08.020 Traffic division – Accident studies.

The traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting studies of accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 11-2002 § 2, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.7.)


10.08.030 Traffic division – Accident reports.

The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic engineer. (Ord. 11-2002 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.8.)


10.08.040 Traffic engineer – Office established.

The office of traffic engineer is established. (Ord. 11-2002 § 2, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.10. Formerly 10.08.050.)


10.08.050 Traffic engineer – Designated.

The director of public works shall serve as traffic engineer in addition to his or her other functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. The director may delegate any powers and duties conferred upon him or her as traffic engineer under this title to any other officer or employee of the city and, to the extent permitted by law, may recommend that the duties provided in CMC 10.08.060 be performed under contract. (Ord. 11-2002 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1394 § 8, 1978; 1964 Code § 16.11. Formerly 10.08.060.)


10.08.060 Traffic engineer – Duties generally.

It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer:

A. To determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of official traffic control devices; and

B. To conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures; and

C. To conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions; and

D. To cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this title and other ordinances of the city. (Ord. 11-2002 § 2, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.12. Formerly 10.08.070.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt rules and regulations for traffic control, see Vehicle Code § 21100. 


Chapter 10.12 ENFORCEMENT1

Sections:

10.12.010    Duties of police.

10.12.020    Obedience required.

10.12.030    Traffic direction – Authority.

10.12.040    Traffic direction – Obedience required.

10.12.050    Traffic direction – By unauthorized persons.

10.12.060    Public employees to obey traffic regulations.

10.12.070    Authorized emergency vehicles – Exemptions.

10.12.080    Other exempt vehicles.


10.12.010 Duties of police.

It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to enforce this title and all other street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. (1964 Code § 16.13.)


10.12.020 Obedience required.

It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act prohibited or fail to perform any act required in this title. (1964 Code § 16.14.)


10.12.030 Traffic direction – Authority.

A. Officers of the police department are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.

B. Firemen, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 

C. Employees of the public works department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the event of a fire or other emergency or in connection with or adjacent to infrastructure repair work being performed within the highway. (Ord. 11-2002 § 3, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.15.)


10.12.040 Traffic direction – Obedience required.

No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police, fire department, or public works official when directing traffic. (Ord. 11-2002 § 4, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.16.)


10.12.050 Traffic direction – By unauthorized persons.

No person other than an officer of the police department, or a person deputized by the police chief, or designated nonsworn police personnel, or person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal; except, that persons may operate when and as provided in this title any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the traffic engineer. (Ord. 1229 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.17.)


10.12.060 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.

The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute. (1964 Code § 16.18.)


10.12.070 Authorized emergency vehicles – Exemptions.

A. The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance when such public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code of the state in response to an emergency call.

B. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. (1964 Code § 16.19.)


10.12.080 Other exempt vehicles.

The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (1964 Code § 16.20.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing municipalities to regulate traffic by using police officers, see Vehicle Code § 21100. 


Chapter 10.16 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES1

Sections:

10.16.010    Installation authority.

10.16.020    Signing required for enforcement.

10.16.030    Obedience required.

10.16.040    Official traffic signals – Installation and maintenance.

10.16.050    Traffic signals – Speed regulation.

10.16.060    Traffic lanes – Marking.

10.16.070    Use of distinctive roadway markings.

10.16.080    Hours of operation.

10.16.090    Removal, relocation or discontinuance authority.


10.16.010 Installation authority.

A. The traffic engineer shall have the exclusive power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required under this title, and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this title and such ordinances.

B. Whenever the Vehicle Code of this state requires, for the effectiveness of any provision thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the traffic engineer is authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

C. The traffic engineer may also place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only on the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title or other traffic ordinances of the city or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (1964 Code § 16.21.)


10.16.020 Signing required for enforcement.

No provision of this title or other ordinance of the city for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (1964 Code § 16.22.)


10.16.030 Obedience required.

The operator of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this title and other traffic ordinances of the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized official, subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 11-2002 § 5, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.23.)


10.16.040 Official traffic signals – Installation and maintenance.

A. The traffic engineer shall install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where the city council determines that traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property.

B. The traffic engineer shall investigate and recommend the locations where such signals may be required by field observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his or her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices issued by the State Department of Transportation.

C. Whenever the traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs visible to the primary flow of traffic unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. (Ord. 11-2002 § 6, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.24.)


10.16.050 Traffic signals – Speed regulation.

The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (1964 Code § 16.25.)


10.16.060 Traffic lanes – Marking.

The traffic engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (1964 Code § 16.26.)


10.16.070 Use of distinctive roadway markings.

Whenever the State Department of Transportation designates a distinctive roadway marking which indicates no driving over such marking, the traffic engineer is authorized to designate by such markings those roadways or parts of roadways where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 11-2002 § 7, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.27.)


10.16.080 Hours of operation.

The traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (1964 Code § 16.28.)


10.16.090 Removal, relocation or discontinuance authority.

The traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by state law or this title whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. (1964 Code § 16.29.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing local authorities to place and maintain traffic control devices as required by statute or as necessary to implement statutes or local ordinances, see Vehicle Code § 21351 et seq. 


Chapter 10.20 TURNING MOVEMENTS1

Sections:

10.20.010    Turning markers – Placement – Obedience required.

10.20.020    Prohibited turn signs – Placement – Obedience required.

10.20.030    Signs prohibiting right turns against red signal – Placement – Obedience required.


10.20.010 Turning markers – Placement – Obedience required.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the traffic engineer is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.

B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (1964 Code § 16.33.)


10.20.020 Prohibited turn signs – Placement – Obedience required.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.

B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (1964 Code § 16.34.)


10.20.030 Signs prohibiting right turns against red signal – Placement – Obedience required.

The traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections within any business or residence district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (1964 Code § 16.35.)1

For statutory provisions regarding authority of cities to prohibit the making of any turning movement, see Vehicle Code § 22113. 


Chapter 10.24 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS1

Sections:

10.24.010    Erection of signs.

10.24.020    Repealed.


10.24.010 Erection of signs.

Whenever this title or any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movements shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1964 Code § 16.36.)


10.24.020 Streets designated.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.37.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to designate the direction of traffic as one-way over highways within their jurisdiction, see Vehicle Code § 21657. 


Chapter 10.28 ROADS UNDER CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

10.28.010    Closing of roadways during improvement work authorized when.

10.28.020    Signs required when roadways closed.

10.28.030    Operating vehicles on closed roadways prohibited.

10.28.040    Construction speed zones.

10.28.050    Injuring new pavement and painted markings.

10.28.060    Flagmen where traffic control devices are inoperative.

10.28.070    Flagmen at construction and maintenance areas.

Prior legislation: 1964 Code §§ 16.38 – 16.41.


10.28.010 Closing of roadways during improvement work authorized when.

Whenever any highway or portion thereof is under improvement, the director of public works may, if he or she deems it necessary to avoid injury to or interference with such work or improvement, order such highway, or any portion thereof in length or width, closed to traffic during the course of such improvement, and the same shall remain closed to traffic until such improvement is completed or the director orders the highway reopened. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


10.28.020 Signs required when roadways closed.

Whenever any highway or portion thereof shall be closed to traffic under the provisions of CMC 10.28.010, it shall be the duty of the contractor, engineer or other person in charge of the work being performed to conspicuously post signage, barricades, delineators and other official traffic control devices as necessary to properly close the highway or portion thereof to traffic in a manner consistent with the provisions of the state’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


10.28.030 Operating vehicles on closed roadways prohibited.

No person shall operate any vehicle or walk upon any portion of the highway closed to traffic pursuant to CMC 10.28.010 unless otherwise instructed to do so by authorized personnel of the police department, fire department or public works department. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


10.28.040 Construction speed zones.

A. Construction speed zones and a construction speed zone speed limit of 25 miles per hour are hereby established and determined to be necessary to limit the risk of injury to workers and to limit the risk of injury to persons or property traveling through said construction areas during all hours of the day or night.

B. This section shall only be enforceable when traffic is regulated through or around the area, pursuant to Section 21367 of the Vehicle Code of the state and CMC 10.16.030, and highway construction or maintenance is actually being performed in the area by workers acting in their official capacity. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


10.28.050 Injuring new pavement and painted markings. 

When a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across any newly made pavement or any pavement under construction or any freshly painted markings upon any highway, a person shall not drive over such pavement or markings. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


10.28.060 Flagmen where traffic control devices are inoperative.

Whenever the director of public works determines that official traffic control devices are disabled or otherwise inoperable, he or she may regulate traffic by means of any person given temporary appointment for such duty. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


10.28.070 Flagmen at construction or maintenance areas.

Whenever the director of public works finds that the regulation of traffic is necessary at the site of highway construction or maintenance, he or she may regulate traffic by means of persons authorized for such duty. (Ord. 11-2002 § 9, 2011.)


Chapter 10.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING1

Sections:

10.32.010    Application.

10.32.020    Parking space – Marking – Compliance.

10.32.030    Prohibition – Parkways and sidewalks.

10.32.040    Prohibition – Where no parking signs posted.

10.32.050    Prohibition – Temporary no parking or tow-away zones.

10.32.060    Prohibition – Highways.

10.32.070    Prohibited parking – Authorized signs or curb markings.

10.32.080    Municipal parking district lots – Time limit parking.

10.32.090    Parking adjacent to schools.

10.32.100    Parking on narrow streets.

10.32.110    Parking on city property.

10.32.111    Parking meter zones designated.

10.32.112    Parking meter, pay-by-space and pay-and-display specifications and hours of operation.

10.32.113    Maximum parking time limits and parking rates in parking meter zones.

10.32.114    Operation of parking meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines by vehicle operators.

10.32.115    Illegal, overtime or expired parking in parking meter zones.

10.32.116    Maximum parking time – No extending machine time beyond maximum.

10.32.117    Vehicles exempt from metered parking requirements.

10.32.118    Defacing, destroying, etc., of parking meters and machines.

10.32.119    Use of parking meter and machine funds.

10.32.120    Parking on hills.

10.32.130    Parking on one-way roadways.

10.32.140    Parking vehicles for sale or rent.

10.32.141    Offering vehicles for sale or rent from off-street parking facilities prohibited.

10.32.145    Vehicle operation and loitering.

10.32.150    Peddlers’ and vendors’ vehicles – Regulations.

10.32.160    Parking between curb and adjacent property line.

10.32.170    Parking for more than 72 consecutive hours prohibited.

10.32.180    All-night parking prohibited.

10.32.185    All-night parking – Exemptions.

10.32.190    Parking prohibited for certain commercial vehicles.

10.32.200    Parking or storing of commercial vehicles.

10.32.210    Parking or storing of trailers, motor homes and motor vehicles.

10.32.220    Parking limits cumulative.

10.32.230    Schedule of fees – Vehicle parking in metered zones, municipal parking lots, and overnight parking lots and zones.

10.32.240    Trailers or semitrailers – Parking requirements.

10.32.250    Vehicles transporting hazardous materials – Parking restrictions.

10.32.260    Blocking highway or private street.

10.32.270    Blocking driveways on private streets.

10.32.280    Double parking prohibited.

10.32.290    Angle parking.

10.32.300    Removal of ignition key when parking.


10.32.010 Application.

A. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

B. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state or of this title or other ordinances of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (1964 Code § 16.54.)


10.32.020 Parking space – Marking – Compliance.

The traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbs and in off-street parking lots of the city where authorized parking is permitted. 

When such parking space markings are placed, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space. No person shall use off-street parking lots of the city for purposes other than the parking of motor vehicles. (Ord. 11-2002 § 10, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.55.)


10.32.030 Prohibition – Parkways and sidewalks.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway or sidewalk. (Ord. 11-2002 § 11, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.56.)


10.32.040 Prohibition – Where no parking signs posted.

The traffic engineer shall appropriately sign or mark places where no parking shall be permitted, and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such places. (Ord. 11-2002 § 12, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.58.)


10.32.050 Prohibition – Temporary no parking or tow-away zones.

A. The chief of police or traffic engineer is authorized to erect or cause to be placed temporary no parking signs, or temporary no parking and tow-away signs, on highways, or portions thereof, when he or she determines that emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions; or from highway repairs or construction; or from the movements of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size; or from the use of such highways for authorized purposes other than the normal flow of traffic.

B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.

C. Any regularly employed officer of the police department is authorized to remove or cause the removal of any vehicle from any of such places signed or marked as a temporary no parking tow-away zone to a garage or other place of safety designated or maintained by the city. Such removal shall be accomplished pursuant to Section 22651 et seq. of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 11-2002 § 13, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.58-1.)


10.32.060 Prohibition – Highways.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no stopping or parking on any highway as designated in the master plan of streets and highways. 

B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking or stopping upon any highway, no person shall stand, stop or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 11-2002 § 14, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.59.)


10.32.070 Parking prohibited – Authorized signs or curb markings.

When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator or any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. (Ord. 11-2002 § 15, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 4, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.60.)


10.32.080 Municipal parking district lots – Time limit parking.

A. Notwithstanding any other part of this chapter, an operator of a motor vehicle shall not stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within a municipal parking district lot for longer than four hours in any 24-hour time period unless a valid parking permit is properly affixed or displayed upon said vehicle.

B. The parking time limits specified in subsection (A) of this section shall only be effective between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded. (Ord. 11-2002 § 16, 2011; Ord. 09-1968 § 1, 2009; Ord. 99-1858, 1999; 1964 Code § 16.61.)


10.32.090 Parking adjacent to schools.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1964 Code § 16.62.)


10.32.100 Parking on narrow streets.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.

B. When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (1964 Code § 16.63.)


10.32.110 Parking on city property.

A. Whenever the city manager determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is prohibited, limited or restricted.

B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs.

C. The city council may also install, or cause to be installed, parking meters, pay-by-space machines, and/or pay-and-display machines within any parking meter zone in such numbers and in such places as may be necessary for the regulation, control, and inspection of the parking of vehicles therein. The city manager may authorize the temporary or permanent removal from service of parking meters, pay-by-space machines, and/or pay-and-display machines, by covering or other means.

D. The city manager may also authorize temporary periods of time in which parking meter zones will not be enforced. This shall be based upon a finding of public convenience and necessity, or upon a finding that parking revenue that would otherwise be collected by parking meters, pay-by-space machines, and/or pay-and-display machines will be secured by alternative means on a special event basis (i.e., contract for valet parking operation in lieu of metered parking). Any such action shall be based upon good traffic engineering principles. (Ord. 07-1942 § 11, 2007; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.64.)


10.32.111 Parking meter zones designated.

The following areas within the city are designated as parking meter zones:

A. The Town Center Specific Plan area;

B. Covina Vehicle Parking District No. 1; 

C. The Shoppers Lane parking improvement area; and 

D. Any future areas that may be designated by the city council by ordinance. (Ord. 11-2002 § 17, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.112 Parking meter, pay-by-space and pay-and-display specifications and hours of operation.

A. Each parking meter shall be so designed and operated that, upon the expiration of the lawful time limit, it will indicate that the lawful parking period for its corresponding metered space has expired and in such case the right of such a vehicle to occupy the metered space shall cease.

B. Each pay-by-space machine and pay-and-display machine shall conspicuously display the applicable parking rates and instructions on its use. If instructions cannot be posted on the machine due to space limitations, they must be conspicuously posted not further than six feet away from the machine. If a pay-by-space machine or pay-and-display machine is stationed in a centralized location in a parking lot or parking structure, each drive aisle must conspicuously display a sign directing individuals to the machine. Upon expiration of the lawful parking period, the right of a vehicle to occupy the metered space shall cease.

C. The city council may determine hours of operation for parking meters, pay-by-space machines, and/or pay-and-display machines within any parking meter zone in order to facilitate the control of vehicle parking and may place signs indicating the hours of operation or other restrictions. (Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.113 Maximum parking time limits and parking rates in parking meter zones.

A. The maximum time limits for the parking of vehicles within any metered space shall be as provided by this title or other ordinances of the city council, which shall be conspicuously displayed by proper signs erected and maintained in the particular parking meter zone, or portion thereof.

B. The rates for parking in a parking meter zone, or portion thereof, shall be established by ordinance of the city council, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22508. (Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.114 Operation of parking meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines by vehicle operators.

A. When a vehicle is parked in any metered space, the operator of the vehicle shall, immediately after entering the metered space, deposit or cause to be deposited in the meter or machine controlling the space the proper United States coins or currency, credit card, debit card, or city prepaid card in the amount required by CMC 10.32.113(B) for the metered space. With respect to a parking meter or pay-by-space machine, the operator of the vehicle, after making the proper deposit, shall also immediately set in operation the timing mechanism, if any, in accordance with the posted directions of operation. With respect to a pay-and-display machine, the operator of the vehicle shall immediately cause the parking receipt provided by the machine to be placed face up on the driver’s-side dashboard of the vehicle.

B. Failure to make a proper deposit and to set the timing mechanism in operation, and (if applicable) failure to place the receipt on the vehicle dashboard as prescribed, shall constitute a violation of this title.

C. Upon compliance with the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, the metered space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of time corresponding to the amount of United States coins, currency, or city prepaid parking card deposited, up to the maximum time limit prescribed for the area in which the metered space is located.

D. The director of finance shall be authorized to develop procedures for the collection of revenue from parking meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines.

E. Notwithstanding compliance with this section, vehicles otherwise prohibited from parking in metered spaces by state law, by any provision of this code or by posted signage may not park in metered spaces. (Ord. 11-2002 § 18, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.115 Illegal, overtime or expired parking in parking meter zones.

A. No vehicle shall remain in a metered space when its corresponding parking meter indicates either illegal use of the metered space or that the lawful parking period for the metered space has expired. The indication showing illegal or expired parking during the hours of operation for any parking meter while a vehicle is parked in a metered space adjacent to the parking meter shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked in violation of this title.

B. No vehicle shall remain in a metered space governed by a pay-by-space machine when the machine indicates either illegal use of the metered space or that the lawful parking period for the metered space has expired. The indication showing illegal or expired parking during the hours of operation for any pay-by-space machine while a vehicle is parked in a metered space governed by that pay-by-space machine shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked in violation of this title.

C. No vehicle shall remain in a metered space governed by a pay-and-display machine when the parking receipt issued by the machine and placed on the vehicle’s dashboard indicates that the lawful parking period for the metered space has expired. The display of a pay-and-display machine parking receipt indicating expired parking, during the hours of operation for any pay-and-display machine, while a vehicle is parked in a metered space governed by that pay-and-display machine shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked in violation of this title. (Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.116 Maximum parking time – No extending machine time beyond maximum.

A. Parking a vehicle in a metered space shall be lawful up to the maximum time posted on the parking meter, pay-by-space machine or pay-and-display machine, or on corresponding signs. No vehicle shall be parked in a metered space beyond the maximum posted time limit for that metered space.

B. No person shall deposit in a parking meter, pay-by-space machine or pay-and-display machine any coins, currency, credit card, debit card, or city prepaid card, for the purpose of extending the parking time period of a vehicle beyond the posted maximum time allowed for parking. (Ord. 11-2002 § 19, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.117 Vehicles exempt from metered parking requirements.

Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, CMC 10.32.113, 10.32.114, 10.32.115 and 10.32.116 shall not apply to any of the following: 

A. Vehicles displaying a special identification license plate or placard issued to a disabled person; vehicles of disabled veterans; emergency vehicles and other vehicles expressly exempted from observing metered parking regulations pursuant to the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code; 

B. Vehicles displaying a temporary permit, issued by the city manager, the police chief, or their designees, authorizing individuals conducting business at city facilities during regular business hours to park their vehicles in a metered space free of charge. Any such permit shall clearly display on its face the signature of the city manager, the police chief, or authorized designee, and shall clearly display the date and time said permit will expire. The operator of the vehicle subject to a temporary permit authorized by this subsection shall immediately cause the permit to be placed face up on the driver’s-side dashboard of the vehicle; 

 C. Vehicles displaying an employee parking permit, issued by the city manager, the police chief, or their designees, authorizing city of Covina employees to park their vehicles in a metered space free of charge. The issuing authority may set the term and expiration date for any employee permit; provided, however, that no such permit shall remain effective after the date the employee is no longer employed by the city. Employee permits may not be transferred to another employee without the consent of the issuing authority. Any employee issued a permit shall immediately cause it to be placed face up on the driver’s-side dashboard of the employee’s vehicle; and 

D. Vehicles displaying a permit, issued by the police chief, or his or her designee, authorizing sworn law enforcement officers employed by agencies outside of the city, but who commute to and from work via the Covina Metrolink Station, to park their vehicles at public transit parking lots free of charge, in order to improve transit rail security by encouraging said law enforcement officers to commute on the Metrolink system. (Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.118 Defacing, destroying, etc., of parking meters and machines.

No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter, pay-by-space machine or pay-and-display machine installed under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.119 Use of parking meter and machine funds.

Revenues generated from on-street and off-street vehicle parking within the designated parking meter zones shall be accounted for separately from other city funds and may be used only for the following purposes:

A. All expenses of administration of the metered parking program;

B. All expenses of installation, operation, maintenance, and control of metered parking equipment and facilities within or designed to serve the parking meter zones;

C. All expenses for the control of traffic (including pedestrian and vehicle safety, comfort and convenience) which may affect or be affected by vehicle parking in the designated parking meter zones, including the enforcement of traffic regulations as to such traffic; and

D. Any other expenditures within or for the benefit of the designated parking meter zones as the city council may, by resolution, determine to be legal and appropriate.

Notwithstanding the above, revenues generated from off-street vehicle parking within the Metrolink lot and Metrolink structure shall return to the city’s Proposition A local return transportation fund. (Ord. 07-1942 § 12, 2007).


10.32.120 Parking on hills.

No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway, or when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (1964 Code § 16.65.)


10.32.130 Parking on one-way roadways.

A. Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb, facing in the direction of traffic movement, upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

B. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

C. The traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. (1964 Code § 16.66.)


10.32.140 Parking vehicles for sale or rent.

No person shall sell, rent, offer for sale or rent, give away, solicit the sale or rental of, or expose for sale or rent any vehicle upon any highway without first having obtained a business license to do so. Said business license shall be properly displayed on the vehicle at all times while such vehicle is offered for sale or rent while parked upon any highway. (Ord. 11-2002 § 20, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.67.)


10.32.141 Offering vehicles for sale or rent from off-street parking facilities prohibited.

When signs not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height have been erected on any off-street parking facility, whether privately or publicly owned, or adjacent to the driveways providing access thereto, giving notice of the prohibition contained in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to park (as that term is defined in CMC 10.04.190) any motor vehicle upon any off-street parking facility, whether publicly or privately owned, for the purpose of selling, renting or offering the vehicle for sale or rent.

If a sign containing the words “for sale,” “for rent” or words of similar import is displayed on or within a motor vehicle parked upon an off-street parking facility, whether publicly or privately owned, it shall be presumed that the registered owner has parked the vehicle for the purpose of selling it or offering it for sale or rent.

Notice of violation of the provisions of this section shall be issued and prosecuted in accordance with Section 40200 et seq. of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 11-2002 § 21, 2011; amended during 2009 republication; Ord. 1347 § 1, 1977.)


10.32.145 Vehicle operation and loitering.

A. No person shall operate any vehicle in any public or private parking area in such a manner that causes unnecessary noise, squealing of vehicle tires, motor racing, fast starting or stopping, or generation of electronic audio noise that can be heard outside the vehicle. Further, vehicle cruising throughout a public or private parking area without stopping in a vehicle stall is forbidden. No stopping or parking in traffic lanes within such parking areas which, by such action, causes one or more other vehicles to either stop behind or pass around is allowed.

B. No person or persons shall park a vehicle, loiter outside that vehicle or leave a vehicle unoccupied when not specifically engaged in customer activities at an adjoining business. No person may park a vehicle on public or private parking areas in excess of 30 minutes between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the next morning, without the express consent of the owner of said premises.

C. No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted as set forth herein, shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property or parking area utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians thereon; nor shall any person block or obstruct, or prevent the free access to, the entrance to any building open to the public.

D. Signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the parking area or public place and shall be not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that the parking area or public place is subject to this regulation or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1695 § 2, 1989.)


10.32.150 Peddlers’ and vendors’ vehicles – Regulations.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle on any portion of any street within the city, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed 10 minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

B. No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city council which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

C. No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while waiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city council which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

D. Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be revoked by the city council upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the city council and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.

E. No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, solicit the sale of, or expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, fruits, vegetables, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream, or other articles of food from any vehicle upon any public street or parkway within 1,000 feet of the property line of any public or private school during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day when school is in session. This section does not prohibit the delivery of goods or merchandise by delivery companies to specific occupants of dwelling units.

F. All soliciting from vehicles is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ord. 97-1810 § 2, 1996; 1964 Code § 16.68.)


10.32.160 Parking between curb and adjacent property line.

A person shall not park any motor vehicle between any curb and the adjacent property line except at those locations where the traffic engineer determines that such parking will not constitute a traffic hazard or public nuisance. (Ord. 11-2002 § 22, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.69.)


10.32.170 Parking for more than 72 consecutive hours prohibited.

A. No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any motor vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street, alley, or “public parking facility,” as that term is defined in CMC 10.60.010(D), for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours.

B. In the event that a motor vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street, alley or public parking facility, in excess of a consecutive period of 72 hours, any member of the police department authorized by the police chief may remove such motor vehicle from the street, alley or public parking facility in the manner and subject to the requirements of Sections 22650 and 22652 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 04-1905 § 2, 2004; 1964 Code § 16.70.)


10.32.180 All-night parking prohibited.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any highway or in any off-street parking lot of the city for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any day, excepting therefrom those streets abutting RD residential zone (multifamily) property, permissibly developed under prior zoning and building standards, where off-street parking no longer conforms to the provisions of CMC Title 17 (Zoning) and a ratio of 0.5 or less parking stalls per bedroom unit exists with a resultant acute shortage of off-street parking spaces. Also excepting therefrom those alleys that are not in conflict with traffic circulation. The city council finds that the following streets are exempt from the above restriction:

A. That portion of Prospero Drive from a point 663 feet north of the centerline of Badillo Street to a point 1,530 feet north of the centerline of Badillo Street;

B. That portion of Ruddock Street from Prospero Drive to the cul-de-sac east of the intersection with Vecino Drive;

C. That portion of Italia Street from Prospero Drive to Vecino Drive;

D. That portion of Vecino Drive between Italia Street and Ruddock Street;

E. That portion of the north side of Cypress Street, starting 524 feet west of the centerline of Azusa Avenue and continuing for 415 feet;

F. That north-south alley located 165 feet east of the centerline of Glendora Avenue south of Colver Place. (Ord. 11-2002 § 23, 2011; Ord. 91-1732 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1579 § 1, 1984; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code § 16.74.)


10.32.185 All-night parking – Exemptions.

A. On-Street All-Night Parking Exemptions. The provisions of CMC 10.32.180 shall not apply to any person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any family passenger vehicle, truck or motorcycle, and who obtains either a one-day or quarterly on-street overnight parking exemption permit from the police chief, or his or her designee, pursuant to the on-street overnight parking program as established by the police chief. The provisions of CMC 10.32.180 shall also not apply to any person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any recreational vehicle, and who obtains a one-day on-street overnight parking exemption permit from the police chief, or his or her designee, pursuant to the on-street overnight parking program as established by the police chief. One-day on-street overnight permits will be limited to 10 per calendar year. 

1. Upon a person’s request for a one-day on-street overnight parking exemption permit, the police chief, or his or her designee, shall issue the permit, but only after he or she has determined that all of the following conditions exist:

a. An exemption permit fee has been paid to the finance department;

b. The granting of the one-day on-street overnight parking exemption will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.

2. Upon a person’s application for a quarterly on-street overnight parking exemption permit, upon a form provided by and filed with the finance department, the police chief, or his or her designee, shall issue the permit, but only after it is determined that all of the following conditions exist:

a. An exemption permit fee has been paid to the finance department;

b. There are unusual circumstances that prevent the person from accommodating the parking of family passenger vehicles, trucks, and motorcycles upon the resident’s on-site parking area;

c. The police chief, or his or her designee, has conducted an investigation of the property where the applicant resides and determines that there is insufficient parking area to park vehicles in the existing garage or driveway;

d. The garage on the property where the applicant resides is used primarily for the parking of vehicles;

e. The motor vehicle to be parked is not a recreational vehicle or a commercial vehicle, as that term is defined in California Vehicle Code Section 260(a) or 15210(b);

f. The granting of the quarterly on-street overnight parking exemption will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.

3. One-day on-street and quarterly on-street overnight exemption permits shall be issued only for the overnight on-street parking of family passenger vehicles, trucks, motorcycles and recreational vehicles. A recreational vehicle parked overnight must be parked legally and in such a fashion that its parking does not constitute a hazard.

B. Municipal Parking District Lots All-Night Parking Exemptions. The provisions of CMC 10.32.180 shall not apply to persons that properly display a valid monthly municipal parking district permit.

C. Metrolink Lot All-Night Parking Exemptions. The provisions of CMC 10.32.180 shall not apply to persons that properly display a valid monthly Metrolink lot parking permit. 

D. Metrolink Structure All-Night Parking Exemptions. The provisions of CMC 10.32.180 shall not apply to persons that properly display either a valid monthly Metrolink structure parking permit or a valid overnight Metrolink structure parking permit.

E. Civic Center Parking Structure All-Night Parking Exemptions. The provisions of CMC 10.32.180 shall not apply to persons that properly display either a valid monthly or overnight parking permit for the Covina Civic Center parking structure at 124 E. College Street.

F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a recreational vehicle nor a commercial vehicle as that term is defined in California Vehicle Code Section 260(a) or 15210(b) may be parked overnight in any off-street public parking lot or public transit parking lot. (Ord. 11-2002 § 24, 2011; Ord. 07-1942 § 13, 2007; Ord. 04-1905 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1645 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1522 § 1, 1982; Ord. 1502 § 1, 1981.)


10.32.190 Parking prohibited for certain commercial vehicles.

A. No person shall park any commercial vehicle exceeding 6,000 pounds in gross weight (vehicle and load) or 80 inches in total exterior width (vehicle and load or combination thereof) on any street or alley in the city for a period of time exceeding 30 minutes, except when necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure fronting upon any street, or for the delivery of building materials to a building site fronting on any street, but in each instance only while actual loading or unloading operations are in progress.

B. Vehicles found in violation of this section, if found upon a public street, may be removed from the public street and stored until such time as they are claimed by the registered owner. The cost of removal and storing shall be borne by the registered owner.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

1. Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State; or

2. Any vehicle owned by a public utility or public agency while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility or public way; or

3. Any emergency vehicle.

D. The traffic engineer shall erect signs giving notice of the parking prohibitions of this section at each major entrance to the city. (Ord. 08-1961 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1263 § 1, 1974.)


10.32.200 Parking or storing of commercial vehicles.

A. It is unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle on property which is zoned A-1, A-2, or any area zoned with a residential classification.

B. It is unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle on property which is zoned for commercial purposes, except in a space which is reserved for a commercial vehicle parking purpose in the parking area required to be maintained in connection with such commercial use.

C. In any case where a fine is imposed for violation of the provisions of this section, such fines shall not be less than $25.00.

D. “Commercial vehicle,” as used in this section, means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the Vehicle Code, used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.

E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to commercial automobiles, pickups, panel delivery trucks and station wagons or the parking of a vehicle temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. (Ord. 1427 § 1, 1979.)


10.32.210 Parking or storing of trailers, motor homes and motor vehicles.

A. Neither the required front yards nor those side yards abutting a street of property zoned with a residential classification shall be used for the purposes of parking trailers, boats, house trailers, motor homes, campers, camper bodies or motor vehicles except in the paved access, garage or paved parking areas as set forth in CMC 17.26.110.

B. Neither the required front yards nor those side yards abutting a street of property zoned with a residential classification shall be used for the purpose of storing trailers, boats, house trailers, motor homes, campers, camper bodies or motor vehicles, except in the following cases:

1. The parking of a vehicle in such front yard is to be used in actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such lot, not exceeding 60 days in any 12-month period;

2. Where the vehicles stored are completely screened from visibility from the abutting street and the manner of screening is in accordance with the provisions of CMC Title 17.

C. In any case where a fine is imposed for the violation of the provisions of this section, such fines shall not be less than $25.00.

D. “Storage,” as referred to in this section, means the placing or parking of vehicles for a period in excess of 72 continuous hours.

E. “Front and side yards,” as referred to in this section, are the open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the main building facing the street projected to the side lines of the lot. For the purposes of this section, “main building” shall not include a detached or attached garage. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 1979.)


10.32.220 Parking limits cumulative.

In any 12-hour period, no person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in a designated parking space and subsequently relocate the same vehicle to stop, stand, or park in another designated parking space for a cumulative period of time in excess of that allowed for any one space where:

A. Each space used by the person in the 12-hour period has a designated time limit under this code; and

B. Each space is 150 feet or less distant from any more of the other spaces used by the person in the 12-hour period. For the purposes of this section, the distance between spaces shall be measured between the points on the edge of each space which are closest to any point on the edge of the other space. (Ord. 99-1859, 1999.)


10.32.230 Schedule of fees – Vehicle parking in metered zones, municipal parking lots, and overnight parking lots and zones.

A. The schedule of fees for vehicle parking in metered zones, municipal parking lots, or overnight parking lots and zones is hereby established at those locations and rates set forth in this section as follows:

	Fee or Service Name/Description	Fee

	Municipal Lot – Monthly Permit (all lots 24 hrs. per day)	$20.00

	Civic Center Parking Structure – Daily after First 4 Hours	$2.00

	Civic Center Parking Structure – Overnight	$3.00

	Metrolink Lot – Monthly Parking Pass – Covina Resident	$20.00

	Metrolink Lot – Monthly Parking Pass – Non-Covina Resident	$45.00

	Metrolink Structure – Daily	$2.00

	Metrolink Structure – Monthly Parking Pass – Covina Resident	$10.00

	Metrolink Structure – Monthly Parking Pass – Non-Covina Resident	$20.00

	Metrolink Structure – Overnight	$3.00

	Daily On-Street Overnight Parking Permit	$3.00

	On-Street Quarterly Overnight Parking Permit – Initial Application	$25.00

	On-Street Quarterly Overnight Parking Permit – Renewal	$17.00

	Vehicle Booting Fee	$195.00

B. This schedule of fees may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 11-2002 § 25, 2011; Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 07-1946 § 1, 2007.)


10.32.240 Trailers or semitrailers – Parking requirements.

A. A person shall not park any trailer or semitrailer upon any highway or public place unless the trailer or semitrailer is at all times while so parked attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semitrailer in a normal manner upon the highway or public place.

B. This section shall not apply to trailers or semitrailers in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semitrailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semitrailer on that portion of the highway or public place ordinarily used for vehicular parking. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)


10.32.250 Vehicles transporting hazardous materials – Parking restrictions.

A. For purposes of this section:

1. A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is in the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within 100 feet of the vehicle and has it within his or her unobstructed field of view.

2. A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who:

a. Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle; 

b. Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he or she attends; 

c. Has been instructed on the procedures he or she must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances contained in the vehicle he or she attends; 

d. Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so.

B. A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be attended at all times by its driver or qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone, or within 1,000 feet of any school, hospital or water utility reservoir site, or within 300 feet of any bridge, except for brief periods of time when mechanical or equipment failure or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation, require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place.

C. Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, pest extermination and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas, schools or hospitals, are exempt from the provisions of subsection (B) of this section. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the provider of service.

D. The rules of this section do not relieve the driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations, or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public highway. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)


10.32.260 Blocking highway or private street.

A person shall not park any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway or upon any private street which is open to the public, whether bordered by curbs or not, unless not less than 12 feet of the width of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of such highway or private street opposite such parked vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for the free passage of other vehicles. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)


10.32.270 Blocking driveways on private streets.

A. A person shall not park any vehicle in front of a driveway on a roadway or private street which is open to the public.

B. This section does not authorize any action prohibited by Section 22500 of the Vehicle Code or by any other state law. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)


10.32.280 Double parking prohibited.

A. A person shall not park any vehicle on the roadway side of a vehicle which is stopped, parking or standing on a roadway or private street at the curb or edge of the roadway.

B. This section does not authorize any action prohibited by Section 22500 of the Vehicle Code or any other state law. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)


10.32.290 Angle parking.

Whenever the traffic engineer finds that the width of a highway and traffic conditions are such that the parking of vehicles at an angle to the curb instead of parallel to the curb will not impede traffic, and that there is need for the additional parking space which parking at an angle will provide, the traffic engineer shall indicate at what angle traffic conditions make it desirable that vehicles should be parked by placing parallel white lines on the surface of the roadway. On such portions of such highways, whether such lines were painted before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an operator shall not stop, stand or park any vehicle except between, at the angle indicated by, and parallel to both such adjacent white lines, with the nearest wheel not more than one foot from the curb. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)


10.32.300 Removal of ignition key when parking.

A. Every operator who parks a vehicle upon any highway or public place shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom and take such key with him or her, unless a licensed operator remains in such motor vehicle, in which case such licensed operator before leaving such vehicle shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom, and take such key with him or her. 

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any operator of a vehicle owned by a public utility or public agency while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility or public way or to the operator of any emergency vehicle. (Ord. 11-2002 § 26, 2011.)1

For statutory provisions requiring submission of all local regulations concerning stopping or standing of vehicles on state highways to the State Highway Department, see Vehicle Code § 22506; for provisions authorizing local authorities to prohibit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles on certain streets during all or a portion of the day, see Vehicle Code § 22507. 


Chapter 10.36 LOADING AND UNLOADING VEHICLES

Sections:

10.36.010    Loading zones – Establishment – Marking.

10.36.020    Curb, pavement and wheel block markings.

10.36.030    Permission to load or unload – Effect.

10.36.040    Commercial loading zones – Use restrictions.

10.36.050    Passenger loading zones – Use restrictions.

10.36.060    Standing in alleys prohibited – For loading or unloading only.

10.36.070    Bus loading zones.

10.36.080    Taxicab parking zones.


10.36.010 Loading zones – Establishment – Marking.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

1. At any place in the town center zone;

2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

B. In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C. Commercial loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line stenciled with black letters stating “Commercial Loading Only” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones.

D. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters stating “Passenger Loading Only” upon the top of all curbs in such zones. Taxicab parking zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters stating “For Taxicabs Only” upon the top or side of all curbs in such zones.

E. Bus loading zones shall be indicated by a red line stenciled with white letters stating “No Standing” together with the words “Bus Loading Zone” upon the top or side of all curbs in such zones. (Ord. 11-2002 § 27, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 5, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.76.)


10.36.020 Curb, pavement and wheel block markings.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb, pavement or wheel block markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb, pavement or wheel block markings shall have the meaning as herein set forth:

1. Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code of the state, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus loading zone; 

2. Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes;

3. White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers, which shall not exceed three minutes; 

4. Green means no standing or parking for longer than 20 minutes at any time; 

5. Blue accompanied by the signage and markings required by the Vehicle Code of the state means reserved parking for disabled persons.

B. When the traffic engineer, as authorized under this title, has caused curb, pavement or wheel block markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such curb, pavement or wheel block marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 11-2002 § 28, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.77.)


10.36.030 Permission to load or unload – Effect.

A. Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purpose of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes.

B. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C. Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary and reasonable therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes.

D. Within the total time limits above-specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this section. (1964 Code § 16.78.)


10.36.040 Commercial loading zones – Use restrictions.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any commercial loading zone for any purpose other than for loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in CMC 10.36.030. (Ord. 11-2002 § 29, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.79.)


10.36.050 Passenger loading zones – Use restrictions.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in CMC 10.36.030. (1964 Code § 16.80.)


10.36.060 Standing in alleys prohibited – For loading or unloading only.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading of persons or materials in any alley. The city council finds that the following alley is exempt from the above restriction:

A. That north-south alley located 165 feet east of the centerline of Glendora Avenue south of Colver Place. (Ord. 91-1732 § 2, 1991; 1964 Code § 16.81.)


10.36.070 Bus loading zones.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus loading zones opposite curb space for the loading or unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this section.

B. “Bus,” as used in this section, means any motorbus, motor coach or trackless trolley coach used as a common carrier of passengers.

C. No bus loading zone shall exceed 80 feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the traffic engineer he may extend bus loading zones not to exceed a total length of 125 feet.

D. Bus loading zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.

E. No bus loading zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a safety zone.

F. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus loading zone. (Ord. 11-2002 § 30, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.82.)


10.36.080 Taxicab parking zones.

A. The traffic engineer is authorized to establish taxicab parking zones.

B. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a taxicab in a taxicab parking zone. (Ord. 11-2002 § 31, 2011; Ord. 1525 § 1, 1982; 1964 Code § 16.83.)


Chapter 10.40 MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.40.010    Cleaning of sidewalks required.

10.40.020    Report of damage to certain property required.

10.40.030    Emerging from alley or private driveway.

10.40.040    Driving through funeral processions.

10.40.050    Driving on sidewalks.

10.40.060    Driving on newly made pavements.

10.40.070    Driving contrary to directions on traffic barriers.

10.40.080    Littering on highway.

10.40.090    Vehicle operation on private property – Permission required – Exceptions.

10.40.100    Vehicle operation on private property – Regulations.

10.40.110    One-way highways – Designations – Signs required.

10.40.120    Loading and unloading of juvenile passengers.

10.40.130    Molesting of traffic counting devices prohibited.

10.40.140    Washing vehicles in highway.

10.40.150    Repairing of vehicles on highway.


10.40.010 Cleaning of sidewalks required.

No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to keep the sidewalk adjacent to his or her house, place of business, or premises in a clean and neat condition, free of trash, graffiti or offensive material of any kind or nature. (Ord. 11-2002 § 32, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.3.)


10.40.020 Report of damage to certain property required.

A. The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, resulting in damage to any ornamental shade tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall, within 24 hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the police department of the city.

B. Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

C. A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time such driver is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event such driver shall make a report as required in subsection (A) of this section within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report. (1964 Code § 16.4.)


10.40.030 Emerging from alley or private driveway.

The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. (1964 Code § 16.42.)


10.40.040 Driving through funeral processions.

No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. (1964 Code § 16.43.)


10.40.050 Driving on sidewalks.

The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway except to cross the same at a permanent or temporary driveway. (Ord. 11-2002 § 33, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.44.)


10.40.060 Driving on newly made pavements.

No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (1964 Code § 16.45.)


10.40.070 Driving contrary to directions on traffic barriers.

No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected:

A. Pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the city;

B. By any public utility;

C. By any department of the city; or

D. By any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city; nor shall any unauthorized person move or alter the position of any such barrier or sign. (1964 Code § 16.46.)


10.40.080 Littering on highway.

No person shall throw, place, deposit or dump or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped upon any highway or sidewalk, any bottle, can, garbage, rubbish or any substance likely to injure or damage traffic using the highway or sidewalk. (Ord. 11-2002 § 34, 2011; Ord. 1222 § 3, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.48.)


10.40.090 Vehicle operation on private property – Permission required – Exceptions.

It is unlawful to operate any type of motorized vehicle, as defined in Section 415 of the Vehicle Code of the state, upon the private property of another without first obtaining the written permission of the owner.

Persons who obtain permission from private property owners to operate motorized vehicles thereon shall maintain in their possession such written permission at all times when operating motorized vehicles on such private property.

This section in no way prohibits the use of such private property by:

A. Emergency vehicles;

B. Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal business;

C. Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial purposes where the general public is expressly or implicitly invited to such property;

D. Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes and where such vehicle is there at the express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant. (1964 Code § 16.53-1.)


10.40.100 Vehicle operation on private property – Regulations.

Motor vehicles operating on private property open to the public or on a public parking lot not subject to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall be subject to the following regulations:

A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent nor in any manner that endangers the welfare and safety of persons or property thereon, having due regard for the surface and condition of the area.

B. No person shall engage in or aid or abet in any motor vehicle speed contest or motor vehicle exhibition of speed thereon without prior written authorization therefor from the owner, lessee or other person in legal possession.

C. No person shall unreasonably accelerate the motor of any vehicle or unreasonably sound, blow or operate the horn or other audible warning device of any vehicle. (Ord. 1229 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.53-2.)


10.40.110 One-way highways – Designations – Signs required.

If the city council finds that the width of a highway, the amount of traffic thereon, and the availability of other highways are such that traffic on such highway should proceed in one direction only, the director of public works shall erect and maintain in a conspicuous place on such highway at the intersection of each highway intersecting such highway adequate signs bearing the words “One Way” and indicating which way. (Ord. 11-2002 § 35, 2011; Ord. 1458 § 1, 1980.)


10.40.120 Loading and unloading of juvenile passengers.

A. No operator of a motor vehicle shall stop or park to load or unload juvenile passengers where such loading or unloading is in a location which would encourage the juvenile to cross the street unattended without a crosswalk or a signal, including, but not limited to:

1. Where there is no crosswalk or a traffic signal within 100 feet;

2. Where it is prohibited by posted signs; or

3. Where it places one’s intended juvenile passengers in a hazardous situation, including, but not limited to, beckoning a juvenile(s) to cross the street in violation of this section.

B. Subsection (A) of this section shall not apply when a peace officer directs the vehicle operator to stop or park and permits a passenger(s) to unload.

C. As used herein, “juvenile” means a child 14 years of age or younger.

D. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, which may be punishable as provided in CMC 1.16.010(B). (Ord. 98-1827 § 1, 1998.)


10.40.130 Molesting of traffic counting devices prohibited.

Unless authorized by the director of public works, a person shall not move, molest, tamper with or damage in any way any traffic counting device which has been located within a city highway or adjacent thereto by authority of the director of public works. (Ord. 11-2002 § 36, 2011; Ord. 08-1961 § 2, 2008.)


10.40.140 Washing vehicles in highway.

A person shall not dust, wipe, wash or otherwise clean, or use or employ any method of dusting, wiping, washing or otherwise cleaning any vehicle or portion thereof while on any highway. (Ord. 11-2002 § 37, 2011.)


10.40.150 Repairing of vehicles on highway.

A. A person shall not repair, or make any repairs, or add or install any part or accessory to or on any vehicle while the same is upon any highway.

B. The provisions of this section do not prohibit the operator of any vehicle which is disabled while upon any highway, to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping, from making or causing to be made the repairs necessary to enable such vehicle to be moved from the highway. (Ord. 11-2002 § 37, 2011.)


Chapter 10.44 TRUCK ROUTES1

Sections:

10.44.010    Designation.

10.44.020    Signing.

10.44.030    Vehicles over three tons – Use required – Exceptions.

10.44.035    Maximum size of trucks allowed on truck routes.

10.44.040    Commercial vehicles – Use of certain streets prohibited.

10.44.050    Larger truck access to terminals.


10.44.010 Designation.

When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following highways or portions of highways are declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons:

A. Arrow Highway, from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits;

B. Azusa Avenue, from the southerly city limits to the northerly city limits;

C. Badillo Street, from Azusa Avenue on the west to Grand Avenue on the east;

D. Barranca Avenue, from the southerly city limits to San Bernardino Road;

E. Citrus Avenue, from the southerly city limits to Badillo Street and the northerly city limits to San Bernardino Road; 

F. Front Street, from Citrus Avenue on the west to Barranca Avenue on the east;

G. Grand Avenue, from the southerly city limits to the northerly city limits; 

H. San Bernardino Road, from the westerly city limits to Grand Avenue on the east; 

I. Second Avenue, from Front Street on the north to Badillo Street on the south;

J. Workman Street, from Citrus Avenue on the west to Barranca Avenue on the east. (Ord. 11-2002 § 38, 2011; Ord. 00-1865, 2000; Ord. 1434 §§ 1, 2, 1979; Ord. 1306 §§ 1, 2, 1975; Ord. 1192, 1972; Ord. 1178 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code § 16.50.)


10.44.020 Signing.

Whenever this title or any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “Truck Traffic Routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. (1964 Code § 16.51.)


10.44.030 Vehicles over three tons – Use required – Exceptions.

A. When truck traffic routes are established and designated by appropriate signs as provided in CMC 10.44.010 and 10.44.020, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route and none other; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck traffic route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

1. Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or

2. Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility located in the central business district. (1964 Code § 16.52.)


10.44.035 Maximum size of trucks allowed on truck routes.

When truck traffic routes are established and designated by appropriate signs as provided in CMC 10.44.010 and 10.44.020, the total outside width of any vehicle or load thereon shall not exceed 96 inches and no combination of vehicles coupled together, including any attachments thereto shall exceed a total length of 60 feet. (Ord. 1564 § 1, 1984.)


10.44.040 Commercial vehicles – Use of certain streets prohibited.

A. Whenever this code or any other ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.

B. When signs are erected as provided in this section, no driver of a commercial vehicle shall disobey the direction of such sign; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle coming from a truck traffic route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. (Ord. 1191, 1972; 1964 Code § 16.53.)


10.44.050 Larger truck access to terminals.

A. Any combination of vehicles exceeding the maximum size as provided in CMC 10.44.035 is permitted only on those routes which the city and other affected agencies have jointly identified and signed as being connections between terminals and federally designated highways.

B. For purposes of this section, “terminal” (as defined in Section 35401.5(b) of the State Vehicle Code) means a facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped and where full-load consignments may be off-loaded, or at which the vehicle combinations are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured.

C. Determination of terminal access routes if the terminal is located in the city:

1. Proposals for signing the routes shall be initiated by the terminal operator or trucking firm by a written request to the city. The request shall include the following:

a. Name, address, business, telephone number, of applicant;

b. Location of the terminal;

c. Map showing the preferred route and alternate routes if appropriate;

d. Evidence that the terminal meets established criteria;

e. Evidence that the terminal parking and terminal entries are adequate;

f. Other considerations noted by applicant which need resolution, including potential road geometric problems.

2. The traffic engineer shall make a determination if the proposed routes have adequate turning radii and lane widths to safely accommodate these vehicles and the general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes will not prevent safe operation of these vehicles and endanger public safety.

3. If the route passes through more than the city’s jurisdiction, the traffic engineer shall require written approval from all affected jurisdictions.

4. If the traffic engineer determines that the proposed routes are safe, and upon which the larger trucks can operate, the traffic engineer shall request a written approval from the State Department of Transportation for the access points to the federally designated highway system for larger trucks and for any routes that cross or traverse state highways.

5. After receiving written approval from all affected agencies, the traffic engineer shall give written approval to the terminal operator or trucking firm requesting the terminal access routes.

6. The traffic engineer shall erect and maintain terminal signings at every decision point on the route to terminals within the city.

7. The terminal operator or trucking firm requesting the terminal routes shall be responsible for the actual cost of erecting and maintaining the terminal signings along the approved terminal routes. The terminal operator or trucking firm shall also be responsible for signing costs and other charges that will be imposed by the other affected agencies.

8. The city has the right to revoke the terminal route designated or designate an alternate route if the proposed route performs in an unsatisfactory manner.

9. If either the traffic engineer or the other affected agencies determine that the proposed route is inadequate, the applicant shall be notified of acceptable alternate routes, if any, or shall be notified of those modifications necessary to make a route acceptable. The applicant shall be requested to eliminate deficiencies in the route, at the applicant’s expense, prior to route approval. (Ord. 1564 § 1, 1984.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate weight and loads upon streets, see Vehicle Code § 35701. 


Chapter 10.48 PEDESTRIANS1

Sections:

10.48.010    Crosswalk establishment.

10.48.020    Crossing roadway at right angles.

10.48.030    Standing in roadways.


10.48.010 Crosswalk establishment.

A. The traffic engineer shall mark crosswalks at those locations which the city council has determined and found that conditions of vehicular and pedestrian traffic are such that the establishment of a marked crosswalk is warranted.

B. The traffic engineer may mark a portion of a roadway at intersections or in conjunction with channelizing islands adjacent to intersections if he or she finds such markings will reduce traffic conflicts. (Ord. 11-2002 § 39, 2011; 1964 Code § 16.30.)


10.48.020 Crossing roadway at right angles.

No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. (1964 Code § 16.31.)


10.48.030 Standing in roadways.

No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty. (1964 Code § 16.32.)1

For statutory provisions regarding local regulation of pedestrians, see Vehicle Code §§ 21106, 21109, and 21961. 


Chapter 10.521 BICYCLES AND WHEELED TOYS

Sections:

10.52.001    Definitions.

10.52.002    Business sidewalk operation prohibited.

10.52.003    Wheeled toys prohibited on streets.

10.52.004    Parking restrictions.

10.52.005    Exemption from regulations.

10.52.006    Posting authorized.

10.52.010    –

10.52.130    Repealed.


10.52.001 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined in this section and shall have the meaning thus ascribed:

A. “Bicycle” includes every device propelled in whole or in part by human power upon which a person may ride, having two or more tandem wheels any one of which is over 14 inches in diameter.

B. “Wheeled toy” includes all other wheeled objects, regardless of motive power, not classified as bicycles in this code nor as vehicles in the Vehicle Code, and specifically includes, but without limitation, roller skates, skateboards, coasters, scooters and toy vehicles.

C. “Business district” shall be that defined by the Vehicle Code.

D. “Place of public assembly” includes all buildings or areas where persons congregate from time to time, exclusive of those within business districts as defined in this section.

E. “Sidewalk” means that area adjacent to a traveled roadway, whether hard-surfaced or not, upon which the public is customarily invited or permitted to walk or otherwise use. (Ord. 1319 § 2, 1976.)


10.52.002 Business sidewalk operation prohibited.

No person shall use or operate any bicycle or wheeled toy upon any sidewalk in a business district or adjacent to any place of public assembly. (Ord. 1319 § 2, 1976.)


10.52.003 Wheeled toys prohibited on streets.

No person shall use, operate, park or leave any wheeled toy upon the traveled way of any public street or alley. (Ord. 1319 § 2, 1976.)


10.52.004 Parking restrictions.

No person shall park or leave any bicycle or wheeled toy upon any street or alley, nor upon any sidewalk in any business district or adjacent to any place of public assembly in such manner as to obstruct or hinder the free passage of pedestrians or other vehicles or devices permitted to use the same. Any bicycle or wheeled toy found in violation of this section may be impounded by the police department and returned to the owner under such reasonable conditions as may be established by the chief of police. (Ord. 1319 § 2, 1976.)


10.52.005 Exemption from regulations.

Devices designed, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants, invalids or incapacitated persons, or devices designed, intended and used for the transportation of merchandise to or from the place of purchase, and other wheeled devices when being used for either of these purposes, shall be exempted from the regulations imposed by this chapter. Likewise, the regulations specified in this chapter shall not apply to a place of public assembly when it is not open or in use, nor shall they apply if the person in charge of such place of public assembly waives the same. Likewise, the regulations specified in this chapter shall not apply to sworn peace officers engaged in their usual and customary employment activities. (Ord. 94-1773 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1319 § 2, 1976.)


10.52.006 Posting authorized.

The city traffic engineer is authorized and directed to erect such signs and other notices as he deems advisable under this chapter. (Ord. 1319 § 2, 1976.)


10.52.010 Registration – Required.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.90.)


10.52.020 Registration – Issuance – Duration.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.91.)


10.52.030 Registration – Scope.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.92.)


10.52.040 Registration – Fee.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; 1964 Code § 16.93.)


10.52.050 Registration – Record.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.94.)


10.52.060 Purchaser to apply for new registration.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.95.)


10.52.070 Registration stickers and serial numbers.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; 1964 Code § 16.96.)


10.52.080 Mutilation of registration or serial number.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.97.)


10.52.090 Reports of secondhand sales.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.98.)


10.52.100 Dealers selling bicycles – Reports.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.99.)


10.52.110 Reports of sales or transfers by registrant.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.100.)


10.52.120 Impoundment.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.101.)


10.52.130 Registration – Due when.

Repealed by Ord. 11-2002. (1964 Code § 16.102.)1

For statutory provisions authorizing local authorities to pass ordinances not in conflict with state law regarding operation, use, licensing and equipment of bicycles, see Vehicle Code § 21206. 


Chapter 10.56 PARADES

Sections:

10.56.010    Definition.

10.56.020    Permit required.

10.56.030    Exemptions from provisions.

10.56.040    Application for permit – Time of filing – Fee.

10.56.050    Investigation.

10.56.060    Bond required.

10.56.070    Contents of the permit.

10.56.080    Parade prohibited.

10.56.090    Appeal of denial.

10.56.100    Revocation of permit.

10.56.110    Violation.

10.56.120    Notification.


10.56.010 Definition.

“Parade” means any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, review, or procession of any kind, in or upon any street, alley, park or other public place which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations and controls. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.103.)


10.56.020 Permit required.

No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, solicit, form or start any parade unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the city manager and unless such permit is carried by the person heading or leading the parade. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.104.)


10.56.030 Exemptions from provisions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to funeral processions; nor to any parade carried on by the pupils of the public schools as a part of their educational activities and under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper public school authorities with the approval of the public school administrators, nor to any governmental agency within the scope of its functions. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.105.)


10.56.040 Application for permit – Time of filing – Fee.

Applications for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade and applicants shall pay a nonrefundable fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council to defray in part the cost of investigation and report. Such application shall be sworn to and shall state:

A. The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such parade; 

B. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;

C. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;

D. The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued;

E. The date when such parade is to be conducted;

F. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;

G. The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals, and a description of the vehicles;

H. The hour when such parade will start and terminate;

I. Whether such parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the highways to be traversed;

J. The location by streets of any assembly or assembly areas for such parade;

K. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;

L. The interval space to be maintained between units of such parade; 

M. If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;

N. Any other information the chief of police deems necessary for his or her investigation. (Ord. 11-2002 § 41, 2011; Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.106.)


10.56.050 Investigation.

The police chief shall investigate and make a recommendation to the city manager to approve, with or without conditions, or deny the application based upon a consideration of the following questions and other pertinent information:

A. Will the conduct of such parade substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route?

B. Will the conduct of such parade require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection to the city or impose too great an expense to the city?

C. Will the concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas?

D. Will the conduct of such parade interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire?

E. Will the conduct of such parade be reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property?

F. Will such parade move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without stopping en route?

G. Is such parade to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is it designed to be held purely for private profit?

H. Has the permittee provided for the services of monitors to control the orderly conduct of the parade in conformity with such permit?

I. Has the permittee provided reasonable means for informing all the persons participating therein of terms and conditions of such permit?

J. Does the applicant agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit?

K. Are the facts contained in the application true and not false or nonexistent in any material detail? (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.107.)


10.56.060 Bond required.

An applicant for a parade permit may be required by the city manager, before the issuance of a permit, to deposit with the finance department a sum of money or an approved surety bond in such amount as determined by the city manager as a guarantee that he will pay any and all damages which may result in the conduct of the parade. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.108.)


10.56.070 Contents of the permit.

Each parade permit shall state the following:

A. The assembly area and time of assembly;

B. The starting time;

C. The route of the parade;

D. What portions of the street to be traversed may be occupied by such parade;

E. The disbanding area and time of disbanding;

F. The number of persons required to monitor the parade;

G. The maximum length of parade in miles or fractions thereof, or in units, or in number of participants;

H. Such other requirements as are found by the city manager to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.109.)


10.56.080 Parade prohibited.

No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade which the city manager finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event and is designed to be held purely for private profit. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.110.)


10.56.090 Appeal of denial.

Any appeal to the city council from the city manager’s denial of a parade permit must be filed with the city clerk within five days after notice of such denial. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.111.)


10.56.100 Revocation of permit.

Any permit for a parade issued under this chapter may be summarily revoked by the city manager at any time when by reason of disaster, public calamity or other emergency, the city manager determines that the safety of persons or property demands such revocation. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.112.)


10.56.110 Violation.

Willful violation of any of the terms or conditions of the parade permit by the permittee or any participant in the parade is a misdemeanor. Willful violation of any section of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.113.)


10.56.120 Notification.

Upon the granting of a parade permit, the city manager will cause a copy of the permit to be sent to all agencies and businesses in the Covina area providing emergency services. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 16.114.)


Chapter 10.57 INTERFERENCE WITH SPECIAL EVENT PROHIBITED

Sections:

10.57.010    Definitions.

10.57.020    Interference with special event prohibited.

10.57.030    Violation – Penalty.


10.57.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning given herein:

A. “City” means the city of Covina.

B. “Public place” means any and all public streets, sidewalks, gutters, boulevards, alleys or other public rights-of-way and any and all public buildings, parks, squares, grounds and publicly owned off-street parking areas.

C. “Sidewalk” shall have the meaning set forth in CMC 1.04.010.

D. “Special event” shall mean any event, parade, exposition, fair or procession staged in or upon public places or sidewalks for which city services are required because of interference with normal vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic or which will reasonably be expected to generate an extraordinary need for sanitation or other city services. “Special event” also includes any event which has received a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.08 CMC. (Ord. 04-1910 § 1, 2004.)


10.57.020 Interference with special event prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, disrupt or impede a permitted special event as specified herein. The following acts are prohibited by this section when done for the purpose of or with knowledge that an effect thereof is to interfere with or disrupt the ability of the permittee to carry on the special event:

A. To block, obstruct or impede the passage of participants, vehicles or animals in the special event along the special event route;

B. When not participating in the special event with the permission of the permit holder, to walk, run, operate a skateboard, ride any wheeled vehicle or roller skate through, between, with or among the participants, vehicles or animals in the special event, except in cases of bona fide emergency;

C. To drop, roll, throw, toss, squirt or propel any gaseous, liquid, semisolid or solid substance or object toward or among the participants, vehicles or animals in the special event;

D. To grab, take hold of, strike, hit, pull or push any participant, vehicle or animal in the special event, or to mount any vehicle in the special event, except with the permission of the permittee or in cases of bona fide emergency;

E. To generate, amplify or broadcast any noises or sounds using any loudspeaker, amplifier, instrument or device other than sounds generated solely by the human voice or body unaided by any such amplifier, device or instrument upon any sidewalk or public place. This restriction shall apply only along the special event route while the special event is in progress at that location, and shall not apply to any participant in the special event acting with the permission of the permittee. (Ord. 04-1910 § 1, 2004.)


10.57.030 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000 or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 04-1910 § 1, 2004.)


Chapter 10.60 MOTOR VEHICLES EMITTING FALSE ALARMS WHILE PARKED IN PUBLIC PARKING FACILITIES 

Sections:

10.60.010    Definitions.

10.60.020    Time restriction.

10.60.030    Enforcement of false alarms.

10.60.040    Excessive false alarms – Penalties.

10.60.050    Nuisance.

10.60.060    Abatement.

10.60.070    Signage.


10.60.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied to the terms utilized in this chapter, unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended:

A. “Emergency situation” means any situation where life or property is in physical jeopardy.

B. “False alarm” means an alarm signal emitting from a motor vehicle necessitating a response by the police department where an emergency situation does not exist.

C. “Motor vehicle” or “vehicle” means a vehicle which is self-propelled as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 415.

D. “Public parking facility” means any property improved for the purposes of parking motor vehicles, which property is owned and under the direct control of the legislative body of the city of Covina. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


10.60.020 Time restriction.

A. It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any alarm located in a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven by such person to emit any audible sound constituting a false alarm for a period of more than five minutes while parked in a public parking facility within the city of Covina.

B. The time shall be calculated based upon the emission of the first audible sound ending five minutes thereafter notwithstanding any variation or delay in the emissions of audible sounds. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


10.60.030 Enforcement of false alarms.

Any vehicle parked in, upon, or within a public parking facility is subject to enforcement under this chapter. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


10.60.040 Excessive false alarms – Penalties.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit a false alarm to be emitted from a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven by such person. Any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. The first violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. The second infraction occurring within one year of the first violation shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00. Every violation occurring after the second violation within one year of the first violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


10.60.050 Nuisance.

Any violation of this chapter is declared a public nuisance which is subject to abatement pursuant to the procedures described in this chapter and is authorized by law. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


10.60.060 Abatement.

A. The police department in order to abate the public nuisance created by a vehicle in violation of this chapter may undertake such procedures as are reasonably necessary to deactivate the alarm.

B. Should the police department be unable to deactivate the alarm, the vehicle shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22651.5. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


10.60.070 Signage.

All public parking facilities which are subject to this chapter shall have erected and placed appropriate signs giving notice of the regulations imposed by this chapter. Such notice shall be posted in conspicuous places including the entrance and shall be not less than 17 by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height. (Ord. 96-1802 § 2, 1996.)


Chapter 10.64 VALET PARKING

Sections:

10.64.010    Purpose.

10.64.020    Definitions.

10.64.030    Permit required.

10.64.040    Rules and regulations.

10.64.050    Conformance with applicable laws.

10.64.060    Violation.


10.64.010 Purpose.

The primary purpose of public streets and rights-of-way is the free and unobstructed right of travel. The city recognizes that the use of public streets and rights-of-way for valet parking operations, while providing a public benefit, may impede travel, interfere with rights of others using the streets and rights-of-way, and may affect the public safety and create a public nuisance. The city may therefore permit and restrict valet parking operations as a special privilege, not as a matter of right, in order to foster public safety and to prevent public nuisances. The approval of any permit under this chapter for the use of the public right-of-way is on a temporary and nonpermanent basis and is for a nonexclusive use of that public right-of-way. Permittees shall have neither a property interest in nor any entitlement to the granting or continuation of any permit for the use of any public right-of-way. (Ord. 09-1976 § 1, 2009.)


10.64.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the prescribed meanings:

“City council” shall mean the city council of the city of Covina, California.

“Operator” shall mean any person engaged in the business of valet parking operations.

“Parking facility” shall mean any area owned by the city of Covina and dedicated for public parking, including but not limited to dedicated curbside parking areas, parking lots, and parking structures.

“Person” shall mean a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other business entity, and employees, agents and subcontractors thereof.

“Public right-of-way” shall mean any area dedicated for public use as a public street, pedestrian way, or other thoroughfare, including but not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways.

“Sponsor” shall mean any person who operates, or causes to be operated, a valet parking operation at the sponsor’s place of business or function.

“Valet parking” shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation engaged in, conducting or managing the receiving, taking possession of, driving, moving, parking, or leaving standing other persons’ motor vehicles, whether or not a charge is levied, and whether or not such persons are employed by, or under contract to the business for which the vehicles are being parked. (Ord. 09-1976 § 1, 2009.)


10.64.030 Permit required.

No person shall operate, engage in, conduct, manage, or cause to be operated any valet parking operation or any related activity upon any portion of a public street or right-of-way or other city property, including any city-owned parking facility, except under the terms and conditions of a current operator’s valet parking permit and, if using the public street or right-of-way in any manner for drop-off and pick-up of vehicles, under the terms and conditions of a current sponsor’s valet parking permit. (Ord. 09-1976 § 1, 2009.)


10.64.040 Rules and regulations.

The city council may establish rules and regulations, by resolution, for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and when duly adopted by the city council such rules shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 09-1976 § 1, 2009.)


10.64.050 Conformance with applicable laws.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the parking of motor vehicles by valet parking operators in a manner contrary to, and all permittees shall comply with, applicable state laws and local parking and traffic regulations, including this code. (Ord. 09-1976 § 1, 2009.)


10.64.060 Violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the regulations hereunder or the terms and conditions of any permit issued hereunder is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC. (Ord. 09-1976 § 1, 2009.)


Chapter 10.68 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

10.68.010    Speed limits.


10.68.010 Speed limits.

The California Vehicle Code provides that cities may by ordinance establish prima facie speed limits. It is determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the following prima facie speed limits would facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and would be reasonable and safe. It is declared that signs be erected, as appropriate, to provide notice of the following prima facie speed limits:

	Name of Street	From	To	Prima Facie Speed Limit (MPH)

	Arrow Highway	Arrow Grand Circle	Grand Avenue	45

	Arrow Highway	Grand Avenue	1000' Easterly	45

	Azusa Avenue	South City Limits	San Bernardino Road	40

	Azusa Avenue	San Bernardino Road	Cypress Street	40**

	Azusa Avenue	Cypress Street	Arrow Highway	40

	Badillo Street	Lark Ellen Avenue	Hollenbeck Avenue	40

	Badillo Street	Hollenbeck Avenue	Fourth Avenue	40

	Badillo Street	Fourth Avenue	Second Avenue	30

	Badillo Street	Second Avenue	Barranca Avenue	40

	Badillo Street	Barranca Avenue	Grand Avenue	40

	Badillo Street	Grand Avenue	Glendora Avenue	45**

	Badillo Street	Glendora Avenue	Reeder Avenue	45

	Badillo Street	Reeder Avenue	East City Limits	45

	Barranca Avenue	South City Limits	Puente Street	40**

	Barranca Avenue	Puente Street	San Bernardino Road	40**

	Barranca Avenue	San Bernardino Road	Covina Boulevard	40**

	Barranca Avenue	Covina Boulevard	North City Limits	40

	Cienega Avenue	Barranca Avenue	Grand Avenue	40

	Cienega Avenue	Arroway Avenue	Ivescrest Avenue	40**

	Citrus Avenue	Workman Avenue	Rowland Avenue	40

	Citrus Avenue	Rowland Avenue	Puente Street	40

	Citrus Avenue	Puente Street	Badillo Street	35

	Citrus Avenue	Badillo Street	San Bernardino Road	25

	Citrus Avenue	San Bernardino Road	Covina Boulevard	35

	Citrus Avenue	Covina Boulevard	Arrow Highway	40

	Covina Boulevard	Fircroft Avenue	Citrus Avenue	40

	Covina Boulevard 	Citrus Avenue	Grand Avenue	40**

	Covina Boulevard	Grand Avenue	Rimhurst Avenue	40**

	Covina Boulevard 	Bonnie Cove Avenue	Sunflower Avenue	40**

	Covina Hills Road	Grand Avenue	Rancho La Carlota Road	30

	Cypress Street	Leaf Avenue	Hollenbeck Avenue	40**

	Cypress Street	Hollenbeck Avenue	Citrus Avenue	40**

	Cypress Street	Citrus Avenue	Barranca Avenue	40

	Cypress Street	Barranca Avenue	Grand Avenue	40

	Cypress Street	Grand Avenue	Glendora Avenue	40

	Cypress Street	Glendora Avenue	Bonnie Cove Avenue	40**

	Cypress Street	Bonnie Cove Avenue	Sunflower Avenue	40

	Glendora Avenue	Puente Street	Ruddock Street	35**

	Glendora Avenue	Ruddock Street	Cypress Street	35

	Glendora Avenue	Cypress Street	Covina Boulevard	35

	Glendora Avenue	Covina Boulevard	Cienega Avenue	35**

	Grand Avenue	Walnut Creek Road	Puente Street	40

	Grand Avenue	Puente Street	San Bernardino Road	40**

	Grand Avenue	San Bernardino Road	Covina Boulevard	40

	Grand Avenue	Covina Boulevard	Arrow Highway	40

	Hollenbeck Avenue	South City Limits	Rowland Avenue	35

	Hollenbeck Avenue	Rowland Avenue	Badillo Street	35**

	Hollenbeck Avenue	Badillo Street	Edna Place	35

	Hollenbeck Avenue	Covina Boulevard	Arrow Highway	40

	Holt Avenue	I-10 Freeway	Via Verde Street	45

	Lark Ellen Avenue	Grovecenter Street	Edna Place	40**

	Puente Street	Armel Drive	Hollenbeck Avenue	35**

	Puente Street	Hollenbeck Avenue	Citrus Avenue	35

	Puente Street	Citrus Avenue	Barranca Avenue	30

	Puente Street	Barranca Avenue	Grand Avenue	40**

	Puente Street	Grand Avenue	Glendora Avenue	35**

	Puente Street	Glendora Avenue	Shouse Avenue	25

	Puente Street	Reeder Avenue	Rancho Corto Drive	45

	Reeder Avenue	Old Badillo Street	Puente Street	35

	Reeder Avenue	Old Badillo Street	Badillo Street	30**

	Reeder Avenue	Badillo Street	Cypress Street	35

	Rowland Avenue	Armel Drive	Citrus Avenue	40

	Rowland Avenue	Citrus Avenue	Barranca Avenue	40

	Rowland Avenue	Barranca Avenue	Forestdale Avenue	40

	San Bernardino Road	Vincent Avenue	Lark Ellen Avenue	40

	San Bernardino Road	Lark Ellen Avenue	Azusa Avenue	35

	San Bernardino Road	Azusa Avenue	Hollenbeck Avenue	35**

	San Bernardino Road	Hollenbeck Avenue	Citrus Avenue	30

	San Bernardino Road	Citrus Avenue	Barranca Avenue	35

	San Bernardino Road	Barranca Avenue	Grand Avenue	35

	Second Avenue	Rowland Avenue	Badillo Street	35

	Second Avenue	Badillo Street	Front Street	30

	Sunflower Avenue	Cypress Street	Cienega Avenue	35**

	Vincent Avenue	Badillo Street	Edna Place	35

	Workman Avenue	West City Limits	East City Limit w/o Citrus	35**

	Workman Avenue	Citrus Avenue	Barranca Avenue	35

	Workman Avenue	Barranca Avenue	Easterly End of Road	30

**    Twenty-five mph when children are present.

(Ord. 16-2056 § 2, 2016.)


Title 11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Chapters:

11.04    Public Improvements

11.08    Highway Permits and Regulations

11.12    Roll-Off Debris Containers on Highways

11.16    Undergrounding of Utilities

11.24    House Numbering

11.26    Outdoor Sidewalk Dining

11.28    Awnings

11.32    Newsracks

11.36    Street Trees

11.37    Regulation of Maintenance Standards for Private Property Encroachment onto the Public Rights-of-Way

11.40    Miscellaneous Regulations

11.44    Maintenance and Repair of Hazardous Private Streets and Private Drains

11.48    Community Event Booths

11.50    Underground Utility Maps

11.54    Appeal of Director’s Decisions under This Title


Chapter 11.04 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

11.04.010    Absence declared prejudicial to health, safety and welfare.

11.04.020    Required when.

11.04.030    Distance along street frontage.

11.04.040    Procedure.

11.04.060    Performance bond.

11.04.070    Exceptions.

11.04.080    Modification for extreme hardship.

11.04.090    Cost of existing street lighting facilities.

11.04.100    Improvements under private contract – Permission required.


11.04.010 Absence declared prejudicial to health, safety and welfare.

The absence of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving and adequate drainage, fire protection and street lighting facilities within the city is found and declared to be prejudicial to the public health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. (1964 Code § 20.1.)


11.04.020 Required when.

Any person constructing or causing to be constructed any building, dwelling, parking or storage lot, or developing any areas of the city, shall also construct or install, at his own cost, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving and drainage, and fire protection facilities and appurtenances and dedicate necessary rights-of-way, in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city and in accordance with the master plan of the streets and highways of the city. Such improvements shall be constructed or installed along all public street frontage adjoining the land being developed or upon which any building, dwelling, parking or storage lot is to be constructed unless curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving and adequate drainage, and fire protection facilities already exist along the street frontage at their ultimate location(s).

Street lighting facilities and appurtenances shall be installed adjacent to the property being developed where no street lighting exists along the abutting street, providing the proposed street light location(s) fit the ultimate location(s) of the street lights along the entire street. Street lighting facilities and appurtenances shall also be installed adjacent to the property being developed if there is existing street lighting along the abutting street which does not conform with current city street lighting standards, and the proposed street light location(s) fit the ultimate location(s) of the street lights along the entire street. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1375 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code § 20.2.)


11.04.030 Distance along street frontage.

In areas not subdivided into parcels or lots, the improvements required by this chapter need not extend a greater distance along the street frontage than:

A. The required side yards of such building or parking lot;

B. The required side and rear yards in the case of corner lots;

C. Such areas as may be used as an accessory to the principal use of the buildings thereon. (1964 Code § 20.3.)


11.04.040 Procedure.

Upon application for a building permit or permit required under CMC 11.08.030, or prior to construction of any parking or storage lot, the director of public works (“director”) shall determine the improvements which are required by this chapter. The applicant shall provide construction plans, quantity and cost estimates, and construction staking. The director shall accept or modify the quantity and cost estimates. No permits shall be issued for any building or dwelling, nor shall any parking or storage lot be constructed, nor shall any development of any area occur, until the director certifies that the improvements required by this chapter exist or that a performance bond has been posted with the city to guarantee the construction of the improvements, and necessary rights-of-way have been dedicated. A cash deposit shall be submitted with the required performance bond, the amount based on a percentage of the estimated construction or installation cost of the improvements and the sum to be for inspection and plan checking charges. The percentage to be used shall be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 10-1987 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1600 § 2, 1985; 1964 Code § 20.4.)


11.04.060 Performance bond.

When a performance bond is posted, the bond shall be posted with the city in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the construction or installation of the improvements. (Ord. 1600 § 4, 1985; 1964 Code § 20.6.)


11.04.070 Exceptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to construction in the following cases:

A. Development on land being subdivided under the provisions of CMC Title 16.

B. Additions, alterations or reconstruction of an existing single-family residence where such construction does not increase the gross floor area (not including parking structure) by more than 50 percent.

C. Additions, alterations or reconstruction of an existing residential unit or units on property zoned for multiple-family use where such construction does not increase the total gross floor area of all of the units (not including parking structure) by more than 50 percent; and providing further, that no additional residential units are created.

D. Additions to or reconstruction or alterations of existing commercial or industrial buildings or structures where such additions, reconstruction or alterations do not increase the gross floor area of the existing buildings or structures by more than 50 percent. (Ord. 1600 § 5, 1985; 1964 Code § 20.7.)


11.04.080 Modification for extreme hardship.

If unusual conditions exist or when compliance with the provisions of this chapter would constitute an extreme hardship or would be impractical, the city council may, upon written request of the property owner, modify the requirements contained in this chapter as it may deem fit. (1964 Code § 20.8.)


11.04.090 Cost of existing street lighting facilities.

The owner, developer or applicant shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of existing street lighting facilities, where such existing street lights are not to be replaced, as follows:

A. Where street lighting exists on streets abutting a development and where the owners or prior owners of such property have never paid a proportionate share of the cost of installing such street lighting, the owner, developer or applicant shall pay to the city a proportionate share of the cost of such lighting facilities in an amount per front foot established by the city council from time to time by resolution.

B. If the shape of such real property is other than the usual rectangular shape, or unusual in area, and strict adherence to the provision of subsection (A) of this section would require the payment of an amount not commensurate with provisions of such subsection (A) of this section, the amount to be charged may be modified as determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 1600 § 6, 1985; Ord. 1375 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code § 20.9.)


11.04.100 Improvements under private contract – Permission required.

It is unlawful for the owner of any property fronting on any street in the city to grade or otherwise improve said street under private contract without first obtaining permission from the engineering department to do so, and it is unlawful for any contractor or other person to commence any street work under private contract without first obtaining permission from the engineering department to do such work. The city council may impose such terms and conditions under the granting of such permission as they, in their discretion, may deem necessary for the proper performance of the work. (Ord. 1600 § 7, 1985; 1964 Code § 23.83.)


Chapter 11.08 HIGHWAY PERMITS AND REGULATIONS1

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions – Permit Required

11.08.010    Powers of deputies.

11.08.020    Definitions.

11.08.030    Permit – Prerequisite to commencement of certain work.

11.08.035    Street cut moratorium.

11.08.040    Commencement of work without permit – Permit required.

11.08.050    Applicability of provisions to nonpermittees.

11.08.060    Permit – Availability for inspection.

Article II. Application for Permit – Permit Issuance – Fees and Costs – Permit Denial and Revocation – Billing for Costs

11.08.070    Application – Form.

11.08.080    Application – Information required.

11.08.090    Application – Liability and relocation statements required.

11.08.100    Application – Plans or plats prepared by engineer required when.

11.08.110    Application – Information regarding overhead structures or encroachments.

11.08.120    Permits – Issuance/denial/revocation.

11.08.130    Permits – Appeal of director’s decision.

11.08.140    Permits – Period of validity to be specified – Extension.

11.08.150    Blanket permits.

11.08.160    Permits – Not transferable.

11.08.170    Issuance fee.

11.08.180    Unit fees for highway permit inspection costs – Exception.

11.08.190    Costs related to permit – Permittee liability.

11.08.200    Computation of costs.

11.08.210    Billing for all chargeable fees and costs.

Article III. Deposits and Security

11.08.220    Cash deposit or other security required – Exceptions.

11.08.230    Cash deposit – Form and use conditions.

11.08.240    Other security – Types acceptable.

11.08.250    Refund of deposits.

Article IV. General Conditions of Permit Issuance

11.08.260    Permit work – Compliance with codes and director’s orders required.

11.08.270    Permit – Additional conditions for issuance.

11.08.280    Permit work – Standard specifications for public works construction and other specifications applicable.

11.08.290    Permit work – Safeguarding, restoration, completion and cleanup.

11.08.300    Permit work – Warning signs, lights and barricades – Requirements.

11.08.310    Unauthorized highway work – Rehabilitation by city authorized when – Costs.

11.08.320    Highway closure or use restriction authorized when.

11.08.330    Completion of excavation – Notice to director – Preservation of monuments.

Article V. Location, Excavation and Relocation of Facilities

11.08.340    Permit work – Relocation of facilities or plantings – Procedures and costs.

11.08.350    Investigation and relocation of facilities owned by others within highways.

11.08.360    Investigation and notification to owners – Underground facilities and excavations.

11.08.370    Investigation – Location of pipelines carrying hazardous substances.

11.08.380    Excavation restrictions – Pipelines carrying hazardous substances.

11.08.390    Investigation and notice when unidentified utilities are located.

Article VI. Completion of Work – Liability for Damage – Restoration of Highway and Facilities

11.08.400    Certificate of acceptance for completed work.

11.08.410    Permittee liability for damage or injury.

11.08.420    Restoration of highway surfaces.

11.08.430    Failure to comply with regulations – City to perform work when – Costs.

Article VII. Special Construction Standards – Driveways

11.08.440    Driveways – Concrete construction required when.

11.08.450    Driveways – Location restrictions.

11.08.460    Driveways – Width specifications.

11.08.470    Driveways – Aggregate width limitations.

11.08.480    Driveways – Minimum intervening distance.

11.08.490    Driveways – Prohibited in certain locations.

11.08.500    Driveways – In curb return curvature – Limitations.

11.08.510    Driveways – Deviation from requirements authorized when.

Article VIII. Special Construction Standards – Underground Pipelines

11.08.520    Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Membership in one-call notification system required.

11.08.530    Underground pipelines – Minimum depth of cover.

11.08.540    Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Pressure test specifications.

11.08.550    Pipeline system – Isolation valves required when.

11.08.560    Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Cathodic protection system required – Specifications.

11.08.570    Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Emergency plan requirements.

11.08.580    Underground cable television and telephone conduits in systems designed pursuant to special requirements of the director.

11.08.590    Lines for television or audio signals – Undergrounding required when.

11.08.600    Abandonment or removal of facilities or encroachments – Specifications.

Article IX. Overload Moving Regulations

11.08.610    Overload moving permit – Relocation permit required for certain buildings.

11.08.620    Overload moving permit – Issuance conditions for overweight loads.

11.08.630    Overload moving permit – Director’s authority to issue and set conditions.

11.08.640    Overhead facilities – Overload moving permit information available to operator – Procedure.

11.08.650    Facilities within highways – Overload moving contractors and utility facilities.

11.08.660    Runway required under wheels of moving vehicles.

11.08.670    Copy of permit required on each part of shipment.

Article X. Overhead Structures

11.08.680    Minimum height over highways.

11.08.690    Doorway shelters.

11.08.700    Awnings.

11.08.710    Permit allows maintenance of structures – Exception.

11.08.720    Removal of structures following permit expiration or revocation.

Article XI. Violations

11.08.730    Acts constituting misdemeanors designated.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions – Permit Required


11.08.010 Powers of deputies.

Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer, or by a person authorized pursuant to law or ordinance by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the prescribed meanings attached to them, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

A. “Base course” means that portion of the highway located between the pavement and the native soil.

B. “City” means the city of Covina.

C. “City council” means the city council of the city of Covina.

D. “Director” or “director of public works” means the director of public works of the city of Covina.

E. “Driveway” means that portion of the highway between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the highway onto adjacent property.

F. “Emergency repairs” means those repairs that are necessary when a vital infrastructure service has been damaged, compromised, or has failed resulting in a loss of service or constituting a hazard to public safety.

G. “Encroachment” means and includes any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, stand or building, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this chapter, which is placed in, along, under, over or across the highway. This section does not apply to the temporary use of the highway for ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment; nor to the suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cables, wires, transmission lines, conduits or service connections solely for cable television, wired telephone or electric power purposes.

H. “Excavation” means any activity in which earth, rock, asphaltic concrete, cement, or other material in or on the ground is moved or otherwise displaced by means of manual or mechanical tools, equipment, or explosives and shall include grading, trenching, digging, ditching, drilling, augering, tunneling, scraping, and cable, conduit or pipe plowing or driving.

I. “Facilities” or “pipelines” means pipes, pipelines, pipe coatings and encasements, valves, tanks, mains, service lines, conduits, duct banks, cables, wires, poles, tunnels, obstructions and other apparatus, both aerial and underground.

J. “Hazardous substance” means one having the potential for explosion, fire, poisoning, or other immediate disaster, such as, but not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, butane, propane, chemicals, or chlorine, and natural gas transported at pressures greater than 60 psi.

K. “Height” means that dimension measured from the level surface upon which a vehicle stands to the highest protrusion in a vertical line.

L. “Highway” means any public highway, public street, median, public alley, public sidewalk, public way or public place in the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for the purposes of pedestrian or vehicular travel. The term includes all or any part of the entire width of public right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such entire width is actually used for highway purposes.

M. “Native soil” means the compacted native material.

N. “One-call notification system” or “systems” means an association providing for mutual receipt of notification of construction activities in the city.

O. “Overhead structure” means any structure, other than utility facilities authorized by state or local franchise, extending over the dedicated portion of the highway, including canopies but excluding such projections from buildings as may be enumerated in the building code set out in CMC Title 14.

P. “Overload” means any object or thing which, when transported by a vehicle or combination of vehicles over, upon, along or across any highway would be required to have a special permit in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code, and includes but is not limited to any house, vessel, machine, equipment, transformer, tree, girder, boat or airplane.

Q. “Overload moving contractor” means any person who, for himself or for another, moves or causes to be moved any overload over, upon, along or across any highway.

R. “Overload vehicle” means a vehicle or combination of vehicles as described in the Vehicle Code which:

1. Whether laden or unladen is required by the Vehicle Code to have a special permit to be on any highway; or

2. Is so laden that it is required to have such special permit.

S. “Pavement” means the surfaced portion of the highway which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds.

T. “Permittee” means a person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter and performing work pursuant to said permit.

U. “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, any district, any county, any city, and all departments and divisions thereof except this city.

V. “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.

W. “Section” means a section of the ordinance codified in this title unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned.

X. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

Y. “Vehicle Code” means the state of California Vehicle Code in effect at the time of issuance of a permit.

Z. “Width” means that dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the load or portion thereof is, or is to be, loaded or moved, or to the median line of the highway over which the same is being or is to be moved. (Ord. 18-04 §§ 1, 2, 2018; Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.030 Permit – Prerequisite to commencement of certain work.

Every person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, is required to obtain a permit from the director before:

A. Moving or causing to be moved over, along or across any highway any overload or overload vehicle;

B. Making or causing to be made any excavation or encroachment in any highway;

C. Placing, changing, renewing or abandoning a facility or encroachment;

D. Placing, planting or replanting any tree, sapling, bush, shrub, foliage or other material of similar nature in, over or along any highway;

E. Placing, constructing or repairing any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain, culvert, or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or through any highway;

F. Constructing, reconstructing, repairing or maintaining any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility;

G. Constructing, reconstructing or repairing any highway light or highway lighting system in any highway or in any privately owned thoroughfare which is open to public travel; this subsection does not apply if any agreement with the city exists for the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of such installation;

H. Placing or leaving any impediment to travel upon any highway. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.035 Street cut moratorium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 11.08.030, pavement cutting and excavation within the city shall be prohibited as follows:

A. After any street has been constructed, reconstructed, or paved by city forces, under a city contract or under an encroachment permit, no pavement cutting or excavation will be permitted for a period of five years after the construction has been accepted by the city council. This prohibition shall include asphalt overlays, pavement reconstruction, pavement rehabilitation, and new pavement construction.

B. After any street has been slurry sealed or chip sealed by city forces, under a city contract or under an encroachment permit, no pavement cutting or excavation will be permitted for a period of three years after the construction has been accepted by the city council.

C. The director of public works or city engineer may grant an exemption to the prohibitions set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section in order to facilitate new development on adjacent properties, work mandated by the city or a state or federal agency, provide for emergency repairs to subsurface facilities, provide for underground service connections to adjacent properties, or allow for the upgrading of underground utility facilities.

D. Pavement restoration work under an exemption shall comply with the city’s “street cut restoration requirements”; however, the director of public works or city engineer may determine that alternative restoration requirements are appropriate due to circumstances unique to the excavation site. (Ord. 18-04 § 3, 2018.)


11.08.040 Commencement of work without permit – Permit required.

A. Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit therefor shall immediately stop work and apply for such permit.

B. Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining, by virtue of law, ordinance or permit, any facility or encroachment in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property if the person making such excavation applies for a permit no later than the next business day. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.050 Applicability of provisions to nonpermittees.

Whenever the provisions of this chapter require a permittee to perform any work, take any action or be liable for any fees or costs, such requirement also applies to any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter, whether such person obtains such permit or not. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.060 Permit – Availability for inspection.

The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the director or by any peace officer or other person having responsibility for safety or maintenance of the highway. Each permit for overload moving must be in or on the overload vehicle or combination of overload vehicles to which it refers. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article II. Application for Permit – Permit Issuance – Fees and Costs – Permit Denial and Revocation – Billing for Costs


11.08.070 Application – Form.

Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the director, on the forms provided by the director. The director may make such reasonable changes or additions to any application as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.080 Application – Information required.

An applicant for a permit shall state in the application: name, address, and such other information as is required by this chapter or by the director as he may reasonably require to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.090 Application – Liability and relocation statements required.

A. On each application the applicant or his agent shall sign a statement agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and each officer, official, agent and employee thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of the applicant’s activities pursuant to the permit applied for.

B. Every application shall also contain a statement, signed by the applicant or his agent, that if any facility or encroachment placed in the excavation or the facility or encroachment for which a permit is issued interferes with the future use of the highway by the general public, then the applicant and his successors or assigns will at his own expense remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the director such facility or encroachment. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases when the applicant has an easement superior to the highway easement at the time of application and can furnish evidence when required of such superior easement. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.100 Application – Plans or plats prepared by engineer required when.

A. If, in the opinion of the director, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the director may require the application be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a licensed or certified engineer.

B. Each applicant for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application a plat showing the highways in which the proposed excavation, facility or encroachment will be placed, together with the exact location and dimensions of the proposed excavations, or the specifications and characteristics of the facility or encroachment, together with any other details which the director reasonably requires. When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable or pipe, or for making repairs thereto, the director may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public records.

C. Each applicant for a permit to abandon in place or remove any facility or encroachment in the highway shall do so under the terms and conditions prescribed by the director. The permit application shall include a plat or other suitable means describing the facility or encroachment to be abandoned or removed, and indicating its exact location. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.110 Application – Information regarding overhead structures or encroachments.

The director may require evidence to be submitted with the application that any proposed overhead structure or encroachment will not create a hazard of any kind to persons or property. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.120 Permits – Issuance/denial/revocation.

A. If the applicant complies with every applicable provision of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances and statutes, the director shall issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application, unless the director finds that issuance of the permit will constitute a hazard to public health, safety or welfare.

B. The director may deny a permit when the work authorized by the permit or such portions thereof is included in the proposed work to be done by any proposed assessment district for which proceedings have been initiated by the city council.

C. The director may revoke a permit if the activity therein permitted is not commenced within the time specified in the permit, unless said date is extended by the director.

D. The director may revoke a permit if the permittee fails to comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter or the conditions established for the permit.

E. The director shall notify a permittee of the director’s decision to deny or revoke a permit and the reason for the denial or revocation. The notice shall be provided to the permittee by personal service, by first class mail or by facsimile machine to the address or facsimile number provided on the permit on file with the public works department. Notices made pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail.

F. Upon any permit revocation, the permittee shall immediately restore the highway to the director’s satisfaction. If the permittee fails to do so, the director may restore the highway at the expense of the permittee or charge the costs against any security posted by the permittee with the city. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.130 Permits – Appeal of director’s decision.

The decision of the director may be appealed as provided in Chapter 11.54 CMC. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.140 Permits – Period of validity to be specified – Extension.

Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall expire and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified unless the director extends the time. The director may extend the time if in his opinion the work for which the permit was issued was delayed in completion because of inclement weather, strikes, an act of God, or other causes not within the control of the permittee. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.150 Blanket permits.

Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued for multiple activities or work subject to the compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a blanket permit does not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the blanket permit as may be required by the director and for paying for inspection, repairs and other costs incurred by the director due to the permittee’s activities. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.160 Permits – Not transferable.

Permits issued under this chapter are nontransferable to other persons, projects or locations. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.170 Issuance fee.

A. All persons, except as otherwise specified in this chapter, shall pay an issuance fee prior to receipt of a permit. The issuance fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The following shall be exempt from paying the issuance fee: the United States, the state of California, all departments of the city, and all departments of the county of Los Angeles.

B. The director may waive the permit issuance fee if the director finds that the work is to be done under contract with the city in connection with proposed public works.

C. At the request of a permittee who maintains with the director adequate security, as provided in this chapter, and to whom 10 or more permits have been issued monthly for three consecutive months, the director may waive the requirement for prepayment of issuance fees, and bill said permittee for issuance fees covering permits issued subsequent to such request. The director may revoke such billing arrangements at any time. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.180 Unit fees for highway permit inspection costs – Exception.

A. Unit fees for highway permit inspection costs shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be payable prior to issuance of a permit. If no such unit fees are set by resolution, the unit fees shall be based upon the estimated cost for such inspection.

B. The director may issue a permit without any highway permit inspection fee if the permittee furnishes evidence to the director that a qualified governmental agency inspector outside the city will inspect the work and ensure that the work will comply with minimum standards required by this chapter.

C. If the governmental agency inspector fails to make the inspection pursuant to subsection (B) of this section or fails to file evidence as required with the city, the director may inspect the work and the permittee shall pay the actual cost for such inspection. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.190 Costs related to permit – Permittee liability.

The permittee shall also be liable for and shall pay for all the director’s costs related to the following:

A. Engineering, which includes design, survey and tests;

B. The cost of repairing or restoring the highways and all appurtenant facilities to the same or equal condition that they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee’s activities;

C. The cost of furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices;

D. The cost of alteration, removal, replacement and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic striping and markings, and any other expenses for traffic control;

E. The cost of removing or remedying any hazardous condition;

F. The cost of tree trimming;

G. Any other costs to the city caused by the permittee’s activity. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.200 Computation of costs.

Whenever in the provisions of this chapter any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs, including overhead and depreciation, in accordance with current practices in charging for work performed for the public. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.210 Billing for all chargeable fees and costs.

A. The director shall bill the permittee for all fees and costs chargeable under this chapter.

B. If, within 30 calendar days after a bill has been sent, the permittee does not pay same in full, such amount may be deducted from any deposit or security made by the permittee pursuant to CMC 11.08.220 through 11.08.240. If the deposit or security is insufficient to pay the amount due, the city may pursue collection of the remaining amount due by all means at law or equity.

C. The director may deny issuance of further permits to the permittee and may hold any deposits or security of the permittee as long as any bill remains unpaid by the permittee. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article III. Deposits and Security


11.08.220 Cash deposit or other security required – Exceptions.

A. As a condition to issuance of a permit, every permittee, unless exempt by this chapter or other applicable law, shall be required to provide a cash deposit or other adequate security, as determined by the director, to guarantee payment of all fees and charges due under this chapter. The amount of the deposit or security shall be sufficient to recover all costs of any nature which the director estimates will be incurred if the permittee does not fulfill its permit requirements.

B. A cash deposit or other adequate security is not required in the case of construction under contract with the city where a faithful performance bond is posted or other surety is deposited and assigned to the city which guarantees to the city the repair of the highway, including construction financed in whole or in part by special assessments. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.230 Cash deposit – Form and use conditions.

A cash deposit may be in the form of a special deposit for each permit, or in the form of a general deposit to be maintained as security for all the permits issued to a permittee, including for blanket permits. If a permittee maintains a general cash deposit, it shall be with the understanding that the permittee will pay all bills sent by the director for work covered by this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.240 Other security – Types acceptable.

In lieu of a general cash deposit, the director may accept from a permittee other types of security as specified below:

A. Surety Bond. The director may accept a surety bond on a form supplied by the director and executed by an “admitted surety insurer” authorized to make, guarantee or become a surety upon bonds by the state of California. The bond shall guarantee the payment of all fees and other charges required by this chapter which may become due because of any permits issued during the life of the said surety bond.

B. Insurance. As security on overload moving permits only, the director may accept a certificate of insurance and endorsement on the standard forms provided by the director. Such certificate and endorsement shall show that an insurance policy of not less than $2,000,000 has been issued to the applicant and is in full force and effect, and in which policy the insurer directly agrees to reimburse the city for all sums due it from the permittee for damage to highway facilities.

C. Additional Securities. The director may require additional security to be filed with the city in the event that he reasonably determines the original security filed with the city has become insufficient to pay all fees and other charges required by this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.250 Refund of deposits.

A. The remainder of any deposit, if there is any remainder, shall be refunded to the permittee making such deposit once the director is satisfied that all work pursuant to a permit has been satisfactorily completed and that the permittee is not liable for any further fees, costs or charges with regard to said work.

B. Any deposit made for highway inspection fees or any other unit fees may be refunded if it was erroneously collected or if the work was not constructed by the permittee. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article IV. General Conditions of Permit Issuance


11.08.260 Permit work – Compliance with codes and director’s orders required.

A. Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by this chapter must comply with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions made part of any permit, and the specifications and all codes referred to by this chapter.

B. All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule issued by the director in the matters specified on the permit or any attachments to said permit, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents and employees, except in the case of a public utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission when such order, decision, direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission applicable to such public utility.

C. A person shall not obstruct the director in making any inspection authorized by this chapter or in taking any sample or in making any test. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.270 Permit – Additional conditions for issuance.

A. Every permit issued under this chapter for activity or work in, along, on, over, across or under the highway shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any person entitled thereto to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be used. Proof of the applicant’s right to use the highways for the purposes set forth in the application shall be filed with the director.

B. The director may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under any permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill, compaction, paving, traffic regulations, hours of work, flagmen, lights, inspection, and other similar requirements. He also may require whatever advance notice he deems proper for requests for inspection. The director may add these requirements and conditions by rubber stamp or attachments to the permit, or both, and they shall be an integral part thereof. If any of the requirements of the permit are violated, the director may revoke the permit and require that a new permit be secured before further work is done. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.280 Permit work – Standard specifications for public works construction and other specifications applicable.

All work shall be performed in accordance with the current version of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (“Greenbook”), or according to the plans and specifications referred to in the permit and, in addition, to any special requirements and/or specifications which are made a part of the permit by the director. In case of conflict between two specifications, the more stringent specification shall apply. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.290 Permit work – Safeguarding, restoration, completion and cleanup.

Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by this chapter shall safeguard and complete the activity or work within the time set forth in the permit, unless that time is extended for good cause by the director. Any part of the highway that is damaged, removed or disturbed shall be repaired, restored and replaced in a condition satisfactory to the director. All surplus material of any kind shall be removed from the highway. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.300 Permit work – Warning signs, lights and barricades – Requirements.

Any person engaged in performing work regulated by this chapter which interferes with or endangers the safe movement of traffic shall have the work safeguarded by adequate warning signs, barricades, lights and devices. Such person shall be responsible for placing and maintaining adequate warning signs, barricades, lights and devices during all periods during which traffic movement is interfered with or endangered in order to promote the safe movement of traffic, including but not limited to periods of twilight, nighttime, fog and/or rain. All warning signs, barriers, barricades, flags and other devices shall comply with or exceed the standards required in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.310 Unauthorized highway work – Rehabilitation by city authorized when – Costs.

Whenever the director discovers work that is not authorized by a permit issued under this chapter, in order to promote the welfare, well-being and safety of the public traveling along or across any highway, the director may do any work within the highways of whatever nature is required in the director’s opinion to reestablish conditions as they existed prior to commencement of unauthorized work done by any person within the highways and for which a permit has been obtained. The director shall charge the cost of this rehabilitation to the person doing the unauthorized work and may also revoke a permit on this basis. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.320 Highway closure or use restriction authorized when.

The director may restrict the use of, or close, any highway whenever he considers such closing or restriction of use necessary:

A. For the protection of the public;

B. For the protection of such highways from damage during storms;

C. During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.330 Completion of excavation – Notice to director – Preservation of monuments.

A. Upon completion of any excavation or encroachment, or completion of the cut or fill, the permittee shall so notify the director in writing on a form prescribed by the director. Whenever a plat is required pursuant to CMC 11.08.100(B) and there were substantial deviations approved during the work from the dimensions or locations as shown on the plat, the permittee shall transmit to the director a concise, “as-built plat” upon completion of the work, showing the accurate location, depth and size of the facility or encroachment so laid, removed or abandoned.

B. Any monument set for the purposes of locating or preserving the lines of any highway or property subdivision, or a survey reference point, or a permanent survey or bench mark, shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article V. Location, Excavation and Relocation of Facilities


11.08.340 Permit work – Relocation of facilities or plantings – Procedures and costs.

The permittee shall make proper arrangements for and, except as otherwise set forth herein, bear the cost of the relocation of any structure, facility, tree or shrub where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The director may elect to do the necessary relocation at the permittee’s expense. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.350 Investigation and relocation of facilities owned by others within highways.

A. The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the highways which are within the limits of the permittee’s activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner or to the satisfaction of its owner.

B. The cost of locating, exposing, moving or relocating publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee unless the permittee makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility or unless the owner is required by its franchise or agreement to relocate the facility without cost.

C. The permittee shall support and protect all facilities by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner has the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In case any of said facilities should be damaged, they may be repaired by the owner at the expense of the permittee or, if authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision of the owner. The expense of repairs to any damaged facilities shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.360 Investigation and notification to owners – Underground facilities and excavations.

Except with respect to emergency work to immediately protect the public and property, as determined by the director, any permittee proposing to excavate in any highway shall make a search of available records of underground facilities and shall notify owners or operators known to have such underground facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation by telephone or other acceptable means of communications at least 48 hours prior to the time of the proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays. At such time as a one-call notification system is operational in the city, the permittee shall notify those owners or operators who are members of the system by notifying the system by telephone or other acceptable means of communication at least 48 hours prior to the time of the proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays. No permit shall be valid until permittee receives a “ticket” number from the system acknowledging the notification, which number permittee shall enter upon the face of the permit. Said notification is an additional method to be used in determining underground facilities, and does not relieve permittee from the responsibility to assure that owners or operators of such facilities are notified. Any permittee shall likewise notify nonmembers of the system who are owners or operators of facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation. Any person receiving notice pursuant to this chapter shall, not less than one working day in advance of proposed excavation, inform the permittee of or field mark the location of any underground facility in the proposed area of excavation, unless otherwise agreed to between said person and permittee. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.370 Investigation – Location of pipelines carrying hazardous substances.

A. Prior to making any excavation within the construction area where a pipeline known to carry a hazardous substance exists, no permittee shall excavate until the pipeline has been located by potholing or other proven acceptable methods at intervals sufficient to determine its exact location. The permittee shall arrange with the owner to locate or expose private and public pipelines. Abandoned or inoperative pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances shall be considered as carrying hazardous substances until determined otherwise by the director.

B. In no case shall the intervals between potholes or the location by proven acceptable methods exceed the distance set forth as follows:

1. Excavations for Highway Construction. The pipeline shall be located at intervals not greater than 25 feet for lines less than eight inches in diameter, 50 feet for lines of eight inches through 24 inches in diameter, and 200 feet for lines greater than 24 inches in diameter.

2. Trench Excavation.

a. Longitudinal Pipelines. All longitudinal pipelines in the construction area of the highway shall be located at intervals not greater than 500 feet. If determined to be within six feet of the excavation, it shall be further located at intervals not greater than 25 feet for lines less than eight inches in diameter, 50 feet for lines of eight inches to 24 inches in diameter, and 100 feet for lines greater than 24 inches in diameter.

b. Transverse Pipelines. If the location of the pipeline is above or less than six inches below the facility being installed, it shall be carefully hand-tool exposed before excavating. If its location is six inches or more below the facility, it need only be located. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.380 Excavation restrictions – Pipelines carrying hazardous substances.

A. After it is determined that the horizontal or vertical clearance between the pipeline known to carry hazardous substances and the construction limits is less than 12 inches, or 18 inches if scarifying, the permittee shall confer with the owner. Unless the owner elects to relocate, abandon or take the pipeline out of service, the permittee shall excavate until the pipeline has been completely hand-tool exposed within the limits of construction.

B. Once the physical location of the pipelines known to carry hazardous substances has been determined, as above described, the permittee doing the excavation, in cooperation with and with the concurrence of the owner and the director, shall determine how to protect the pipeline from damage before proceeding with his work. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.390 Investigation and notice when unidentified utilities are located.

Each permittee excavating in the highway shall notify the owner, the director and any public agency maintaining records for the jurisdiction of the owner, if known, whenever previously unidentified or unknown utilities or underground facilities are encountered so that the location can be accurately established and made a part of the permanent substructure records. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article VI. Completion of Work – Liability for Damage – Restoration of Highway and Facilities


11.08.400 Certificate of acceptance for completed work.

If the director, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.410 Permittee liability for damage or injury.

The permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, agents, and employees of and from any and all liability or responsibility for any property damage or loss, or injury or death to any person arising out of or occurring as the proximate results of any of the work undertaken pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.420 Restoration of highway surfaces.

A. Upon completion of the permittee’s activity, the director, at his option, may require the permittee to restore that portion of the highway facilities damaged by the permittee’s activity or the director may elect to do such restoration himself, at the permittee’s cost.

B. Where pavement has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and in no event to a thickness of less than two inches.

C. The base course removed shall be replaced to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course.

D. When the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under the permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired.

E. When the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the director may require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements.

F. In those instances where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of highway to be reconstructed by the city and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement, the director may waive such resurfacing.

G. If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a highway surface it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to permittee’s activity, the permittee shall pay to the director the cost of such additional repairs or the permittee shall make the required repairs, at the director’s discretion. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.430 Failure to comply with regulations – City to perform work when – Costs.

When any work authorized by a permit under this chapter does not comply with the terms or specifications of said permit or with any provision of this chapter, or when any highway facility has been damaged and the person responsible fails or refuses to repair or restore as required by any permit or this chapter, then the director with his own forces or otherwise may cause such to be corrected, completed, repaired, restored, removed and/or maintained. The person responsible shall pay for any and all costs incurred by the city. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article VII. Special Construction Standards – Driveways


11.08.440 Driveways – Concrete construction required when.

Driveways shall be constructed of cement concrete where a cement concrete curb exists. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.450 Driveways – Location restrictions.

A driveway shall not be constructed or maintained where fences, buildings, natural grade or any other obstacle will prevent a vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way after entering such driveway. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.460 Driveways – Width specifications.

The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or centerline of the highway. The net width of an individual driveway shall be not less than 10 feet and shall not exceed in width:

A. Twenty feet if the driveway serves only residences or apartments;

B. Twenty feet for mixed-use or nonresidential lots or parcels of land less than 100 feet wide;

C. Thirty feet or 20 percent of the frontage of the lot or parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed 60 feet, when the driveway serves mixed-use or nonresidential uses on a lot or parcel of land not less than 100 feet wide. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.470 Driveways – Aggregate width limitations.

The aggregate width of the total number of driveways serving any single lot or parcel of land from any one highway shall not exceed:

A. Forty percent of the frontage, if the driveway serves only residences or apartments;

B. Sixty percent of the frontage in all other cases. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.480 Driveways – Minimum intervening distance.

The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or returns of adjacent driveways serving the same lot or parcel shall be 22 feet. In the case of adjacent driveways serving two adjoining lots or parcels, the intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be and the adjacent property line shall be at least one foot; otherwise a common or continuous driveway will be required. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.490 Driveways – Prohibited in certain locations.

A. A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed:

1. Between the prolonged intersecting property lines of any highways; or

2. Between the points of curvature of any curb return having a radius of 20 feet or less.

B. In applying the provisions of this section, the condition producing the greater length of curb between the specified control points in the particular case shall govern. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.500 Driveways – In curb return curvature – Limitations.

A. A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed between the points of curvature of any curb return except:

1. In the case of a curb return having a radius of 25 feet or more, driveways may encroach at each end thereof for a distance of not greater than one-eighth of the total arc length of return, leaving in the clear at least three-quarters of such arc length, if such encroachment does not conflict with other requirements of this section.

2. In the case of a curb return having a radius of less than 25 feet but more than 20 feet, the maximum permissible encroachment at each end of the return, subject to other requirements of this section, shall be that proportion of one-eighth of the total arc length that the difference between the length of the radius and 20 feet bears to five.

B. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, a driveway shall not encroach on any curb return beyond or ahead of any traffic-regulating device located on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.510 Driveways – Deviation from requirements authorized when.

Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a modification of the provisions of CMC 11.08.440 through 11.08.500 are necessary for the promotion of traffic safety and the director so finds, he may permit a deviation from the provisions of such sections to the extent which he finds necessary. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article VIII. Special Construction Standards – Underground Pipelines


11.08.520 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Membership in one-call notification system required.

When a one-call notification system is operational in the territory of the city, no person shall maintain and operate a pipeline designed to carry hazardous substances below the surface of a highway unless said person is a member of the system. Such person shall provide to the director such proof as required that said person is a member of the system in Los Angeles County. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.530 Underground pipelines – Minimum depth of cover.

Except as provided in CMC 11.08.580, the following minimum depths of cover below existing, finished or proposed gutter grade shall be required for all underground pipelines in the roadway area:

A. Local Streets.

1. Twenty-four inches for service pipelines;

2. Thirty inches for pipelines transporting nonhazardous substances;

3. Thirty inches for all electrical facilities;

4. Forty-two inches for all pipelines transporting hazardous substances.

B. Major Arterials.

1. Twenty-four inches for service pipelines;

2. Thirty-six inches for pipelines transporting nonhazardous substances;

3. Forty-two inches for electrical facilities;

4. Forty-two inches for pipelines transporting hazardous substances. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.540 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Pressure test specifications.

A. After initial installation under this chapter of any pipeline used or to be used to carry hazardous substances, such pipeline shall be subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before it is placed in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall not be less than 24 hours.

B. After repair or replacement of any pipeline used or to be used to carry hazardous substances, the affected portion of the pipeline shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before placing in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall be not less than 24 hours. However, no such test is required for a minor repair which does not require removal of the pipeline from operation. If the affected section is isolated and tested hydrostatically, pressure test of the tie-in welds is not required; however, tie-in welds shall be examined by radiographic means.

C. No pipeline subject to this chapter used or to be used to carry hazardous substances and over 10 years of age shall be operated beyond the successive ensuing 12-month period of time from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless retested annually by a hydrostatic pressure test or other test means acceptable to the director. The duration of the periodic test, either initial or retest, shall not be less than four hours.

D. Each pressure test, either initial or retest, shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision. The director may authorize the use of a liquid petroleum that does not vaporize rapidly (flash point over 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 66 degrees centigrade) as a test medium. Pressure tests after initial installation of pipelines and before they are placed in operation shall show no unexplained loss. Annual or retest pressure tests shall not show an hourly loss, for each section of the pipeline under test at the time, in excess of either 10 gallons, or the sum of one gallon and an amount computed at a rate in gallons per mile equivalent to one-tenth of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe.

E. The director may grant administrative waiver or other relief to an owner or operator under this chapter as to the periodic pressure testing of any pipelines as herein provided if owner or operator can demonstrate that such testing will cause the unreasonable unscheduled shutdown of plants, terminals, refineries or other facilities of which such pipelines constitute an integral part.

F. In addition to the foregoing requirements, any pipeline authorized by this chapter and subject to pressure testing shall be subjected to a pressure test by the owner or operator at any time as may be required by the director in the interest of public safety.

G. Within 30 calendar days after completion of any test made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner or operator shall submit a certified report for the director’s review. The report shall show the date of test, description of portion of pipeline tested to include the identification of the right-of-way within which the pipeline is located, and the test data. The report shall be sufficient in detail to permit analysis of test results and determination of compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance, rule or regulation. The report shall also contain any other test information as may be specifically requested by the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.550 Pipeline system – Isolation valves required when.

Isolation valves shall be installed on each new main at locations along the pipeline system that will minimize damage from accidental product discharge. Said location shall be appropriate for terrain and the population density of the area. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.560 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Cathodic protection system required – Specifications.

As provided in the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision, a cathodic protection system shall be installed for all new ferrous pipelines used to carry hazardous substances other than utility gases in order to mitigate corrosion deterioration that might result in structural failure. The cathodic protection system for all new ferrous pipelines carrying utility gases shall be installed in accordance with General Order No. 112-C of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. A test procedure shall be developed by the owner or operator to determine whether adequate cathodic protection has been achieved and submitted to the director for approval. Reports of cathodic protection evaluation in accordance with such approved procedure shall be made available annually for review by the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.570 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances – Emergency plan requirements.

A. Each owner or operator of a pipeline used or to be used to convey hazardous substances shall have a written emergency plan approved and on file with the director and city fire department. The plan shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision.

B. The plan shall include but not be limited to the following elements:

1. A “liaison” element for intercommunications between public agencies and pipeline owners or operators to provide for prompt coordinated remedial action, and the dissemination of information as to the location and ownership identification of pipelines based on the best available records and plans;

2. A “spill contingency” element to limit the extent of accidental product discharge by which pipeline owners or operators shall involve themselves in a cooperative pipeline leak notification emergency action system;

3. A “leak detection” element by which the pipeline owners or operators can monitor the flow of their product and can divert, reduce or stop the flow of said product at the first indication of a product leak;

4. A “first-on-scene emergency containment” element, in cooperation with other pipeline owners or operators, to be utilized until arrival of the affected pipeline’s owners or operators. “First-on-scene” costs shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility, and shall be reimbursed to the organization effecting the emergency containment. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.580 Underground cable television and telephone conduits in systems designed pursuant to special requirements of the director.

A minimum depth of cover of 18 inches below existing or proposed edge of gutter grade shall be permitted for cable television and telephone conduits, and to be placed in existing roadways as follows:

A. Mainline cable conduit in a four- to five-inch-wide trench located adjacent to the concrete gutter or three feet from the edge of the curb if no gutter exists.

B. Service cable conduits crossing the roadway from the mainline to serve users on the opposite side of local streets when installed by an acceptable boring method. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.590 Lines for television or audio signals – Undergrounding required when.

The director shall require all lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in highways when all power and telephone lines are underground, and shall also require underground installation in all instances except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof or permission to use existing pole lines or where the director finds that other conditions render underground installation impractical or infeasible. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument by the director or owning agency. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.600 Abandonment or removal of facilities or encroachments – Specifications.

A. Permission to abandon a facility or encroachment without removing shall be subject to removal within one year after the effective date of the abandonment if the facility or encroachment may interfere with a present or future public improvement. If it is determined that the facility or encroachment should be removed, the permittee or its successors in interest shall remove it at its expense or pay the city for the cost of such removal. Permittee shall leave any abandoned facility or encroachment in a safe condition.

B. In addition to the foregoing, abandonment in place of a pipeline used to convey hazardous substances will be subject to the following requirements:

1. The pipeline shall be thoroughly purged of liquids and vapors and filled with an inert material that will remain in a solid or semisolid state if any portion of the pipeline is cut or removed in the future;

2. The permittee shall file a certificate with the director that said requirements have been complied with and the abandoned pipeline has been left in a safe condition. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article IX. Overload Moving Regulations


11.08.610 Overload moving permit – Relocation permit required for certain buildings.

In all cases where the building code, as set out in CMC Title 14, requires the owner of any premises to which it is proposed to move any building or structure to obtain a relocation permit, the director shall not grant an overload moving permit to move such building or structure until the applicant furnishes to the director evidence that such owner has also obtained a relocation permit. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.620 Overload moving permit – Issuance conditions for overweight loads.

The director shall not issue an overload moving permit when the weight of the load, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code, except that if it appears to the director that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the load, or portion thereof, to be moved make it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the director may issue a permit to move a load on an overload vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires where the director has determined that such movement will not cause injury to the highways, bridges, and appurtenances installed therein or thereunder. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.630 Overload moving permit – Director’s authority to issue and set conditions.

The director is authorized to issue or withhold the overload moving permit, as he reasonably determines in the interests of public safety, traffic circulation and proper maintenance of the highway. If an overload moving permit is issued, the director is further authorized to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the overload vehicle or vehicles described may be operated on the highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the overload vehicle when necessary to assure against undue interference with traffic or damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures, and may require the undertaking of other security measures as may be deemed necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injury, or to provide indemnity for any injury resulting from the operation of the vehicle. The director may require that the moving of any overload or overload vehicle be under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the director. The costs of any inspector shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.640 Overhead facilities – Overload moving permit information available to operator – Procedure.

Any person lawfully operating or maintaining overhead facilities across any highway in the city who desires information pertaining to any overload moving permits issued for the moving of a building of 18 or more feet in height shall file a written request with the director. The director shall make such information available to the requesting person. The director shall not allow the moving of a building for a period of 48 hours after the filing of an overload moving permit application in order to allow such person time to inspect the route the permittee intends to take. In the event the permittee needs to make any change in the route set forth on the permit, said permit shall be void until the overload moving contractor has obtained an approved change in the route. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.650 Facilities within highways – Overload moving contractors and utility facilities.

No overload moving contractor shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with any facilities or property of any public utility. When any overload is moved along or across any highway, and it is determined that the height, width or weight of said overload exceeds the height, width or weight as stated in the permit, and property damage results therefrom, the director is authorized to withhold any further overload moving permits from the violator until the violator produces evidence satisfactory to the director that each additional overload complies with all dimensions and weights as shown upon the application, that the overload will not interfere with any facilities or public utility, and that the violator has made arrangements satisfactory to the director to repair such property damage. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.660 Runway required under wheels of moving vehicles.

When so required by the director, an overload moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving a building or structure, or under each wheel of an overload vehicle, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the overload without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along or across any portion of any highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The overload moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface except upon such board, plank or runway. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.670 Copy of permit required on each part of shipment.

If a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more than one of such sections is moved at the same time, the overload moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times in conspicuous places on each section on which the original overload moving permit is not affixed true copies of such permit. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article X. Overhead Structures


11.08.680 Minimum height over highways.

Each overhead structure which extends over the portion of a highway used by vehicles shall be not less than 15 feet above the highest portion of the highway surface. If the director finds that traffic conditions are such that it is necessary for highway safety for such structure to be at a greater height, then such structure shall be at such greater height as specified by the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.690 Doorway shelters.

Each overhead structure used primarily for a covered shelter for ingress or egress into a doorway shall not exceed 10 feet in width and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than eight feet at every point. Each structure shall be supported on metal posts on a line two feet back from the face of the curb, if any, otherwise from the edge of the portion of the highway designed for use by motor vehicles, and shall be constructed in such a manner that no portion thereof shall extend toward the roadway more than six inches beyond the metal posts. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.700 Awnings.

A. Moveable awnings or hoods may have combustible coverings supported on frames attached to any building in the city.

B. No awning or hood shall extend over a public sidewalk for more than two-thirds the distance from the property line to the nearest curb line in front of the building site, or from the property line to the edge of the street pavement if a curb is not present.

C. The lowest part of any moveable awning or hood frame shall not be less than seven and one-half feet above the ground immediately below. The lowest part of any fringe or covering attached to such awning or hood shall not be less than seven feet above the grade immediately below.

D. The lowest part of any permanent, nonmovable awning or hood shall not be less than eight feet above the ground immediately below. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.710 Permit allows maintenance of structures – Exception.

Any permit to erect or maintain an overhead structure shall be treated as and deemed to be a permit to maintain such structure until expiration or revocation of the permit. This section does not apply to agencies operating under an approved city-awarded franchise. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)


11.08.720 Removal of structures following permit expiration or revocation.

Upon the effective date of the expiration or revocation of the permit, the person maintaining the overhead structure shall remove same, and restore any highway facility damaged or removed. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)

Article XI. Violations


11.08.730 Acts constituting misdemeanors designated.

Every person who performs any work regulated by this chapter, either without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director or who, having a permit, fails or refuses to comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter or with any condition of the permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any part of which such violation occurs. (Ord. 10-1987 § 2, 2010.)1

For statutory provisions regarding construction of sidewalks, see Streets and Highways Code §§ 5870 – 5895.54; for provisions regarding repair of sidewalks, see Streets and Highways Code § 5600 et seq. For statutory provisions authorizing cities to require removal of encroachments from public ways, see Government Code § 38775; for provisions regarding abandoned excavations, see Government Code § 50230.

    Prior history: 1964 Code §§ 23.11 – 23.22; Ords. 95-1796, 1382, 1394 and 1600. 


Chapter 11.12 ROLL-OFF DEBRIS CONTAINERS ON HIGHWAYS

Sections:

11.12.010    Permit – Required.

11.12.020    Definition – Roll-off debris container.

11.12.030    Permit – Application.

11.12.040    Permit – Issuance.

11.12.050    Permit – Fee.

11.12.060    Identification and warning devices required.

11.12.070    Roll-off debris container – Condition.

11.12.080    Roll-off debris container – Prohibited use.

11.12.090    Roll-off debris container – Restrictions on placement.

11.12.100    Indemnification and insurance.

11.12.110    Permittee responsible for damage.

11.12.120    Violations.

11.12.130    Impoundment.

11.12.140    Revocation of permit.

11.12.150    Notices.

11.12.160    Appeal.

11.12.170    Violation – Penalty.

11.12.180    Remedies cumulative.


11.12.010 Permit – Required.

No person shall place or cause to be placed any roll-off debris container on or projecting onto any portion of any highway without a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.020 Definition – Roll-off debris container.

A “roll-off debris container” is any container of one cubic yard in size or greater placed on or projecting onto any highway that is used for the collection and temporary holding of construction, demolition or lot clearing debris and waste. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.030 Permit – Application.

The director shall establish an application form for a roll-off debris container permit. Each application submitted to the director for his consideration shall be accompanied by a permit fee and proof, if applicable, of a valid department of health services waste collection permit. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.040 Permit – Issuance.

Upon the director’s review of a complete application for a roll-off debris container permit and the payment of all applicable fees, the director may issue the permit, if he reasonably determines that the placement and use of the roll-off debris container will not adversely affect public safety, traffic circulation and proper maintenance of the highway. Subject to the conditions contained in the permit, the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws, a valid permit will allow the placement of a roll-off debris container on a highway. A roll-off debris container permit shall expire upon the date noted within the permit but in no case later than one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.050 Permit – Fee.

Roll-off debris container permit fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.060 Identification and warning devices required.

Every permitted roll-off debris container shall have the following clearly displayed and visible on its exterior surface:

A. The permittee’s name and telephone number (including area code) in print at least two inches in height;

B. Three-inch-diameter reflectors, placed on the four corners of each side of the roll-off debris container facing traffic. The lower reflectors shall be between three and four feet above the ground and vertically aligned with the upper reflectors. The reflectors must be clearly seen when illuminated by vehicle headlights. The permittee shall replace any worn or missing reflectors so as to conform with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.070 Roll-off debris container – Condition.

A permitted roll-off debris container shall be maintained in good condition. The area immediately surrounding a permitted roll-off debris container shall be maintained in a clean manner, free from any trash or deleterious material. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.080 Roll-off debris container – Prohibited use.

At no time shall any permitted roll-off debris container be used for the collection or storage of hazardous substances, materials or waste as defined by federal, state or local law. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.090 Roll-off debris container – Restrictions on placement.

A. Permitted roll-off debris containers shall be secured in such a manner so as to prevent any movement other than during placement and removal.

B. Permitted roll-off debris containers shall not remain at any location on a highway for more than seven consecutive calendar days unless specifically authorized in writing by the director.

C. Permitted roll-off debris containers shall only be placed on or project onto highways within the limits of the projected property lines where the roll-off debris container debris is generated.

D. Permitted roll-off debris containers shall not be placed on or project onto any highway in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

E. Permitted roll-off debris containers shall not be placed on or project onto any highway:

1. Within 15 feet of any crosswalk;

2. Within 15 feet of any street corner, fire hydrant or disabled access ramp;

3. On any portion of any sidewalk of any highway;

4. On highways with grades in excess of six percent;

5. Where clear space for the safe passage of pedestrians within the highway is reduced to less than three feet in width;

6. Where the roadway is reduced to less than 15 feet in width;

7. Where a motorist’s ability to see traffic control devices such as stop signs, traffic lights, etc., is impaired;

8. Where the roll-off debris container will block or unreasonably interfere with access to neighboring property;

9. Where the sight distance of the roll-off debris container would be less than:

a. One hundred fifty feet on highways posted with speed limits of 25 miles per hour or less;

b. Three hundred forty-five feet on highways posted with speed limits greater than 25 miles per hour and up to 40 miles per hour;

c. Six hundred eighty feet on highways posted with speed limits greater than 40 miles per hour. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.100 Indemnification and insurance.

As a condition of the issuance of a roll-off debris container permit, the permittee shall agree in writing to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against any and all liability, expense, including defense costs and legal fees, claims and causes of action for damages of any nature whatsoever, including but not limited to bodily injury, death, personal or property damage, arising from or connected with any act or omission of permittee, and any and all allegations involving the placing, maintaining and/or removing of roll-off debris containers placed on or projecting onto any portion of any highway. In addition, and without limiting the above obligation to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, the permittee shall, as a condition to obtaining a permit, present evidence of liability insurance providing minimum coverage of $2,000,000 satisfactory to the director, which insurance shall include the city of Covina as an additional insured. Each permittee shall maintain the required insurance during the life of the permit and whenever a roll-off debris container is placed on any portion of any highway. Failure to maintain the required insurance is grounds for immediate impoundment of the roll-off debris container. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.110 Permittee responsible for damage.

The permittee shall be responsible for any damage to any part of any highway attributable to a roll-off debris container. The permittee shall repair, restore or replace any damage to any highway to the satisfaction of the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.120 Violations.

The director may provide written notice to a permittee of a violation of any provision of this chapter by personal service, by first class mail or by facsimile machine to the address or facsimile number provided on the permit on file with the public works department. The notice shall also inform the permittee of those appeal rights set forth in CMC 11.12.160. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.130 Impoundment.

The director may immediately remove and impound any roll-off debris container placed on or projecting onto any highway in violation of this chapter if the violation is creating a dangerous or hazardous condition. Written notice of impoundment shall be provided to a permittee within three working days after the impoundment, either by personal service, by first class mail or by facsimile machine, to the address or facsimile number provided on the permit on file with the public works department. If the roll-off debris container is not permitted, then such notice shall be provided to the person responsible for the placement of the roll-off debris container, if such person is known. The notice shall inform the permittee or the person responsible for placement of the roll-off debris container of how to reclaim the impounded container upon the permittee’s or responsible party’s payment of an impound fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council, plus any actual and reasonable additional costs, if any, incurred by the city in impounding the container. The notice shall also inform the permittee of those appeal rights set forth in CMC 11.12.160. If the container is impounded for more than 30 calendar days after the date of the notice or, if appealed, more than 30 calendar days after the appeal becomes final, then the director may cause the sale or disposal of the impounded container. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.140 Revocation of permit.

The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute grounds for the revocation of a permit. The director shall notify a permittee of the director’s intention to revoke a permit and the reason for the revocation. The notice shall be provided to the permittee by personal service, by first class mail or by facsimile machine to the address or facsimile number provided on the permit on file with the public works department. The notice shall also inform the permittee of those appeal rights set forth in CMC 11.12.160. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.150 Notices.

Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail. The failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceeding or action under this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.160 Appeal.

A permittee or person responsible for a roll-off debris container may appeal any denial of a permit or notice of the director as provided in Chapter 11.54 CMC. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.170 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


11.12.180 Remedies cumulative.

The remedies provided by any section of this chapter are cumulative to any other remedies authorized by this code or state law. (Ord. 10-1987 § 3, 2010.)


Chapter 11.16 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES1

Sections:

11.16.010    Definitions.

11.16.020    Hearing.

11.16.030    District designation.

11.16.040    Unlawful acts within districts.

11.16.050    Exceptions.

11.16.060    Exempt facilities.

11.16.070    Notice to property owners and utility companies.

11.16.080    Equipment furnishing responsibility.

11.16.090    Duty of property owner.

11.16.100    Duty of city to remove equipment.

11.16.110    Extension of time.


11.16.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California;

B. “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service;

C. “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city of Covina within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of CMC 11.16.030;

D. “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.1.)


11.16.020 Hearing.

A. The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The director shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 10 calendar days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive.

B. Prior to holding such public hearing, the director shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such reports shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 9, 1978; 1964 Code § 28A.2.)


11.16.030 District designation.

If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety and welfare require such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.3.)


11.16.040 Unlawful acts within districts.

Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in CMC 11.16.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in CMC 11.16.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.4.)


11.16.050 Exceptions.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The director may grant special permission on such terms as the director may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 10, 1978; 1964 Code § 28A.5.)


11.16.060 Exempt facilities.

This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 11.16.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

A. Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director;

B. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connected to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D. Poles, overhead wires and associated structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltage in excess of 34,500 volts;

E. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F. Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

H. Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 11, 1978; 1964 Code § 28A.6.)


11.16.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.

Within 10 calendar days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 11.16.030, the director shall notify all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The director shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

Notification by the director shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted by CMC 11.16.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.7.)


11.16.080 Equipment furnishing responsibility.

If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 11.16.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.8.)


11.16.090 Duty of property owner.

A. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in CMC 11.16.080 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

B. In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting any such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (A) of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted by CMC 11.16.030, the director shall post written notice on the property being served and 30 calendar days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 12, 1978; 1964 Code § 28A.9.)


11.16.100 Duty of city to remove equipment.

The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to CMC 11.16.030. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.10.)


11.16.110 Extension of time.

In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 11.16.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 10-1987 § 4, 2010; 1964 Code § 28A.11.)1

For statutory provisions regarding conversions of overhead electrical and communications facilities to underground locations, see Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq.; for provisions regarding assessment of property obtaining connections to underground facilities, see Government Code § 38793. 


Chapter 11.24 HOUSE NUMBERING

Sections:

11.24.010    Required.

11.24.020    Commercial, industrial and multifamily addresses.

11.24.030    Notice to owner or occupant.

11.24.040    Premises description.

11.24.050    Designation.

11.24.060    Location.

11.24.070    Size and material.

11.24.080    System generally.

11.24.090    Starting points or dividing lines.


11.24.010 Required.

All entrances from public streets of the city to buildings shall be numbered. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; 1964 Code § 23.69.)


11.24.020 Commercial, industrial and multifamily addresses.

All commercial, industrial and multifamily buildings shall bear address numbers at each entrance, front and rear. This requirement shall apply even though such an entrance is from a private street, private parking lot, alley or walkway. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1516 § 1, 1982. Formerly 11.24.015.)


11.24.030 Notice to owner or occupant.

The director shall give notice calling attention to this chapter by one publication of such notice in a newspaper published in general circulation in the city or by mailing it, postage prepaid, addressed to the occupant, lessee, tenant, subtenant or other person in control of the building, if the address of any such party is known to the director or, if the address of any such party is not known to the director, such notice shall be mailed, addressed to one of such parties at the city. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 13, 1978; 1964 Code § 23.70. Formerly 11.24.020.)


11.24.040 Premises description.

Within 10 calendar days after notice has been given as required by CMC 11.24.030, the occupant, lessee, tenant, subtenant or other person in control of a building with an entrance from a public street shall furnish to the director of public works a description of such premises as set forth in map and plans thereof recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 13, 1978; 1964 Code § 23.71. Formerly 11.24.030.)


11.24.050 Designation.

Upon receipt of the information required by CMC 11.24.040, the director shall designate the number for the premises covered thereby. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1394 § 13, 1978; 1964 Code § 23.72. Formerly 11.24.040.)


11.24.060 Location.

The number of each fronting entrance to a building or structure shall be placed in a conspicuous position over, upon or adjacent to each and every door or entranceway to such building or structure. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; 1964 Code § 23.73. Formerly 11.24.050.)


11.24.070 Size and material.

The figures used in numbers designated under this chapter shall be not less than two inches in height and made of corresponding width, made out of rustproof material including, but not limited to, aluminum, porcelain, ceramic, plastic, wood, or cement, and shall be of a color that contrasts with its background to enhance its visibility. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; 1964 Code § 23.74. Formerly 11.24.060.)


11.24.080 System generally.

A. For the purpose of numbering buildings and structures as required by this chapter, 100 numbers or as many thereof as shall be necessary shall be allowed to each block.

B. Number 100 shall be the first number used at the respective beginning points on the side of the street which is to contain even numbers, and number 101 for the side of the street which is to contain the odd numbers. The first number in each block shall be increased by 100 over the first number in the next preceding block, and each 15 feet of frontage or fraction thereof on the north and west side of each street in each block shall be numbered consecutive odd numbers, and each 15 feet or fraction thereof on the south and east sides of each street in each block shall be numbered with consecutive even numbers.

C. Should the door or entrance way fall on the dividing line between two sections, the number of the section best representing the premises shall be used. Should several doors or entrance ways occur in succession within less space than is provided for in this section, the numbers may be shifted forward or backward so as to provide for a fractional number for each entrance or a new series in alphabetic order.

D. Numbers shall be calculated from the end of the block nearest to the starting point or dividing line. On all streets, the numbering shall be done as if the street extends to the dividing line or starting point for the city, as defined in CMC 11.24.090.

E. Alley intersections shall not be numbered. Any fractional section of street frontage of less than 15 feet adjoining an alley on the side thereof nearest the initial number on such street shall be given a whole number. The first 15 feet on the opposite side of such alley shall be given the next odd or even number.

F. A “block” within the meaning of this section is that portion of any street between two intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and an abutting street, or between two abutting streets. In the case of abutting streets, the prolonged centerline of the abutting streets shall be the dividing line of the block, and all blocks exceeding 1,000 feet in length shall be considered two equal blocks. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; 1964 Code § 23.75. Formerly 11.24.070.)


11.24.090 Starting points or dividing lines.

The following shall be the respective starting points or dividing lines for numbering all buildings fronting on streets heretofore laid out or hereafter to be laid out or extended:

A. From east to west, Citrus Avenue shall be the dividing line;

B. From north to south, Badillo Street shall be the starting point.

In designating any location in the city by number and street, the word “East” shall precede the name of each street running easterly from Citrus Avenue, and the word “West” shall precede the name of each street running westerly from Citrus Avenue. The word “North” shall precede the name of each avenue running northerly from Badillo Street, and the word “South” shall precede the name of each avenue running southerly from Badillo Street. (Ord. 10-1987 § 5, 2010; 1964 Code § 23.76. Formerly 11.24.080.)


Chapter 11.26 OUTDOOR SIDEWALK DINING

Sections:

11.26.010    Permit – Required.

11.26.020    Permit – Application.

11.26.030    Permit – Fee.

11.26.040    Report and recommendation of city planner.

11.26.050    Permit – Director’s authority to issue and set conditions.

11.26.060    Minimum sidewalk clearance.

11.26.070    Limited to restaurants that serve food.

11.26.080    Limitations on outdoor dining facilities.

11.26.090    Indemnification and insurance.

11.26.100    No live entertainment or amplified music.

11.26.110    Notice of violation and/or termination.

11.26.120    Impoundment.

11.26.130    Appeal.

11.26.140    Violation – Penalty.

11.26.150    Violation – Other remedies.


11.26.010 Permit – Required.

Any person desiring to erect, construct, place or maintain an encroachment upon any public sidewalk for outdoor sidewalk dining facilities must first obtain an annual outdoor sidewalk dining permit pursuant to this chapter. Each applicant for an annual permit shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable laws. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.020 Permit – Application.

The director shall establish an application form for an annual sidewalk dining permit, including any application materials deemed necessary to enable complete review of the application. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.030 Permit – Fee.

Each applicant for an annual outdoor sidewalk dining permit under this chapter shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Each holder of such permit shall be required to submit a renewal application along with a nonrefundable renewal application fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council each year to obtain a new annual permit. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.040 Report and recommendation of city planner.

The director shall transmit a copy of each application for an annual outdoor sidewalk dining permit to the chief of police and city planner. The chief of police and/or city planner may require of the applicant such additional information pertinent to the outdoor sidewalk dining permit as they may deem necessary, and shall advise the director in writing of all material facts which they consider necessary for determining whether an outdoor sidewalk dining permit should be approved, approved with conditions or denied. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.050 Permit – Director’s authority to issue and set conditions.

The director in acting upon any application for an annual outdoor sidewalk dining permit shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the issuance of a permit based on the following principles and standards:

A. That the proposed use of the public sidewalk is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter;

B. That the proposed use of the public sidewalk is so arranged as to ensure the protection of public health, safety and general welfare and prevent interference with users of the highway right-of-way and with holders of other similar permits; and

C. That the proposed outdoor sidewalk dining and the abutting restaurant will comply with the provisions and development standards prescribed in CMC Title 17, or as prescribed by the city planner. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.060 Minimum sidewalk clearance.

Sidewalk dining facilities shall not be permitted on sidewalks which are less than 10 feet wide. All outdoor sidewalk dining facilities shall be located at least five feet from the curb and any sidewalk obstruction which shall include, but not be limited to, street light poles, trees, sign posts, news racks, mail boxes, and utility poles. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.070 Limited to restaurants that serve food.

All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to outdoor sidewalk dining facilities established in conjunction with and abutting restaurants that serve food. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.080 Limitations on outdoor dining facilities.

All outdoor dining facilities shall be placed, installed, used or maintained as follows:

A. All outdoor dining furnishings and equipment such as chairs, tables, fences, planters and such related furnishings and equipment shall not exceed 48 inches in height;

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, any umbrella used in conjunction with the aforementioned furnishings and equipment or any portable heater may exceed 48 inches in height if the umbrella or heater does not encroach upon the air space required in the five-foot sidewalk clearance area referred to in CMC 11.26.060;

C. No items of furnishings or equipment, including but not limited to umbrellas, chairs, tables, fences, planters and related furnishings and equipment, shall be attached to the sidewalk or sidewalk surface, nor shall any of those items cause damage to the sidewalk in any manner, unless otherwise authorized by separate encroachment permit pursuant to Chapter 11.08 CMC;

D. Outdoor sidewalk dining shall only be allowed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise authorized by separate encroachment permit pursuant to Chapter 11.08 CMC;

E. All sidewalk dining furnishings and equipment must be removed and the sidewalk kept clear of all obstructions between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise authorized by separate encroachment permit pursuant to Chapter 11.08 CMC;

F. The maximum number of tables, chairs or other items of furnishings or equipment allowed under any permit shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable laws. The decision of the director with regard to the total number of tables, chairs or other items of furnishings or equipment which may be permitted under the permit granted hereunder shall be final. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.090 Indemnification and insurance.

As a condition of the issuance of an annual outdoor sidewalk dining permit, the permit holder shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, agents and employees, and shall present, along with each application or renewal application for an annual permit, evidence of liability insurance in a form and in an amount acceptable to the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.100 No live entertainment or amplified music.

No live entertainment or amplified music shall be permitted in any outdoor sidewalk dining area established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.110 Notice of violation and/or termination.

A. If the director believes that a permittee is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the director may issue a notice of violation to the permittee. The notice shall be served on the permittee, either in person or by first class mail. The notice of violation shall set forth the basis for the violation and indicate that the permit is subject to termination unless, within 10 calendar days of service of the notice, the violation is either corrected or an appeal is requested pursuant to CMC 11.26.130.

B. If the director determines that a permittee:

1. Has committed a violation of this chapter; or

2. Will not be able to continue to meet the requirements of this chapter because of a proposed public highway right-of-way improvement;

the director shall notify the permittee, either in person or by first class mail, that the permit will be terminated. The notice of termination shall be served on the permittee, either in person or by first class mail. The notice shall indicate that the permit is subject to termination unless, within 10 calendar days of service of the notice, an appeal is requested pursuant to CMC 11.26.130.

C. Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail. The failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceeding or action under this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.120 Impoundment.

A. The director may impound any furnishings and equipment believed to be in violation of this chapter if the furnishings and equipment are deemed a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. Before impounding any furnishings or equipment the director shall provide not less than 10 calendar days’ notice prior to impoundment. The notice shall set forth the basis for the impoundment and shall also notify the permittee of its appeal rights as set forth in CMC 11.26.130.

B. If, however, the violation constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the director may impound furnishings and equipment without any advance notice to the permittee. In such case, written notice of the impound shall be served to the permittee of record not later than two working days after the impoundment. The notice shall inform the permittee of the right to seek the return of the impounded furnishings and equipment and the right to appeal the director’s decision as set forth in CMC 11.26.130.

C. Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail. The failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceeding or action under this chapter.

D. The permittee or, if there is no permittee, a claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of impounded furnishings and equipment may, no later than 30 calendar days after impoundment or, if an appeal has been filed, not later than 30 calendar days after any such appeal becomes final, obtain a return of the furnishings and equipment, upon paying an impound fee as established from time to time by the city council, plus the reasonable cost, if any, of impounding the furnishings and equipment in excess of the impound fee established by the city council. The furnishings and equipment shall be returned without payment of any impound fee or costs if so determined by the director or on appeal.

E. If any furnishings and equipment are impounded for more than 30 calendar days after impoundment or, if an appeal has been filed, for more than 30 calendar days after the appeal becomes final, then the director may cause the sale or disposal of the impounded furnishing and equipment. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.130 Appeal.

A permittee or person responsible for furnishings and equipment governed by this chapter may appeal any denial of a permit, notice of violation, notice of termination or impoundment as provided in Chapter 11.54 CMC. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.140 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


11.26.150 Violation – Other remedies.

The provisions of this chapter are cumulative to any other remedies authorized by law. (Ord. 10-1987 § 6, 2010.)


Chapter 11.28 AWNINGS

Sections:

11.28.010    Permit – Required.

11.28.020    Permit – Contents.

11.28.030    Combustible coverings.

11.28.040    Extensions over sidewalks.

11.28.050    Height.

11.28.060    Chapter interpretation.


11.28.010 Permit – Required.

It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or repair any awning or hood extending over streets and sidewalks in the city without first having obtained a written permit from the building director or the city council to perform such work of construction or repair. (1964 Code § 23.63.)


11.28.020 Permit – Contents.

Each permit required by CMC 11.28.010 shall contain the restrictions provided for in CMC 11.28.050. (1964 Code § 23.64.)


11.28.030 Combustible coverings.

Movable awnings or hoods may have combustible coverings supported on frames attached to any building in the city. (1964 Code § 23.65.)


11.28.040 Extensions over sidewalks.

No awning or hood shall extend over the public sidewalk of the city for more than two-thirds the distance from the property line to the nearest curb line in front of the building site. (1964 Code § 23.66.)


11.28.050 Height.

The lowest part of any movable awning or hood frame shall not be less than seven and one-half feet above the ground immediately below. The lowest part of any fringe or covering attached to such awning or hood shall not be less than seven feet above the grade immediately below. (1964 Code § 23.67.)


11.28.060 Chapter interpretation.

The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the safety of the community, the people who may use the sidewalks and for the safety of the occupants of the buildings in the city. (1964 Code § 23.68.)


Chapter 11.32 NEWSRACKS1

Sections:

11.32.010    Purpose.

11.32.020    Definitions.

11.32.030    Permit required.

11.32.040    No fee required.

11.32.050    Issuance of permit – Only one permit required.

11.32.060    Permit – Application – Contents.

11.32.070    Renewable annually.

11.32.080    Newsrack identification.

11.32.090    Prohibited placement.

11.32.100    Standards.

11.32.110    Display of certain matter prohibited.

11.32.120    Definition of explicit sexual acts.

11.32.130    Impounding of newsracks.

11.32.140    Return of impounded newsracks.

11.32.150    Appeal.

11.32.160    Appeal after hearing.

11.32.170    Penalty.

11.32.180    Other remedies.

11.32.190    Time for compliance.


11.32.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the placement and maintenance of newsracks upon public sidewalks or parkways under the limitations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “Director” means the director of public works of the city of Covina or designee thereof.

B. “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals.

C. “Parkway” means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and, where there is no sidewalk or curb, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto.

D. “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. (Ord. 10-1987 § 7, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.030 Permit required.

No person, whether as a principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall place or maintain a newsrack on or projecting onto a sidewalk or parkway unless and until a newsrack permit has been obtained from the director. (Ord. 10-1987 § 8, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.040 No fee required.

No fee shall be required for the issuance of a newsrack permit. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.050 Issuance of permit – Only one permit required.

Upon proper application on forms provided by the director, the director shall issue the applicant a newsrack permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the director may not refuse to issue a newsrack permit properly applied for. One permit shall permit the placement and maintenance of any number of newsracks on the sidewalks in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 9, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.060 Permit – Application – Contents.

Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall make application therefor to the director. The application shall be upon a form furnished by the director and shall set forth:

A. The name, address, telephone number (and facsimile or electronic mail address, if available) of the applicant;

B. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal corporate officers and the state of incorporation;

C. The name, address, telephone number (and facsimile or electronic mail address, if available) of the person to be in immediate charge of the individual newsrack(s) who the city may notify or contact at any time;

D. The location where the newsrack(s) shall be placed;

E. A color photograph and model number of the type of newsrack(s);

F. The name of the publication to be contained in each newsrack;

G. A site map showing the width of the sidewalk and the location of each proposed newsrack installation and any and all structures, encroachments or objects of any kind or character within 25 feet of the proposed installation including, but not limited to, traffic signals, street light poles, fire hydrants, bus benches, utility poles, telephones, building entrances, driveways and parking meters;

H. A statement that the applicant will directly control and supervise each newsrack proposed to be authorized under the permit sought and will be responsible for the operation and maintenance thereof;

I. Such other data as the director may reasonably require in the interests of public health, safety or welfare;

J. A statement certifying on penalty of perjury the correctness of the information given on the application and agreeing on behalf of the proposed applicant that there shall be full compliance of the applicant with all state and city laws in the conduct of the activities for which a permit may be granted;

K. Copies of any permits required by this code or other ordinances of the city or the state laws. (Ord. 10-1987 § 10, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.070 Renewable annually.

A newsrack permit shall be renewable annually. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.080 Newsrack identification.

Every newsrack permittee shall permanently affix to each newsrack placed on or maintained on or projecting over any portion of a sidewalk or parkway the permittee’s name, address, telephone number, and the permittee’s permit number. (Ord. 10-1987 § 11, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.090 Prohibited placement.*

A. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.

B. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property; or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use; or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near the location.

C. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which is located in a parkway or sidewalk adjacent to property zoned residential, as such zone is defined in this code; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit such placement where the newsrack is in a parkway or sidewalk directly in front of a public building within a residential zone which is open to and used regularly by the public, so long as such public building is not an elementary, junior high or high school.

D. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure which is located in a parkway or sidewalk adjacent to a public park, in any zone.

E. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure which is located in a parkway or sidewalk in any zone within 300 feet of any public or private school, church, library, community center, or public building if the newsrack will contain matter described in CMC 11.32.110.

F. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure which is located in a parkway or sidewalk along Citrus Avenue, between the south side of San Bernardino Road and the north side of Badillo Street. (Ord. 13-2024 § 2, 2013; Ord. 13-2021 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)

*    Section 4 of Ord. 13-2024 provides, “This Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days following its adoption and, upon its effective date, shall supersede Urgency Ordinance 13-2021 (adopted and effective June 18, 2013) except with respect to its factoring into the amortization period set forth in Section 3.”


11.32.100 Standards.

Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:

A. No newsrack shall exceed 48 inches in height, 30 inches in width, or 24 inches in depth.

B. Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no closer than 18 inches to the face of the curb and no farther than 24 inches from the face of the curb, measured from the curb face to the nearest point on the newsrack. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.

C. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object without the consent of the owner or such property. Newsracks shall be bolted to the sidewalk, unless otherwise authorized by the director. Upon removal of a newsrack, the permittee shall fully restore the sidewalk or parkway to its original condition. No newsrack shall be chained or attached to loose objects including, but not limited to, bricks, rocks, cinder blocks, pipes or other such objects.

D. Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to another; however, no more than three newsracks may be joined together in this manner, and a space of not less than 42 inches shall separate each group of three newsracks so attached, unless the newsracks are placed adjacent to the wall of a building.

E. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 11.32.090(B), no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

1. Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;

2. Within 15 feet of any curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

3. Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

4. Within five feet of any driveway or alley approach;

5. Within five feet in front of, and within 25 feet to the rear of, any sign or pavement markings designating a bus stop, measured parallel to the flow of traffic;

6. Within six feet of any bus bench;

7. Within three feet of any outdoor sidewalk dining area or area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees, or within three feet of any display window or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes;

8. Within 42 inches of any sidewalk obstruction which shall include, but not be limited to, traffic signals, street light poles, trees, sign posts, telephones, and utility poles;

9. Within 100 feet of any other newsrack or group of newsracks on the same side of the street containing the same edition of the same publication, unless the permittee can demonstrate to the director that the demand for such publication within such 100 feet requires an additional newsrack or racks. The total number of newsracks within such 100 feet shall not exceed the maximum number of newsracks allowed by subsection (H) of this section;

10. At any location where the clear space for pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;

11. Which causes or constitutes a traffic hazard;

12. Which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with access to, or the use and enjoyment of, abutting property;

13. Which will endanger persons or property;

14. Which will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the highway;

15. Where a curb is painted blue, yellow or white;

16. Which obstructs the motoring public’s view of pedestrian or traffic and parking signage.

F. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein.

G. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. Each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:

1. It is free of dirt, grease and graffiti;

2. It is free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible areas thereof;

3. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed, are unbroken and free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;

4. It is free of rust and corrosion in the visible areas thereof;

5. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are free of tears, peeling or fading;

6. The structural parts thereof are not broken or misshapen.

H. No more than six newsracks shall be permitted within a space of 100 feet on the same side of any highway where vehicles are allowed to park, load, unload or stand for any period of time. (Ord. 10-1987 § 12, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.110 Display of certain matter prohibited.

Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on or projecting over a sidewalk or parkway shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from a sidewalk or parkway any of the following:

A. Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement, where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

B. Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perinea, anuses, or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

C. Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.120 Definition of explicit sexual acts.

“Explicit sexual acts” as used in this chapter means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.130 Impounding of newsracks.

A newsrack may be impounded for being in violation of CMC 11.32.030, 11.32.080, 11.32.090, 11.32.100 or 11.32.110 under the following conditions:

A. The director must attach a tag upon the particular newsrack found in violation. Thereafter, a written notice of the violation shall be sent within two working days to the permittee designated in CMC 11.32.060(A) and the person in immediate charge of the newsrack as designated in CMC 11.32.060(C). The permittee or person in immediate charge of the newsrack must correct the violation within 10 calendar days from the date on the tag or request an appeal pursuant to CMC 11.32.150 within that same time for the purpose of demonstrating that the particular newsrack is not in violation. The director may impound the newsrack if the violation is not corrected or an appeal is not requested in writing within 10 calendar days from the date of the tag.

B. Notwithstanding the impound provisions of this section, the director may immediately correct any violation of CMC 11.32.090 and, if such violation is creating a dangerous or hazardous condition, may immediately impound any such newsrack. If the newsrack is impounded pursuant to this section, a written notice of such action shall be sent to the permittee and person in immediate charge of the newsrack within two working days after the impoundment. The permittee or person in immediate charge of the newsrack may request an appeal within 10 calendar days from the date of service of the written notice pursuant to CMC 11.32.150 for the purpose of demonstrating that the particular newsrack was not in violation and should not have been impounded. Notices made pursuant to any section of this chapter shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail. (Ord. 10-1987 § 13, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.140 Return of impounded newsracks.

A. Unless the newsrack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the permittee, or if there is no known permittee a claimant, who provides sufficient proof of ownership of such newsrack may have such newsrack together with its contents and all moneys, if any, returned within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 calendar days from the date of removal and impoundment, or if an appeal is timely requested pursuant to CMC 11.32.150, within 30 calendar days from the date the appeal becomes final, upon paying an impound fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council plus the reasonable cost of impounding, removing, and storing the newsrack, if any, in excess of the fee established by the city council.

B. Should there be a dismissal of an action charging a violation of this chapter, or an acquittal of such charges, the court or city official ordering such dismissal or entering such acquittal shall provide for the release of any newsrack and its contents and all moneys, if any, impounded or the return of any impound fee and costs paid for the release of a newsrack impounded pursuant to such charges.

C. If the newsrack is not being held as evidence in any criminal proceeding, and no criminal proceeding concerning the violation for which the newsrack was impounded is still pending, and if no appeal pursuant to CMC 11.32.150 has been requested, or, if requested, has resulted in a final decision that the newsrack was rightfully impounded, and if the impound fees and costs specified in this chapter have not been paid within the time specified, the director may sell or otherwise dispose of the newsrack and its contents, if any, and retain the proceeds from any such sale or other disposition and any moneys contained in said newsrack at the time of its removal and impoundment. (Ord. 10-1987 § 14, 2010; Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.150 Appeal.

Any applicant, permittee, or, if there is no permittee, any claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of a newsrack may, within the time frames set forth in CMC 11.32.130, request an appeal regarding any denial of a permit, notice of violation, or impoundment as provided in Chapter 11.54 CMC. (Ord. 10-1987 § 15, 2010; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.160 Appeal after hearing.

A. Appeal. Any permittee or claimant may, within 10 days after receipt of notice of decision held pursuant to CMC 11.32.130(A) or 11.32.150, appeal such decision to the city council.

B. Contents of Appeal. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the legal and factual basis upon which the appeal is to be based and shall be filed with the police chief. The police chief shall forward the appeal, together with a copy of the decision and order, to the clerk of the city council.

C. Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the appeal and order and decision, the city council may take any one of the following actions:

1. Approve the decision and order;

2. Refer the matter back to the police chief with or without instructions;

3. Set the matter for public hearing before itself. Such public hearing shall be held de novo as if no hearing previously had been held. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.170 Penalty.

A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished in accordance with CMC 1.16.010(A).

B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person who violates CMC 11.32.110 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, or by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Amended during 2009 republication; Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.180 Other remedies.

The provisions of this chapter shall not limit any other remedies authorized by law. (Ord. 1478 § 1, 1980.)


11.32.190 Time for compliance.*

Any newsrack which does not comply with this chapter shall be removed or otherwise brought into conformance with this chapter not later than (A) December 18, 2013, or (B) if Urgency Ordinance No. 13-2021 is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, six months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (“compliance date”). If any newsrack remains in violation of this chapter after the compliance date, the city may take all appropriate legal actions authorized by this chapter to enforce compliance, including impoundment of the newsrack. Any permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section for placement of a newsrack which is in violation of this chapter shall automatically expire upon the compliance date. (Ord. 13-2024 § 3, 2013; Ord. 13-2021 § 3, 2013.)

*    Section 4 of Ord. 13-2024 provides, “This Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days following its adoption and, upon its effective date, shall supersede Urgency Ordinance 13-2021 (adopted and effective June 18, 2013) except with respect to its factoring into the amortization period set forth in Section 3.”

1

Prior history: 1964 Code §§ 23.90 – 23.97; Ord. 1209. 


Chapter 11.36 STREET TREES1

Sections:

11.36.010    Definitions.

11.36.020    Master plan.

11.36.030    Enforcement.

11.36.040    Trimming, removing or injuring trees and other plants – Permit required.

11.36.050    Application – Contents.

11.36.060    Permit – Issuance conditions.

11.36.070    Permit – Denial.

11.36.080    Replacement of trees required when.

11.36.090    Tree trimming for moving buildings or structures.

11.36.100    Violations – Penalty.


11.36.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Director” means the director of public works of the city of Covina or designee thereof.

B. “Public street” means every way set apart for public travel or use in the city, including the entire parkway strip, sidewalk area, easements and rights-of-way granted to the city. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.020 Master plan.

All trees and shrubs hereafter planted in any public street shall conform as to species, spacing and location to the master street tree plan and reports adopted by the city council, which by reference is made a part of this chapter and is on file with the director.

Amendments and additions to the master street tree plan shall be by resolution of the city council and shall thereby become a part of the master street tree plan. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.030 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the director to carry out the provisions of this chapter, and for that purpose he is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for accomplishing the purpose of this chapter.

The director may perform any necessary operations on any tree, shrub or plant in any public street for the accomplishment of the master street tree plan or for the protection of public improvements or persons using the public streets.

Any portion of any tree or shrub growing in private property but extending into a public street may have such portion trimmed or pruned by the director for the protection of public improvements or persons using the public streets. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.040 Trimming, removing or injuring trees and other plants – Permit required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than the director, to trim, prune, cut, break, deface, destroy, burn or remove any shade or ornamental tree, hedge, plant, shrub or flower growing or to grow upon any public street a tree within the city of Covina, without first having obtained a permit from the director; or to deface, bend, break or destroy, or in any manner injure or remove any frame, post, trellis or other structure used to protect or support any such tree, hedge, plant, shrub or flower; or to plant or place thereon or attach thereto any sign, notice or other advertising device. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.050 Application – Contents.

Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the director, on the forms provided by the director, along with an application fee, which shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. The director may make such reasonable changes or additions to any application for a permit as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. An applicant for a permit shall state in the application: name, address, and such other information as is required by this chapter or by the director as he may reasonably require to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.060 Permit – Issuance conditions.

A permit shall not be granted to any person, firm or corporation, except:

A. A person, firm or corporation who owns or is the tenant of the property adjacent to that portion of the public street on which the shade or ornamental trees, hedges, plants, shrubs or flowers which it is proposed to trim, prune, cut, break, deface, destroy, burn, remove or grow;

B. A person, firm or corporation having a valid, unrevoked easement or franchise, with the exercise of which the shade or ornamental trees, hedges, plants, shrubs or flowers interfere, and the trimming, pruning, cutting, breaking, defacing, destruction, burning or removing of which is necessary to the exercise of such easement or franchise;

C. A person, firm or corporation whose principal business is tree trimming and maintenance and tree surgery, who, in the opinion of the director, is qualified for such business, and who deposits with the director a sum sufficient, in the opinion of the director, to reimburse the city for any expense necessarily incurred to do corrective tree trimming, removal and replacement necessitated by any trimming done by the permittee. The city shall deduct from the deposit the actual cost of any necessary corrective trimming, pruning, removal and replacement and shall refund the balance to the permittee. Should the cost be greater than the deposit, the permittee upon demand shall pay to the director an amount equal to such excess. Further permits shall not be issued until such payment is made;

D. After the applicant for a permit has provided proof of public liability insurance in a form satisfactory to the director and in an amount of not less than $300,000 and property damage insurance in an amount not less than $100,000. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.070 Permit – Denial.

A permit shall be denied if, as reasonably determined by the director, the activity proposed by the applicant will:

A. Be in violation of any provision of this chapter; or

B. Endanger the public health, safety and general welfare, or interfere with users of the public right-of-way or with holders of other similar permits. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.080 Replacement of trees required when.

No permit for the removal of any tree shall be issued under this chapter unless and until the applicant agrees to replace the tree with another tree, of a type and quality to be determined by the director. This condition may be waived by the director when replacement of such tree is not desirable in the public interest. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.090 Tree trimming for moving buildings or structures.

A. Investigation of Proposed Route. Before any permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall investigate the proposed route and determine whether the moving of any building or structure as proposed in and over the route specified in the application can be done without any excessive or damaging tree trimming.

B. Permit Issuance. If tree trimming is required to facilitate the moving of the building or structure, the director may issue a permit to the applicant, pursuant to CMC 11.36.060, authorizing such tree trimming and containing conditions prescribed by the director to assure against damage or injury to persons or property and to provide indemnity for any damage or injury resulting from the work. In the alternative, the director may require the permittee to select a different route which will not require excessive or damaging tree trimming, if such a route is feasible. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)


11.36.100 Violations – Penalty.

A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall bear the expense of replacing any tree, shrub or plant more than one-third destroyed by such violation, in addition to other penalties provided by law. (Ord. 10-1987 § 16, 2010.)1

For statutory provisions regarding municipal programs of shade tree plantings, see Government Code § 40401.

    Prior history: 1964 Code §§ 27.1 – 27.6; Ord. 1394. 


Chapter 11.37 REGULATION OF MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR PRIVATE PROPERTY ENCROACHMENT ONTO THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

11.37.010    Intent and purpose.

11.37.020    Violation – Declaration of nuisance.

11.37.030    Abatement.


11.37.010 Intent and purpose.

The city council has determined that the quality of life in Covina is tied to the character and conditions of its neighborhoods. It is the purpose of these regulations to prevent private property encroachment onto the public rights-of-way which shall strengthen visual continuity and preserve the integrity and safety of the pedestrian and vehicular public. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and not supersede other regulations contained in the Covina Municipal Code. (Ord. 10-1987 § 17, 2010; Ord. 93-1751 § 1, 1993.)


11.37.020 Violation – Declaration of nuisance.

A. No owner of private property shall permit any grass, plants, flowers, shrubs, trees, barriers, decorative appurtenances or any other private property condition to become overgrown, overspread, or to intrude into the public right-of-way such that it imperils or interferes with the safe travel of the pedestrian and vehicular public.

B. For purposes of this section, the term “owner” means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in the private property. This definition includes any agent of the owner. (Ord. 10-1987 § 17, 2010.)


11.37.030 Abatement.

If the director finds such conditions to exist, the director may declare such conditions to be a public nuisance and initiate nuisance abatement proceedings in accordance with Chapter 8.40 CMC. (Ord. 10-1987 § 17, 2010; Ord. 93-1751 § 1, 1993.)


Chapter 11.40 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS

Sections:

11.40.010    Transportation of manure, dirt and similar materials.

11.40.020    Prohibited deposits.

11.40.025    –	

11.40.050    Repealed.


11.40.010 Transportation of manure, dirt and similar materials.

It is unlawful to haul any manure, dirt, rock, sand, gravel or similar material upon or along any paved, oiled or macadamized street in the city, unless contained in a box or receptacle sufficiently tight to prevent the same from sifting or dropping upon such street. (1964 Code § 23.3.)


11.40.020 Prohibited deposits.

It is unlawful to throw, deposit or place or allow to be thrown, deposited or placed at or upon any street or alley of the city any nails, tacks, tin, sheet iron, broken glass, grass clippings or tree branches, boards, clothing, bottles, paper, night soil, rubbish, rind, skin or peel of any fruit or vegetables, any foul or noisome substance without removing the same immediately thereafter. It is also unlawful to discharge or allow to be discharged any water upon any street or alley when such discharge is determined to be detrimental to street or alley surfaces by the field operations director. The field operations director shall notify the person or persons responsible to stop such discharge. The person or persons responsible for the discharge shall take necessary action to stop such discharge within a reasonable time following such notification. (Ord. 1394 § 15, 1978; Ord. 1371 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code § 23.4.)


11.40.025 Industrial waste and sewage.

Repealed by Ord. 10-1987. (Ord. 1394 § 15, 1978; Ord. 1272 § 1, 1974.)


11.40.030 Machinery moving restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. 10-1987. (1964 Code § 23.5.)


11.40.040 Irrigating water on streets.

Repealed by Ord. 10-1987. (1964 Code § 23.6.)


11.40.050 Riding on sidewalks.

Repealed by Ord. 10-1987. (1964 Code § 23.7.)


Chapter 11.44 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF HAZARDOUS PRIVATE STREETS AND PRIVATE DRAINS

Sections:

11.44.010    Definitions.

11.44.020    Maintenance of private streets and private drains.

11.44.030    Repair of private streets and private drains – Declaration of purpose.

11.44.040    Hazardous private streets and private drains – Nuisance.

11.44.050    Order to repair – Persons entitled to copy.

11.44.060    Order to repair – Service.

11.44.070    Order to repair to be posted.

11.44.080    Order to repair – Form and content.

11.44.090    Director may order summary closure or closing of hazardous private street.

11.44.100    Appeal from order.

11.44.110    Order of the city council.

11.44.120    Violations – Penalties for removing any notice or order.

11.44.130    Failure to comply with order – City may repair private streets and private drains.

11.44.140    Failure to comply with order.

11.44.150    Costs to be assessed against property – When.

11.44.160    Filing of report – Contents.

11.44.170    Report transmitted to council – Set for hearing.

11.44.180    Council hearing – Objections.

11.44.190    Total cost – Special assessment.

11.44.200    Assessment – Collection.

11.44.210    Provisions – Not exclusive.

11.44.220    Reassessment.

11.44.230    Interference prohibited.


11.44.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

A. “Director” means the field operations director.

B. “Hazardous private street” means any private street, either improved or unimproved, which is open for access for vehicular traffic and which the director has determined to contain any or all of the following defects:

1. A roadway, the surface material of which has loosened, buckled, split, crumbled, eroded or in any other way whatsoever deteriorated so as to make it unsafe for vehicular traffic or so as to constitute a roadway obstruction to the adequate access by fire, police, health and sanitation and public utility vehicles;

2. A roadway, the surface of which has become blocked in whole or in part by the deposit of earth or other materials thereon, or by reason of any other cause;

3. A roadway, all or any portion of which is likely to collapse because of deterioration, decay, faulty construction or by reason of the removal or movement of any portion of the ground necessary for the support thereof.

C. “Private street” means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public street over which a private easement for road purposes has been granted to the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto which intersects or connects with a public street or another private street, and the instrument creating same has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the recorder of Los Angeles County.

D. “Hazardous private drain” means any private drain, either improved or unimproved, which is used for drainage purposes and which the director has determined to contain any or all of the following defects:

1. Any portion of the drain, the material of which has loosened, buckled, split, crumbled, eroded or in any other way whatsoever deteriorated so as to make it unsuitable or unsafe for drainage purposes;

2. Any portion of the drain which has become blocked in whole or in part by the deposit of earth or other materials thereon or therein, or by reason of any other cause;

3. Any portion of the drain which is likely to collapse because of deterioration, decay, faulty construction or by reason of the removal or movement of any portion of the ground necessary for the support or containment thereof.

E. “Private drain” means a natural drainage course, improved channel, pipe, or any combination of same, over or under a parcel of land which has been granted as a private easement for drainage purposes to owners of other properties which contribute water to the “private drain.” The easement may be considered to have been granted if an instrument creating the same has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the recorder of Los Angeles County, or if the property has been used to drain waters from other properties for sufficient time to unquestionably establish easement rights to those other owners to continue to use the “private drain” for drainage purposes. (Ord. 1394 § 16, 1978; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code §§ 23.102, 23.103.)


11.44.020 Maintenance of private streets and private drains.

A. All private streets shall be maintained by the persons having ownership thereof and by the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto in such a manner that adequate access by vehicular traffic is provided at all times so that fire, police, health and sanitation, and public utility vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or adjacent thereto, and so that the vehicles will have adequate turning areas.

B. All private drains shall be maintained by the persons having ownership thereof in such a manner that adequate drainage is provided at all times. (Ord. 1302 § 2, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.100.)


11.44.030 Repair of private streets and private drains – Declaration of purpose.

It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter to provide equitable and practicable methods, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby private streets and private drains located within the city, which are a hazard to the life, limb, health, property, safety and general welfare of the people of the city, may be required to be repaired. (Ord. 1302 § 3, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.101.)


11.44.040 Hazardous private streets and private drains – Nuisance.

All hazardous private streets and private drains as defined in CMC 11.44.010 are public nuisances and shall be repaired in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1302 § 4, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.104.)


11.44.050 Order to repair – Persons entitled to copy.

When the director determines that any private street or private drain is hazardous, he shall serve an order requiring the correction of the hazardous condition. One copy of the order shall be served on each owner of the land constituting the private street or private drain and upon the owner of each contiguous or adjacent parcel of property having an easement in the private street or private drain, as such owners are shown on the last equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County or as known to the city clerk. (Ord. 1302 § 5, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.105.)


11.44.060 Order to repair – Service.

A. Method of Service. The order to repair shall be served upon all persons entitled thereto, either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at the address of such persons as the same appears either on the last equalized assessment roll of the county, or as known to the city clerk, or as disclosed in any search of title. If no such address appears, or is disclosed, or is known to the city clerk, then a copy shall be addressed to such persons at the lot or parcel involved in the proceedings. The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.

B. Affidavit of Service. The field operations director, upon giving notice as provided herein, shall file an affidavit thereof with the council certifying to the time and manner in which such notice was given. He shall also file therewith any receipt card which may have been returned to him in acknowledgment of the receipt of such notice by certified mail. (Ord. 1394 § 17, 1978; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.106.)


11.44.070 Order to repair to be posted.

A true copy of the order shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon each parcel of property involved. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.107.)


11.44.080 Order to repair – Form and content.

The order shall be given upon a form prescribed by the council and shall set forth the street address and the legal description sufficient for identification of the parcel or parcels constituting the private street or private drain. It shall contain a brief statement specifying the defects which cause it to be a hazardous private street or private drain and their location. It shall also contain a statement of the work required to be done in order to correct the defects and place the private street or private drain in a reasonable state of repair in light of its original construction and that no work shall be commenced without first obtaining a written permit pursuant to CMC 11.08.010. The director shall specify therein the time in which the work required to be done must be commenced, which shall not be later than 60 days following the issuance of the order, and shall further specify a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. The director may extend the time for completion for good cause upon written request for such extension. (Ord. 1302 § 6, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.108.)


11.44.090 Director may order summary closure or closing of hazardous private street.

In addition to ordering the repair of a hazardous private street, the director may order the immediate closing thereof until the repair work has been satisfactorily completed if the director deems that the hazard is extreme. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.109.)


11.44.100 Appeal from order.

Any person served with an order to repair may, at any time prior to the date specified in the order for the work to be commenced, file a written appeal to the city council upon such form as the council prescribes, for a review of any of the requirements of the order. The filing of such an appeal shall stay all requirements of the order until a determination of the matter is rendered by the council. The council shall promptly set a date for the hearing of the appeal and shall, at least 10 days prior thereto, serve and post notice of the date thereof in the manner prescribed by CMC 11.44.050, 11.44.060 and 11.44.070. The council shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall, upon the date set for hearing of the appeal from the order to repair, hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. Thereafter, but in no event later than 45 days from receipt of the appeal, the council shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the private street or private drain is a hazard within the terms of this chapter, and may affirm, change or modify any of the requirements of the repair order. (Ord. 1302 § 7, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.110.)


11.44.110 Order of the city council.

The order of the city council affirming, changing or modifying the requirements of the order of the director shall be served and posted in the manner specified by CMC 11.44.050, 11.44.060 and 11.44.070. If the order of the council requires the performance of any work, it shall specify the time within which the work required to be done must be commenced, which shall be not later than 60 days following the issuance of the order, and shall further specify a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. The director may extend the time for completion for good cause upon written request for such an extension. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.111.)


11.44.120 Violations – Penalties for removing any notice or order.

Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.112.)


11.44.130 Failure to comply with order – City may repair private streets and private drains.

Whenever an order to repair any private street or private drain has not been complied with within the time set by the city council or director, or within such additional time as the director may for good cause extend, the city council may cause the private street or private drain to be repaired by such means as the city council may deem advisable. The cost thereof shall thereafter be assessed against any parcel containing the private street or private drain and against those parcels having an easement in the private street or private drain and shall be a lien thereon in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1394 § 18, 1978; Ord. 1302 § 8, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.113.)


11.44.140 Failure to comply with order.

Whenever the city council has undertaken action to make those repairs required by its order or the order of the director, upon the failure of the owner or other interested party to comply with such order, the owner, person served with the order to repair or other persons having charge or control over the parcels upon which the hazardous private street or private drain is located shall be deemed to have forfeited all further rights and privileges to do such work and are thereafter prohibited from doing any such work on the hazardous private street or private drain, except as the council may otherwise allow. (Ord. 1302 § 9, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.114.)


11.44.150 Costs to be assessed against property – When.

The director shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in the repair of hazardous private streets and private drains. Upon completion of the repair, the city council shall proceed to have the cost of repair assessed against each parcel upon which the private street or private drain is located, and against those parcels having an easement in the private street or private drain. The director shall select the method to be used in each separate project subject to confirmation by the city council.

Such costs shall include, in addition to the cost to repair the hazardous private street or private drain, any administrative costs to the city. (Ord. 1394 § 18, 1978; Ord. 1302 § 10, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.115.)


11.44.160 Filing of report – Contents.

The director shall keep an itemized account of the cost involved in the repairing of such hazardous private streets and private drains. Upon completion of the repair, the director shall prepare and file with the city clerk, in duplicate, a report specifying the work done, the cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the private street or private drain is located, the names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to CMC 11.44.050, and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. (Ord. 1394 § 18, 1978; Ord. 1302 § 11, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.116(a).)


11.44.170 Report transmitted to council – Set for hearing.

Upon receipt of the report, the city clerk shall present it to the city council for consideration. The city clerk shall cause the notice of the cost of the repair to be posted upon each parcel of property, published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or owners of the property as their names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County or as known to the city clerk. Such notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing and shall specify the date, hour and place when the council will hear and pass upon the report of the director, together with any objections or protests which may be filed as hereinafter provided by any person interested in and affected by the proposed assessment. (Ord. 1394 § 18, 1978; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.116(b).)


11.44.180 Council hearing – Objections.

At the time set for consideration of the report, the city council shall hear it with any objections of the property owners liable to be assessed for the abatement. It may modify the report as necessary and shall then confirm the report by motion. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.116(c).)


11.44.190 Total cost – Special assessment.

The total cost for abating such nuisance shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcel of land to which it relates. After confirmation of the report by the city council, a copy may be turned over to the tax collector for the city to add the amount of the special assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.116(d).)


11.44.200 Assessment – Collection.

The director may receive the amount due on the confirmed report and issue receipts at any time prior to turning the same over to the tax collector. The tax collector may collect the assessment by separate billing and issue receipts, without reference to the general taxes, at any time prior to the time the special assessment is added to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel of land for municipal purposes. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.116(e).)


11.44.210 Provisions – Not exclusive.

The provisions of CMC 11.44.150 through 11.44.200 shall not in any way limit or restrict the city or the district attorney from enforcing this chapter or other city ordinances, or abating public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.116(f).)


11.44.220 Reassessment.

If any assessment made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is void or unenforceable for any reason, the council may order a reassessment to be made in accordance with the provisions of CMC 11.44.150 through 11.44.200. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.117.)


11.44.230 Interference prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with the director, his representatives or any authorized employee of the city or with the inspector of any department of this city whenever any such representative of the city council, director, contractor or inspector is engaged in repairing such private street or private drain pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work. (Ord. 1394 § 18, 1978; Ord. 1302 § 12, 1975; Ord. 1265 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1245 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 23.118.)


Chapter 11.48 COMMUNITY EVENT BOOTHS

Sections:

11.48.010    Community event booth permit required.

11.48.020    Application for community event booth permit.

11.48.030    Review of applications.

11.48.040    Denial/revocation of permit.

11.48.050    Permit fees.

11.48.060    Appeals.

11.48.070    Hold harmless.

11.48.080    Administrative regulations.

11.48.090    Penalties.


11.48.010 Community event booth permit required.

All promoters, organizers or sponsors of community events at which booths will be erected and used for display, information distribution, sales of food or goods, or providing any services on public property or rights-of-way shall be required to apply for and obtain a community event permit. Such permit for the booths may contain reasonable conditions and shall be in addition to any other permits, licenses or approvals required by federal, state or local law. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.020 Application for community event booth permit.

To receive a community event permit, the promoter, organizer, or sponsor of the community event must complete a community event application at the public information counter on a form approved by the city. The applicant must provide the following information:

A. A description of the proposed use, event or activity.

B. The street or other public property and the specific area or areas thereof which will be utilized in connection with the proposed use, event or activity.

C. The manner in which the public property will be utilized.

D. The number of booths or structures to be erected.

E. The date or dates and the specific times thereof, including setup and teardown, that the public property or rights-of-way are to be utilized for the described use, event or activity.

F. The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity promoting, organizing or sponsoring the event.

G. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons to be contacted regarding the application or permit. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.030 Review of applications.

The city manager or his or her designee shall issue a community event booth permit if it is determined that all of the following criteria have been met:

A. The proposed use of the public property or rights-of-way is not governed or subject to any other permit procedures provided elsewhere in this code or other applicable laws, rules or regulations, or such other permits have been obtained.

B. The preparation for the conduct of the proposed use, event or activity will not unreasonably or unfeasibly burden city resources necessary to preserve the public’s use of the streets in the area contiguous to the street or other public property to be used for the event.

C. The preparation for the conduct of the proposed use, event or activity will not unduly impede, obstruct or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles or equipment in or through the particular permit area or adversely affect the city’s ability to perform municipal functions or furnish city services in the vicinity of the permit area.

D. The proposed use, event or activity does not otherwise present a substantial or unwarranted safety, noise or traffic hazard.

E. The proposed event will be of a nature and size appropriate to the proposed venue, location or site, and will occur during a time period approved for that venue, location or site.

F. A transportation management/parking plan has been approved for this event by the transportation department to the extent such a plan is required by the city.

G. The proposed event will not cause other adverse impacts on health or safety to surrounding residential or commercial uses, which cannot be effectively mitigated.

In deciding whether to approve an application, no consideration may be given to the message of the event, the content of speech, the identity or associational relationships of the applicant, or to any assumptions or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content of the speech or message conveyed by the event. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.040 Denial/revocation of permit.

The city manager or his or her designee shall deny an application for a community event booth permit or revoke a permit if the city manager or his or her designee finds any of the following:

A. One or more of the approval criteria specified in CMC 11.48.030 is not met.

B. The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the application process.

C. The application does not contain the information required by this chapter.

D. The application does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

E. The applicant fails to comply with any conditions of approval including, but not limited to:

1. Remittance of fees, charges or deposits;

2. Submittal of an indemnification agreement and/or proof of timely receipt of all required approvals.

F. The applicant fails to agree as a condition of permit issuance that, if city property is destroyed or damaged by reason of the permittee’s use, event or activity and the damage or destruction is attributable to the permittee, the permittee shall reimburse the city for the actual replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged property. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.050 Permit fees.

Except as otherwise provided by this code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation, the permit application fees and other additional fees for the use of city public property or rights-of-way pursuant to this chapter shall be established by city council resolution. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.060 Appeals.

Any applicant aggrieved by an adverse decision under CMC 11.48.030 or 11.48.040 may appeal such decision of the city manager or his or her designee by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk within five business days of the decision. The city clerk shall schedule a hearing by the city council regarding the appeal and shall decide the appeal within 30 working days. The city council’s decision shall be final except for judicial review. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.070 Hold harmless.

Each permit shall expressly provide that the permittee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, and any of its employees, officials and agents from and against any liability (including liability for claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, administrative proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including attorneys’ fees and costs, court costs, interest, defense costs, and expert witness fees), where the same arise out of, are a consequence of, or are in any way attributable to, in whole or in part, the alleged acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents or employees in connection with the permitted event or activity. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.080 Administrative regulations.

The city manager or his or her designee may adopt administrative regulations that are consistent with and that further the terms and requirements set forth within this chapter. All such administrative regulations shall be in writing. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


11.48.090 Penalties.

Any person who intentionally violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 02-1890, 2002.)


Chapter 11.50 UNDERGROUND UTILITY MAPS

Sections:

11.50.010    Definitions.

11.50.020    Map – Required.

11.50.030    Map – Filing time.

11.50.040    Map – Affidavit.

11.50.050    Map – New map not required.

11.50.060    Electronic media in lieu of maps.


11.50.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the ascribed meanings:

A. “Director” means the director of public works of the city of Covina or designee thereof.

B. “Highway” means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for the purpose of public travel. The term includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such entire area is actually used for highway purposes.

C. “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, any district, any city, any county, and all departments and bureaus thereof. (Ord. 10-1987 § 19, 2010.)


11.50.020 Map – Required.

It shall be the duty of every person when such person owns, uses, controls or has an interest in any pipes, pipelines, conduits, ducts, tunnels or conveyor systems under or beneath the surface of any public highway, which pipes, pipelines, conduits, ducts, tunnels or conveyor systems shall be used or provided for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, oil, petroleum products, hydrocarbons, ammonia, water, steam, heat, sewerage, discharge of wastes, electricity, or communication circuits in, to or from the city, or to or from any person situated within the city, or for any other similar purposes, to file in the office of the director a map or a set of maps, each drawn to scale of not more than 200 feet to one inch, which map or maps shall show the exact location, size and description of the pipes, pipelines, conduits, ducts, tunnels, or conveyor systems, together with all mains, laterals, services and service pipes, valves, pressure regulators, traps, vents, manholes, handholes, transformer chambers or other appliances, installed beneath the surface of the highways in the city, belonging to, used by or under the control of such person or in which such person has an interest, together with the date of installation of such improvement, as hereinabove set forth, if such date of installation is known. (Ord. 10-1987 § 19, 2010.)


11.50.030 Map – Filing time.

Each map or set of maps required by CMC 11.50.020 shall be kept current and corrected maps shall be filed with the director by the end of February of each calendar year. The corrected map or set of maps shall include all installations or changes made during the previous calendar year, to and including the last day of each such calendar year. (Ord. 10-1987 § 19, 2010.)


11.50.040 Map – Affidavit.

Each map or set of maps required by CMC 11.50.020 and 11.50.030 shall be accompanied by an affidavit endorsed thereon, subscribed and sworn to by such person, member of such firm, or president or secretary of such corporation or person authorized by them, to the effect that such map or set of maps correctly exhibits the details required by this chapter to be shown thereon. (Ord. 10-1987 § 19, 2010.)


11.50.050 Map – New map not required.

In the event that any person has filed a map or set of maps in compliance with CMC 11.50.020 and finds at the last day of any calendar year subsequent thereto that no changes have occurred during such calendar year, such person shall not be required to file a new map or set of maps as set forth in CMC 11.50.030, but it shall be sufficient if such person, member of such firm or president or secretary of such corporation, or person authorized by them, on or before the last day of February thereafter, shall file an affidavit with the office of the director a statement confirming that the maps on file are complete and correct as filed. (Ord. 10-1987 § 19, 2010.)


11.50.060 Electronic media in lieu of maps.

In lieu of maps required by this chapter, persons may file electronic media containing the same information required to be shown on the maps. Each electronic file shall be in a format acceptable to the director and shall include an identifying date for filing purposes. (Ord. 10-1987 § 19, 2010.)


Chapter 11.54 APPEAL OF DIRECTOR’S DECISIONS UNDER THIS TITLE

Sections:

11.54.010    Appeal of director’s decisions under this title.


11.54.010 Appeal of director’s decisions under this title.

A. Except as otherwise provided in the applicable chapter, any person who is aggrieved by the notices, orders, decisions, or determinations made by the director relative to the application of any standards under this title may appeal to the city manager.

B. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be filed with the director not less than 10 calendar days following the date of service of the director’s order, decision or determination on the person aggrieved. The appeal must indicate a return address, set forth the basis for the appeal, include the applicable appeal fee as set by city council resolution, and must be filed with the director’s office. If the appeal deadline falls on a day City Hall is closed, then the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day.

C. As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the city shall fix a date, time and place for hearing before the city manager. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing may be served by personal service, facsimile or by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the written appeal. Service of the appeal notice must be made at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the person aggrieved. The notice shall be deemed served and effective upon the date the notice is provided in person or by facsimile machine, or two calendar days after sending by first class mail. The failure of the person aggrieved to receive such notice of the hearing shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter.

D. The city manager shall conduct an orderly, fair hearing and accept evidence on which persons would commonly rely in the conduct of their ordinary business affairs as follows. The city manager shall administer oaths and accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury relating to the issues presented on appeal. The person aggrieved, or his or her agent or attorney, or any other interested person may present testimony or evidence concerning the issues presented on appeal. For purposes of an appeal hearing, a valid notice, order, decision, or determination of the director shall be prima facie evidence of that fact.

E. The city manager shall make findings based on the record of the hearing and make a written decision based on the findings. The city shall preserve all exhibits submitted by the parties and shall serve the decision by first class mail on the appellant within 10 calendar days after the hearing.

F. The city manager may reduce, waive or modify any penalties, conclusions or conditions stated in the director’s notice, order, decision or determination if mitigating circumstances are shown and the city manager states specific grounds for reduction, waiver or modification in the written decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final, subject only to further review in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to state law. There are no appeals to the city council.

G. Failure of an aggrieved person to file an appeal and appear for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of that person’s rights to administrative determination of the merits of the director’s order, decision or determination, and shall also constitute a forfeiture of any fines, costs and appeal fees. If no timely appeal is filed to the city manager, the director’s notice, order, decision or determination shall be deemed a final administrative order. Failure to appeal a decision to the city manager shall also constitute a failure to exhaust the aggrieved person’s administrative remedies. (Ord. 10-1987 § 20, 2010.)


Title 12 (RESERVED)


Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS

Chapters:

Division I. Water

13.04    General Provisions

13.06    Water Conservation

13.08    Repealed

13.10    Control of Backflow and Cross-Connections

13.12    Water Rates and Charges

13.16    Repealed

13.20    Repealed

13.24    Fire Hydrants

Division II. Sewers

13.50    Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste

13.54    Overflow Prevention


Chapter 13.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS1

Sections:

13.04.010    Districts.

13.04.020    Rules and regulation adoption.

13.04.030    Water division property – Use or trespass.

13.04.040    Design and construction standards.

13.04.050    – 

13.04.110    Repealed.


13.04.010 Districts.

The territory served with domestic water by the city is divided into two districts:

A. District 1. All that territory served by the city water system within the boundaries of the city;

B. District 2. All that territory served by the city water system outside the boundaries of the city. (1964 Code § 29.1.)


13.04.020 Rules and regulation adoption.

The city council reserves the right and power to and may from time to time, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the operation and maintenance of the water division of the city and for furnishing water to users, and may likewise by resolution establish or modify charges and penalties established and imposed by this division, and may from time to time by resolution prescribe rules for the extension of water mains within the boundaries and outside the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 07-1949 § 1, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.2.)


13.04.030 Water division property – Use or trespass.

It is unlawful for any person to open any fire hydrant, street hydrant, stopcock, gate, valve or to interfere in any manner with any street water service, water connection or any water meter attached to any service pipe connected with the water mains, or to turn on or off water mains or water pipes of the city, or to tap any water service pipe, or take or draw water from a water main, pipe or hydrant of the city without paying the established fee therefor, and after having made written application therefor as provided in this division, or in anywise to trespass upon the public property of the water division, without written permission first being obtained from the director of public works or designee thereof. (Ord. 09-1973 § 3, 2009; Ord. 07-1949 §§ 4, 7, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.11. Formerly 13.04.100.)


13.04.040 Design and construction standards.

All facilities of the water utility system shall meet the design and construction standards of the most current edition of the American Water Works Association Standards and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. If any conflicts exist between these two sets of standards, the American Water Works Association Standards shall have precedence for the design and construction of the water system and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction shall have precedence for any appurtenant activities and street work. (Ord. 09-1973 § 3, 2009; Ord. 07-1949 § 8, 2007. Formerly 13.04.120.)


13.04.050 Distance of sewer or gas service from water service.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 4, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.6. Formerly 13.04.060.)


13.04.060 Repairs to water mains, meters and lines.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 4, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.7. Formerly 13.04.070.)


13.04.070 Right of entry.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 4, 2007; Ord. 1218 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code § 29.8. Formerly 13.04.080.)


13.04.080 Water use in boilers, hydraulic elevators, power pumps and similar apparatus.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 §§ 4, 5, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.9. Formerly 13.04.090.)


13.04.090 Turning water off or on in emergency.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 §§ 4, 6, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.10. Formerly 13.04.100.)


13.04.110 Wastewater runoff.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 4, 2007; Ord. 92-1746 § 2, 1992. Formerly 13.04.120.)1

For statutory provisions regarding municipal operation and/or regulation of the city’s water supply system, see Government Code § 38730 et seq. 


Chapter 13.06 WATER CONSERVATION

Sections:

13.06.010    Purpose and intent.

13.06.020    Definitions.

13.06.030    Application.

13.06.040    Permanent water conservation requirements – Prohibition against waste.

13.06.050    Level 1 water supply shortage.

13.06.060    Level 2 water supply shortage.

13.06.070    Level 3 water supply shortage – Emergency condition.

13.06.080    Procedures for notification of water supply shortage.

13.06.090    Hardship waiver.

13.06.100    Penalties and violations.


13.06.010 Purpose and intent.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the city of Covina’s jurisdiction through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the city of Covina to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible.

B. This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency at all times and further establishes three levels of water supply shortage response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall have the meaning defined by this section:

A. “Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, including all agencies and departments of the city of Covina or any other user of water provided by the city of Covina.

B. “Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, tubing, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

C. “Large landscaped areas” means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to or greater than one acre of irrigable land.

D. “Single pass cooling systems” means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed.

E. “Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

F. “Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of nonpotable water for beneficial use as defined in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations.

G. “Billing unit” means the unit of water used to apply water rates for purposes of calculating water charges for a person’s water usage and equals 100 cubic feet of water. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.030 Application.

A. The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of potable water provided by the city of Covina.

B. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following:

1. Uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services.

2. The use of recycled water, with the exception of CMC 13.06.040(A).

3. The use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.040 Permanent water conservation requirements – Prohibition against waste.

The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section shall be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water.

A. Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Pacific Time on any day, except by use of hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing, shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

B. Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape, or other vegetated areas with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or water device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than 15 minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow, drip-type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour and weather-based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a 70 percent efficiency standard.

C. No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.

D. No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive, self-closing shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume, high-pressure water broom.

E. Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected, and in no event more than seven days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited.

F. Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited.

G. Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited, except by the use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing, shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.

H. Drinking Water Served upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to a restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar, or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested. This subsection does not apply to permanently installed public drinking fountains.

I. Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Guests Option to Decline Daily Linen Services. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

J. No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new or increased capacity water service.

K. No Installation of Non-recirculating Water Systems in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of non-recirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems.

L. Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are prohibited from using non-water-conserving dish wash spray valves.

M. Commercial Car Wash Systems. Effective on January 1, 2011, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational recirculating water systems, or must have secured a waiver from this requirement from the city. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.050 Level 1 water supply shortage.

A. A Level 1 water supply shortage exists when the city manager or designee thereof determines that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened water supply shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration of a Level 1 water supply shortage condition, mandatory Level 1 conservation measures identified in this section shall become effective immediately.

B. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in CMC 13.06.040, the following water conservation requirements shall be in effect during a declared Level 1 water supply shortage:

1. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week on a schedule established and posted by the director of public works. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the director of public works. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low-flow drip irrigation systems when no emitter uses more than two gallons of water per hour. This subsection also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing, shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

2. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 72 hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

C. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in CMC 13.06.040 and the water conservation requirements identified within this section, Tier II water supply shortage rates identified within CMC 13.12.200 shall be in effect. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.060 Level 2 water supply shortage.

A. A Level 2 water supply shortage exists when the city manager or designee thereof determines that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened water supply shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration of a Level 2 water supply shortage condition, mandatory Level 2 conservation measures identified in this section shall become effective immediately.

B. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in CMC 13.06.040 and 13.06.050, the following additional water conservation requirements shall be in effect during a declared Level 2 water supply shortage:

1. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week on a schedule established and posted by the director of public works. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the director of public works. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low-flow drip irrigation systems when no emitter uses more than two gallons of water per hour. This subsection also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing, shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

2. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 48 hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

3. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life; provided, that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage level.

4. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by the use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing, shut-off nozzle or device, by high-pressure/low-volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water.

C. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in CMC 13.06.040 and the water conservation requirements identified within this section, Tier III water supply shortage rates identified within CMC 13.12.200 shall be in effect. (Ord. 15-2039 § 1, 2015; Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.070 Level 3 water supply shortage – Emergency condition.

A. A Level 3 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A Level 3 condition exists when the city manager or designee thereof declares a water shortage emergency and notifies residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety. Upon declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage condition, the director of public works will implement the mandatory Level 3 conservation measures identified in this section.

B. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in CMC 13.06.040, 13.06.050, and 13.06.060, the following water conservation requirements shall apply during a declared Level 3 water supply shortage emergency:

1. Watering or irrigating lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to the following categories of use, unless the director of public works has determined that recycled water is available and may be applied to the use:

a. Maintenance of vegetation, including tress and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing shut-off nozzle or device.

b. Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection.

c. Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control.

d. Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of protected species.

e. Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, or school grounds; provided, that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule established in CMC 13.06.060(B)(1) and time restrictions in CMC 13.06.040(A) and (B).

f. Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.

2. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 24 hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

3. Upon declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition, no new potable water service will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service, such as will-serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability, will be issued, except under the following circumstances:

a. A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or

b. The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; or

c. The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the director of public works.

This subsection does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of six months or less.

4. The director of public works, in his or her sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section.

5. Upon the declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage condition, the city will suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This subsection does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any increased use of water. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.080 Procedures for notification of water supply shortage.

The existence of a Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 water supply shortage condition will take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the director of public works or designee thereof must publish a notice of the declaration of water supply shortage in a newspaper used for publication of official notices, post the notice in the same location and manner as other official notices of the city are posted, and use whatever means are reasonably available, including but not limited to the city’s website, the emergency telephone notification system, and regular billing statements, to notify customers of the shortage declaration. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.090 Hardship waiver.

A. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, the person or property owner may apply for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.

B. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property.

1. Application for waiver must be on a form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the Covina city council.

2. The application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written statement of the applicant.

3. An application for waiver will be denied unless the director of public works finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city, all of the following:

a. The waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses;

b. Because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally;

c. The authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest; and

d. The condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent, or general in nature.

4. The director of public works or designee thereof must act upon any completed application no later than 10 days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, modify, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property or use during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the director of public works may be appealed as provided within the water utility’s approved rules and regulations. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


13.06.100 Penalties and violations.

A. At the sole discretion of the city, any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by both.

B. At the sole discretion of the city, in lieu of prosecution as a misdemeanor, any violation of this chapter may result in a penalty being assessed to a person’s water utility bill, as follows:

1. First Violation. The city will issue a written warning and deliver a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter either by mail or by hand delivery to the property.

2. Second Violation. A second violation within the preceding 12 calendar months is punishable by the levying of an assessment of $50.00 upon the responsible person’s water bill.

3. Third Violation. A third violation within the preceding 12 calendar months is punishable by the levying of a noncompliance assessment of $100.00 upon the responsible person’s water bill.

4. Fourth and Subsequent Violations. A fourth and any subsequent violation is punishable by the levying of a noncompliance assessment of $250.00 upon the responsible person’s water bill.

5. Water Flow Restrictor. In addition to or in place of any noncompliance assessments, the city, in its sole discretion, may install a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute capacity for services up to one-and-one-half-inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services 48 hours after written notice of intent to install a flow restrictor is issued.

6. Discontinuing Service. In addition to or in place of any noncompliance assessments and/or the installation of a water flow restrictor, the city may, in its sole discretion, disconnect a customer’s water service for willful violations of mandatory conservation measures contained within this chapter.

C. A person or entity that violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for payment of the city’s charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the city’s schedule of charges then in effect. The charge for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device must be paid to the city before the device is removed. Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates. 

D. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense.

E. A consumer may appeal a notice of violation or violation penalty assessment by filing a written appeal as prescribed within the water utility’s approved rules and regulations. (Ord. 09-1973 § 1, 2009.)


Chapter 13.08 SERVICE AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 09-1973)


Chapter 13.10 CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.10.010    Purpose.

13.10.020    Director of public works – Responsibility.

13.10.025    Building official – Responsibility.

13.10.030    Definitions generally.

13.10.040    Director of public works.

13.10.050    Approved defined.

13.10.060    Auxiliary water supply defined.

13.10.070    Backflow defined.

13.10.080    Back-siphonage defined.

13.10.090    Backflow preventer defined.

13.10.100    Contamination defined.

13.10.110    Cross-connection defined.

13.10.120    Cross-connection, controlled defined.

13.10.130    Cross-connection control by containment defined.

13.10.140    Hazard, degree of defined.

13.10.150    Industrial fluids system defined.

13.10.160    Pollution defined.

13.10.170    Water, potable defined.

13.10.180    Water, nonpotable defined.

13.10.190    Water service connection defined.

13.10.200    Water, used defined.

13.10.210    Water system defined.

13.10.220    Policies.


13.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is:

A. To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers’ internal distribution system(s) or its customers’ private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water supply system;

B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between its customers’ in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and

C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.020 Director of public works – Responsibility.

The director of public works shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through water service connections. If, in the judgment of the director of public works or designee thereof, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city’s water service connection to any customer’s premises for the safety of the water system, the director of public works or designee thereof shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his or her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed.

A. Backflow prevention devices should be tested immediately after installation, relocation or repair.

B. All persons testing backflow devices must be certified either by the American Water Works Association (California-Nevada section) or the Los Angeles County department of health services. (Ord. 07-1949 § 12, 2007; Ord. 1690 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.025 Building official – Responsibility.

The building official shall require all new construction regulated by the building code to comply with the requirements of this chapter and those provisions of the health code which affect new construction. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.030 Definitions generally.

For the purpose of this title, the words and phrases set forth in CMC 13.10.050 through 13.10.210 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.040 Director of public works.

The director of public works or designee thereof is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 07-1949 § 13, 2007; Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.050 Approved defined.

“Approved” means accepted by the water supervisor as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.060 Auxiliary water supply defined.

“Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used waters” or “industrial fluids.” These waters may be polluted or contaminated, or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.070 Backflow defined.

“Backflow” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than its intended source. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.080 Back-siphonage defined.

“Back-siphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source, other than its intended source, caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.090 Backflow preventer defined.

A “backflow preventer” is one of the devices described below designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage:

A. Airgap. “Airgap” is the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved airgap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch. When an airgap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the airgap system and an approved reduced pressure principal device shall be installed in the bypass system.

B. Reduced Pressure Principle Device. “Reduced pressure principle device” is an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged.

C. Double Check Valve Assembly. “Double check valve assembly” is an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow prevention devices. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.100 Contamination defined.

“Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.110 Cross-connection defined.

“Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. A water service connection between a public potable water distribution system and a customer’s water distribution system which is cross-connected to a contaminated fixture, industrial fluid system or with a potentially contaminated supply or auxiliary water system, constitutes one type of cross-connection. Other types of cross-connections include connectors such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices, sliding multi-port tube, solid connections, etc. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.120 Cross-connection, controlled defined.

“Controlled cross-connection” means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.130 Cross-connection control by containment defined.

“Cross-connection control by containment” means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer’s premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer’s water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of cross-connections. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.140 Hazard, degree of defined.

The “degree of hazard” is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.

A. Hazard – Health. Health hazard is any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the supervisor may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply system.

B. Hazard – Plumbing. Plumbing hazard is a plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing-type cross-connections are considered to be a health hazard.

C. Hazard – Pollutional. Pollutional hazard is an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system or which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.

D. Hazard – System. System hazard is an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.150 Industrial fluids system defined.

“Industrial fluids system” is any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated water; all types of process waters and “used waters” originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.160 Pollution defined.

“Pollution” means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.170 Water, potable defined.

“Potable water” means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.180 Water, nonpotable defined.

“Nonpotable water” means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.190 Water service connection defined.

“Water service connection” is the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer’s water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer’s water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.200 Water, used defined.

“Used water” means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.210 Water system defined.

The water system is made up of two parts: the utility system and customer’s system.

A. The utility system consists of the source facilities and the distribution system and includes all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer’s system begins.

1. The source includes all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system.

2. The distribution system includes the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer’s system.

B. The customer’s system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


13.10.220 Policies.

The following policies shall apply to all water service connections in the city:

A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.

B. The customer’s system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the division to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the supervisor shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

C. An approved backflow prevention device shall also be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:

1. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the supervisor, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.

2. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.

3. In the case of premises having (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line.

D. The type of protective device required under subsections (C)(1), (2), and (3) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows:

1. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (C)(1) of this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved airgap separation. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device may be used if the device is approved by the State Department of Health Services and the city water division.

2. In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly.

3. In the case of any premises where there is any material danger to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved airgap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.

4. In the case of any premises where there are “uncontrolled” cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved airgap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection.

5. In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved airgap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises.

E. Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the supervisor. The term “approved backflow prevention device” means a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled:

AWWA C506-69, Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices:

and, have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCC&HR) of the University of Southern California established by:

Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices – #69-2 dated March 1969 or the most current issue.

Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the supervisor. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCC&HR specifications.

The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the supervisors to test and certify backflow preventers:

Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research

University of Southern California

University Park

Los Angeles, California 98007

Testing laboratories other than the laboratory above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the supervisors. Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back pressure or back-siphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory’s current list of approved devices may be used without further test or qualification.

F. It shall be the duty of the customer/user at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once a year. In those instances where the supervisor deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the device manufacturer’s representative, by division personnel or by a certified tester approved by the supervisor. It shall be the duty of the supervisor to see that these timely tests are made. The customer/user shall notify the supervisor in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that he or his representative may witness the tests if it is so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer/user whenever the devices are found to be defective. Records of tests and repairs of backflow prevention devices should be submitted to the city for record keeping.

G. All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described in this chapter at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection (F) of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the supervisor is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the supervisor finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1690 §§ 2, 3, 1989; Ord. 1330 § 2, 1976.)


Chapter 13.12 WATER RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:

13.12.010    Generally.

13.12.040    – 

13.12.200    Repealed.


13.12.010 Generally.

The schedule of rates, compensations and charges as set out in the table of rates on file in the office of the city clerk and the water division office is fixed and established as the rates, compensations and charges to be charged and collected by the city for domestic water and water service, except as hereinafter specifically provided, or as provided by the city council, from time to time by resolution. The schedule of fees for development and selective services including but not limited to turn-ons, turn-offs, meter testing, pressure testing, and late payment penalties shall be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 08-1962 § 1, 2008; Ord. 07-1949 § 14, 2007; Ord. 94-1771 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1394 § 19, 1978; Ord. 1260 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code § 29.21.)


13.12.040 Liability.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (1964 Code § 29.24.)


13.12.050 Water bill – When due and payable.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 1277 § 3, 1974; 1964 Code § 29.25.)


13.12.060 Delinquent bill – Determination.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 1277 § 4, 1974; 1964 Code § 29.26.)


13.12.070 Delinquent bill – Deduction from deposit.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (1964 Code § 29.27.)


13.12.080 Delinquent bill – Service discontinuance – Generally.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 1990; 1964 Code § 29.28.)


13.12.090 Delinquent bill – Service discontinuance – Restoration.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 15, 2007; Ord. 1701 § 2, 1990; Ord. 1363 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code § 29.29.)


13.12.095 Chronic delinquent bill – Service discontinuance – Restoration.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 16, 2007.)


13.12.100 Delinquent bill – Late payment penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 07-1949 § 17, 2007; Ord. 94-1771 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1701 § 3, 1990.)


13.12.200 Drought or water supply disruptions.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 08-1962 § 2, 2008; Ord. 03-1898 § 1, 2003; Ord. 98-1829 § 1, 1998; Ord. 95-1792, 1995; Ord. 94-1771 § 1, 1994.)


Chapter 13.16 METERS

(Repealed by Ord. 09-1973)


Chapter 13.20 WATER MAINS

(Repealed by Ord. 09-1973)


Chapter 13.24 FIRE HYDRANTS

Sections:

13.24.010    Purpose.

13.24.015    Repealed.

13.24.020    Installation or connection with main – Outside city limits.

13.24.030    Opening responsibility.

13.24.040    Existing hydrants outside city limits.


13.24.010 Purpose.

Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires and shall be opened and used only by the fire department or other officials of the municipality authorized to do so. (1964 Code § 29.45.)


13.24.015 Requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 09-1973. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 1987.)


13.24.020 Installation or connection with main – Outside city limits.

In the territory served with water outside the city limits, no fire hydrant shall be installed and connected with the mains of the water division of the city by any person unless and until permission has been granted by the fire department having jurisdiction in the territory and permission has been granted by the director of public works of the city or designee thereof. (Ord. 09-1973 § 3, 2009; Ord. 07-1949 § 23, 2007; Ord. 1394 § 20, 1978; Ord. 1220 § 4, 1973; 1964 Code § 29.47. Formerly 13.24.030.)


13.24.030 Opening responsibility.

Every person authorized to open a fire hydrant shall replace the cap on the outlet when the same is not in use and leave the hydrant in as good condition as when found, and such officer or person shall report to the water division any leaks or breaks or damage to the fire hydrant immediately upon discovery. (Ord. 09-1973 § 3, 2009; Ord. 07-1949 § 24, 2007; 1964 Code § 29.49. Formerly 13.24.050.)


13.24.040 Existing hydrants outside city limits.

In the territory served outside the city limits, all fire hydrants which are connected with the mains of the water division of the city at the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 1394 shall be capped and closed by the director of public works of the city or designee thereof and shall not be used or opened unless and until permission has been granted therefor by the director of public works of the city or designee thereof, and a standby charge arrangement shall be paid each month thereof. The city council reserves the right, by ordinance, to determine the monthly standby charge to be made for each fire hydrant which it permits to be connected with its water mains outside the city limits, and shall therein determine the person who shall pay such monthly standby rate charge, and shall provide rules concerning the use of fire hydrants outside the city limits. (Ord. 09-1973 § 3, 2009; Ord. 07-1949 § 25, 2007; Ord. 1394 § 20, 1978; Ord. 1220 § 5, 1973; 1964 Code § 29.50. Formerly 13.24.060.)


Chapter 13.50 SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE

Sections:

13.50.010    Adoption of the sanitary sewer and industrial waste code of the county of Los Angeles.

13.50.020    Deletions.

13.50.030    Amendments.

13.50.035    Chapter 20.20 amended – Definitions.

13.50.040    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.080 amended – Maintenance of sewers and laterals.

13.50.044    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.165 added – Administrative fines.

13.50.048    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.200 amended – Notification of uncontrolled or slug discharges required.

13.50.050    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.080(F) amended – Excessive discharge of sewage – Conditional permit requirements.

13.50.060    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.120 amended – Sewer construction permit fees.

13.50.070    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.130(A) amended – Connection charges – Designated.

13.50.080    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.150(D) amended – Area and connection charges in reimbursement districts.

13.50.090    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.210(C) amended – Manhole reconstruction inspection charges.

13.50.100    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.230 amended – Plan checking fees.

13.50.110    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.240 amended – Sewer easement processing fees.

13.50.120    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.250 amended – Special studies – Preparation and checking fees.

13.50.130    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.260 amended – Reimbursement processing fees.

13.50.140    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.280(B) amended – Charges for sewer maintenance.

13.50.150    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.290 amended – Cesspool truck disposal fee.

13.50.160    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.580 amended – Materials and construction – Conformity with standards.

13.50.165    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.135 amended – Monitoring and sampling – Pre-notification – Procedures – Reporting.

13.50.170    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.230 amended – Industrial waste disposal permit – Application fee – Schedule.

13.50.180    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.245 amended – Industrial waste plan review – Fee schedule.

13.50.190    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.250 amended – Annual fee – Purpose, schedule and billing.

13.50.200    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.265 amended – Wastewater sampling and analysis fee.

13.50.210    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.270 amended – Miscellaneous services – Fees.

13.50.220    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.280 amended – Annual inspection fee, wastewater sampling and analysis fee and miscellaneous service fee – Payment time – Penalties for delinquency.

13.50.230    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.295 amended – Annual review of fees.

13.50.240    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.310 amended – Permit – Required when.

13.50.243    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.320 amended – Permit – Application forms – Information required.

13.50.244    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.385 amended – FOG disposal systems – Installation required.

13.50.245    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.400 amended – Deposit of certain substances prohibited.

13.50.246    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.406 amended – Slug discharge control plan – When required.

13.50.247    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.450 amended – Ground garbage – Condition.

13.50.248    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.475 amended – Maintenance of existing, nonused facility for industrial waste deposit, discharge or storage.

13.50.249    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.595 amended – FOG disposal systems – Installation requirements.

13.50.250    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.030 amended – Legislative intent – Basis for levy of charge.

13.50.260    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.040 amended – Levy of annual service charge – Amount.

13.50.270    Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.090 amended – Collection of charges.


13.50.010 Adoption of the sanitary sewer and industrial waste code of the county of Los Angeles.

A. Adoption. Subject to the changes and amendments set forth in this chapter, the Los Angeles County Code, Divisions 2 and 3 of Title 20, as amended through and including August 1, 2007, is hereby adopted by reference as the sanitary sewer and industrial waste code for the city of Covina (hereafter referred to as the “sanitary sewer and industrial waste code”). Copies of the sanitary sewer and industrial waste code are on file in the office of the city clerk and are open to public inspection.

B. Definitions. Wherever said sanitary sewer code uses the following words or phrases, they, respectively, shall mean:

1. “Board” or “Board of Supervisors,” the city council of the City of Covina;

2. “Chief Engineer” or “County Engineer,” the city engineer of the city of Covina;

3. “County” or “County of Los Angeles,” the city of Covina;

4. “County health officer,” the health officer of the city of Covina;

5. “Director” or “Director of Public Works,” the director of public works of the city of Covina;

6. “Unincorporated area of the county of Los Angeles,” the city of Covina;

7. “Plumbing Code” or “Title 28,” the plumbing code of the city of Covina;

8. “Zoning Code” or “Title 22,” the zoning code of the city of Covina; and

9. “Building Code” or “Title 26,” the building code of the city of Covina. (Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.020 Deletions.

The sanitary sewer and industrial waste code adopted by this chapter is amended by deleting Los Angeles County Code Sections 20.32.200, 20.36.365, 20.40.045, 20.40.046, 20.40.047, 20.40.050, 20.40.060, 20.40.070, 20.40.080, 20.40.081 and Chapter 20.44 in their entirety. (Ord. 10-1982 § 1, 2010; Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.030 Amendments.

The sanitary sewer code adopted by this chapter is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 13.50.035 through 13.50.270. (Ord. 10-1982 § 2, 2010; Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.035 Chapter 20.20 amended – Definitions.

Chapter 20.20 of the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Code of the county of Los Angeles is hereby amended by adding the following sections to “Definitions”:

20.20.017 Best management practices (BMPs). ‘Best management practices (BMPs)’ means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants in discharges, to implement the prohibitions listed in National Pretreatment Standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b), and prevent the discharge of substance that may contribute to sanitary sewer overflows. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

20.20.025 Categorical industrial user (CIU). ‘Categorical industrial user (CIU)’ means an industrial user that is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

20.20.055 Code of federal regulations (CFR). ‘Code of federal regulations (CFR)’ means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government of the United States.

20.20.118 Fats, Oils and Greases (FOG).    ‘Fats, Oils, and Greases (FOG)’ means non-petroleum organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as ‘grease’ or ‘greases’.

20.20.119 FOG disposal system. ‘FOG disposal system’ means a grease interceptor that reduces fats, oils, and grease (FOG) in effluent by separation, and mass and volume reduction.

20.20.121 Food service establishment. ‘Food service establishment’ means a facility engaged in preparing food for consumption by the public such as a restaurant, bakery, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, religious institution, hospital, prison, correctional facility, or care institution.

20.20.122 Gravity grease interceptor. ‘Gravity grease interceptor’ means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG from a wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, 30-minute retention time, baffle(s), a minimum of two compartments, a minimum total volume of 750 gallons, and gravity separation.

20.20.123 Grease interceptor. ‘Grease interceptor’ means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG from a wastewater discharge.

20.20.124 Grease removal device (GRD). ‘Grease removal device (GRD)’ means any hydromechanical grease interceptor that automatically, mechanically removes FOG from the interceptor, the control of which are either automatic or manually initiated.

20.20.126 Grease trap. ‘Grease trap’ means a multi-baffle, single compartment, 10 to 50 gallon capacity device, serving one (1) to a maximum of four (4) fixtures designed for the removal of FOG from food service establishment discharges and installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

20.20.131 Hydromechanical grease interceptor. ‘Hydromechanical grease interceptor’ means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG from a wastewater discharge and is identified by flow rate, separation and retention efficiency. The design incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical separation, interior baffling, and/or barriers in combination or separately, and one of the following:

A. External flow control with air intake (vent); directly connected.

B. External flow control without air intake (vent); directly connected.

C. Without external flow control; directly connected.

D. Without external flow control; indirectly connected.

20.20.133 Illicit discharge. ‘Illicit discharge’ means any discharge to the sanitary sewer system that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. Illicit discharges include all non-domestic sewage discharges not permitted under the provisions of this division and discharges through connections to the sanitary sewer system, either directly or through satellite collection systems, not authorized pursuant to Chapter 20.32 of this division.

20.20.195 Interference. ‘Interference’ means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources:

A. Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and

B. Is therefore a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including the state regulations contained in any sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.

C. Inhibits operation, disrupts or causes a condition within the sanitary sewer system that may cause excessive maintenance or a sanitary sewer overflow.

20.20.221 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). ‘North American Industry Classification System’ means a classification of business establishments developed and updated periodically by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

20.20.305 Sanitary sewer overflows (SSO). ‘Sanitary sewer overflows (SSO)’ means any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system. SSO include:

A. Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that reach waters of the United States.

B. Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that do not reach waters of the United States.

C. Wastewater backups into buildings and onto private properties that are caused by blockages or flow conditions within the publicly owned portions of a sanitary sewer system.

20.20.362 Significant industrial user (SIU). ‘Significant industrial user (SIU)’ means that except where the control authority of a POTW has found an industrial user to be exempt pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) and (v)(3):

A. All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and

B. Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater to a POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the POTW control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

20.20.363 Slug discharge. ‘Slug discharge’ means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions. Discharge of any prohibited material in any concentration shall be considered a slug discharge.

20.20.367 State Board. ‘State Board’ means the State Water Resources Control Board.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 3, 2010).


13.50.040 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.080 amended – Maintenance of sewers and laterals.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.080 is amended as follows:

All house laterals, industrial connection sewers, septic tank outlet connections to STEP system, and appurtenances thereto shall be maintained by the owner of the property served in a safe and sanitary condition, and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof shall be maintained in good working order. For septic tanks connected to a STEP system, the limits of responsibility are: a) the septic tank and its outlet pipe up to the point of connection to the STEP pumping unit wet well shall be maintained by the owner of the property served; b) the STEP pumping unit, wet well, pumped discharge piping and mainlines shall be maintained by the public agency established for that purpose; and c) the costs of electrical power for the STEP pump shall be paid by the owner of the property served.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.044 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.165 added – Administrative fines.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.165 is hereby added to read as follows:

Violations of this division are subject to administrative fines pursuant to Chapter 1.25 of this code. The amount of an administrative fine shall not exceed $100.00 for the first violation, $200.00 for the second violation of the same provision of this division within one year after the first violation, and $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision of this division within one year after the first violation.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 4, 2010).


13.50.048 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.200 amended – Notification of uncontrolled or slug discharges required.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.24.200 is hereby amended to read as follows:

A. In the event of an uncontrolled or slug discharge, the discharger or permittee shall immediately notify the director by telephone. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of material, duration, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken.

B. Within 5 calendar days after the uncontrolled or slug discharge, the discharger or permittee shall submit to the director a detailed, written report describing the cause of the discharge, corrective action taken and measures to be taken to prevent further occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger or permittee of liability or fines incurred as a result of the uncontrolled or slug discharge.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 5, 2010).


13.50.050 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.080(F) amended – Excessive discharge of sewage – Conditional permit requirements.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.080(F) is amended as follows:

F. The provisions of this section do not apply to properties subject to an ordinance adopted by the city council which requires payment for such additional sewer capacity prior to the issuance of a building or sewer connection permit.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.060 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.120 amended – Sewer construction permit fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.120 is amended as follows:

Before granting any permit for the construction of main-line sewer, house lateral sewer, water pollution control plant, sewage pumping plant, and whenever a permit for any industrial waste treatment or disposal facility is required by the city engineer, the city engineer shall collect the fees established by resolution of the city council from the applicant to cover the cost of field inspection of the proposed construction, procuring or preparing record plans, automobile mileage, and all overhead and indirect costs.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.070 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.130(A) amended – Connection charges – Designated.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.130(A) is amended as follows:

A. No permit shall be issued for the direct connection of any lot to a public sewer which has been constructed at no cost to such lot, or to a trunk sewer in which capacity has been assigned by the owner thereof to the City of Covina until, in addition to any other fees required by this Division 2 and by the Plumbing Code set out at Title 28, there has been paid a connection charge in an amount as established by resolution of the city council.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.080 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.150(D) amended – Area and connection charges in reimbursement districts.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.150(D) is amended as follows:

D. The reimbursement district connection charge shall be computed per front foot of the lot sought to be connected at a per foot rate as established by resolution of the city council. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.090 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.210(C) amended – Manhole reconstruction inspection charges.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.210(C) is amended as follows:

C. The fee for the first and each subsequent manhole inspected shall be established by resolution of the city council. These fees shall cover the costs of field inspections, automobile mileage, and all overhead and indirect costs. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.100 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.230 amended – Plan checking fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.230 is amended as follows:

Any person required by Chapter 20.32 of this division to have plans checked and processed shall pay to the director of public works fees as established by resolution of the city council. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.110 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.240 amended – Sewer easement processing fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.240 is amended as follows:

For each private contract requiring the processing of sewer easements or the vacation of sewer easements, the city engineer shall collect from the applicant a fee as established by resolution of the city council.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.120 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.250 amended – Special studies – Preparation and checking fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.250 is amended as follows:

A. Before proceeding with the preparation of an area, reimbursement, or other special study, the city engineer shall collect from the person making the request for the work a fee as established by resolution of the city council.

B. If the cost of doing the work exceeds the fee originally collected a supplemental fee shall be collected to cover the additional cost as determined by the city engineer.

C. If the city engineer determines that a flow measurement of this existing system is required, there will be an additional minimum fee as established by resolution of the city council.

D. Studies prepared by others and submitted for checking by the city engineer shall be subject to fee requirements stated above.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.130 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.260 amended – Reimbursement processing fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.260 is amended as follows:

A. For each private contract requiring reimbursement under 20.28.050 the applicant shall pay, in addition to the plan checking fee, a fee as established by resolution of the city council for the preparation of reimbursement documents and maps. 

B. If the cost of doing the work exceeds the fee originally collected a supplemental fee shall be collected to cover the additional cost as determined by the city engineer. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.140 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.280(B) amended – Charges for sewer maintenance.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.280(B) is amended as follows:

B. Such charge shall be established by resolution of the city council. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.150 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.290 amended – Cesspool truck disposal fee.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.290 is amended as follows:

Operators of cesspool pump trucks desiring to discharge the contents of their tanks into facilities provided at the city public works yard, in conformance with Section 20.32.650, may do so upon payment of a disposal fee as established by resolution of the city council for each truck load.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.160 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.580 amended – Materials and construction – Conformity with standards.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.32.580 is amended as follows:

A. All material used in any work done under provisions of this Division 2 shall be new, first-class material and shall conform to, and the manner of construction shall meet all the requirements prescribed by this Division 2, by the most current edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, and by the most current edition of the Standard Plans for Public Works Construction.

B. If any conflict exists between these standards, the requirements contained within Division 2 shall have precedence for the design of the sewer system and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction shall have precedence for any appurtenant activities and street work. If neither standard specifically or adequately addresses any particular situation or occurrence, the City Engineer shall determine the appropriate design and construction methodology to be used.

C. All such work shall be approved by the City Engineer before a certificate of final inspection will be issued.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.165 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.135 amended – Monitoring and sampling – Pre-notification – Procedures – Reporting.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.135 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Any permittee or discharger required by the director, by permit or otherwise, to engage in periodic, stand-alone, backup, follow-up, compliance or confirmation monitoring or sampling of a discharge shall notify the director by telephone, or other authorized means, at least 48 hours in advance of any monitoring or sampling to be done. Prior to the commencement of any sampling or monitoring, the director may request that the permittee furnish the director a split sample and all supporting data. Notification is not required for internal monitoring and sampling by a discharger for the purpose of process and pretreatment controls unless so requested by the director. However, such procedures, results and records shall be made available to the director upon request. Sample acquisition and monitoring shall be performed at a location of sampling point as designated in any permit or as specified by the director. The director may require the installation of a secured sampling facility to be designated as the sampling point. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Dischargers to a public sewer system subject to an approved pretreatment program administered by the director shall submit to the director, at minimum, all parameters required by 40 CFR 403.12 as may be amended unless otherwise directed. Each permittee, regardless of industrial waste disposal method, shall submit to the director, certified under penalty of perjury by the permittee, all required monitoring and sampling reports or other requested data within the times specified in the permit.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 6, 2010).


13.50.170 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.230 amended – Industrial waste disposal permit – Application fee – Schedule.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.230 is amended as follows:

The director shall collect a permit application fee, as established by resolution of the city council, for each application received. Such fee shall be separate and apart from any fee or deposit collected for industrial waste plan review or imposed under provisions of the Plumbing Code or other city ordinance or regulation, or by reason of any license, agreement or contract between the applicant and other public agency. Such application fee shall not be refundable even though the application be denied except as provided in Section 20.28.070. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.180 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.245 amended – Industrial waste plan review – Fee schedule.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.245 is amended as follows:

A. The director shall collect a plan review fee, as established by resolution of the city council, for each set of plans received for any single site or location. Such fee shall be separate and apart from any fee or deposit collected for any permit or inspection or imposed by any other city ordinance or regulation. Such plan review fee shall not be refundable even though the submittal be rejected or the project terminated except as provided in Section 20.28.070.

B. The director may impose a reinstatement fee of one-half the plan review fee if the applicant fails to correct any plans or submittal upon written notice of correction or request for additional information by the director after three attempts have been made to gain such correction.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.190 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.250 amended – Annual fee – Purpose, schedule and billing.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.250 is amended to read as follows:

A. All permitted facilities shall pay an annual fee as established by resolution of the city council. The annual fees are a part of the city’s industrial waste control program revenue and pay for the basic level of services which include but are not limited to the following: permitting, inspections, sampling, laboratory analytical services, monitoring facilities and self-monitoring programs, record maintenance, systems development and data management.

B. For each industrial waste disposal permit issued by the director, an annual fee as established by resolution of the city council and determined by Section 20.36.260, Table 1, shall be due and payable to the director annually, in advance, on a billing date to be determined by the director.

C. Immediately upon issuance of a new permit, the permittee shall be billed the above fee for the first annual billing period.

D. The annual fee shall be increased by an additional amount as established by resolution of the city council for each approved rainwater diversion system.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 7, 2010; Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.200 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.265 amended – Wastewater sampling and analysis fee.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.265 is amended to read as follows:

The director may charge the discharger a fee as established by resolution of the city council for each analytical determination performed by or on behalf of the director on wastewater samples taken from the discharger’s effluent.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 8, 2010; Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.210 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.270 amended – Miscellaneous services – Fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.270 is amended as follows:

Fees as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid for any necessary miscellaneous services before a review is made, approval is granted, inspection is made, operation is allowed or remedial action is implemented. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.220 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.280 amended – Annual inspection fee, wastewater sampling and analysis fee and miscellaneous service fee – Payment time – Penalties for delinquency.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.280 is amended as follows:

All inspection fees, wastewater sampling and analysis fees and applicable miscellaneous fees required by this chapter shall be due and payable on the billing date as established by this chapter or by the due date indicated on any invoices issued. Fees not paid within 30 calendar days from the billing date shall be considered delinquent. Delinquent fees shall be subject to a 10-percent penalty fee for each 30-day period beyond the billing date that the fee is due. Permits for which the inspection fee is delinquent for 90 calendar days or more are subject to suspension as provided in Section 20.36.160. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.230 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.295 amended – Annual review of fees.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.295 is amended as follows:

Beginning on July 1, 2009, and thereafter on each succeeding July 1st, the amount of each fee in this chapter shall be adjusted as follows: calculate the percentage movement between April of the previous year and March of the current year in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers in the Los Angeles, Anaheim, Riverside areas, as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics, adjust each fee by said percentage amount and round off to the nearest $1.00. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such adjustment shall decrease any fee, and further, no fee shall exceed the actual cost of providing the services for which the fee is collected.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.240 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.310 amended – Permit – Required when.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.310 is amended as follows:

A. A person shall obtain a permit from the director prior to discharge of industrial waste to a public sewer.

B. The director shall not grant such a permit unless he or she finds that sufficient capacity exists in the public sewer to allow for such industrial waste, as determined by the requirements of Section 20.32.080.

C. A separate permit shall be required for each connection discharging industrial wastes to the public sewer.

D. For the purposes of this section, discharges resulting from garbage grinders powered by motors less than one and one-half horsepower installed in food establishments in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code and where such facilities are not required by other provisions of this division, are not considered to be industrial waste discharges.

E. A person shall obtain a permit from the director to maintain an existing but nonused industrial waste connection to the public sewer. The annual fee for such permit shall be the same as that for Inspection Class A. The connection shall be removed upon the expiration or revocation of such permit pursuant to the criteria established by Section 20.36.220.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 9, 2010; Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.243 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.320 amended – Permit – Application forms – Information required.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.320 is amended as follows:

A. The director shall provide printed application forms for the permit required by this Part 3, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. In conjunction therewith, the applicant may be required to furnish the following:

1. The name and address of the applicant;

2. The name and address of the discharger;

3. The address and location of the premises where the discharge will take place;

4. The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and/or North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) or the discharger for each operation generating wastewater;

5. Information with respect to constituents and characteristics of wastewater proposed to be discharged, including but not limited to those referred to in this Part 3. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended, and by laboratories certified by the state of California. In the absence of a state certification process, the director may certify a laboratory to perform necessary sampling and analysis; 

6. Time and duration of the proposed discharge or discharges; 

7. Average daily and five-minute peak wastewater flow rates; 

8. Each byproduct waste of the discharges by type, amount and rate of production; 

9. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, storm drains, connections and appurtenances by their size, location and elevation;

10. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the applicant’s premises, including all pollutants which could be discharged;

11. Detailed plans showing pretreatment facilities, sampling facilities, uncontrolled discharge containment facilities, and operating procedures; 

12. Identification of the nature and concentration of any pollutant located at the premises of the discharger (and/or applicant if different) if that pollutant is prohibited from discharge under this Part 3, or any proposed discharge which is regulated by an applicable local permit, plus a statement specifying whether the specific limitations set forth in said local limits are being met, and, if not, what operation and maintenance (O&M) or pretreatment is proposed by the discharger to cause compliance;

13. The shortest time scheduled by which the discharger shall provide the necessary additional pretreatment or O&M, if additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the regulations in this Division 2. Any completion date in such a proposed schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established by the applicable regulations. The schedule shall provide for reporting increments in progress in the form of dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment necessary for the discharger to meet the applicable regulation (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction); 

14. Each product of the discharger by type, amount, and rate of production; 

15. Type and amount of raw materials processed by the discharger (average and maximum per day);

16. Number of employees, hours of operation of plant, and hours of operation of the proposed pretreatment system;

17. Copies of any current NPDES permit, Air Quality Management District permit, Regional Water Quality Control Board permit, fire department business plan, public health department license and State Department of Public Health permit for subject premises; 

18. The name, business address and motor vehicle driver’s license number of the authorized representative;

19. Any other information deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the authorized representative of the discharger.

B. For the purpose of this section, the director may utilize joint permit application forms under agreements established with other public agencies as provided in Section 20.28.090.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 10, 2010.)


13.50.244 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.385 amended – FOG disposal systems – Installation required.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.385 is amended as follows:

Wastewater discharge originating at food service establishments from fixtures and equipment which may contain FOG, including but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, soup kettles, automatic vent cleaning devices, and floor drains located in the areas where FOG-containing materials may exist, shall be drained into the sanitary waste system through a FOG disposal system approved by the director. Multiple FOG disposal systems may be required to satisfy the requirements of this section. The director may waive this requirement to specific fixtures upon determination that compliance may create a health hazard and/or impeded by a physical constraint that is impractical to overcome when retrofitting an existing facility.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 11, 2010.)


13.50.245 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.400 amended – Deposit of certain substances prohibited.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.400 is amended as follows:

No person shall place, throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, thrown, discharged or deposited in any public sewer or main line sewer:

A. Any dead animal, offal or garbage, fish, fruit or vegetable waste, or other solid matters, or materials or obstructions of any kind whatever of such nature as shall clog, obstruct or fill such sewer, or which shall interfere with or prevent the effective use or operation thereof; 

B. Any water or sewage, or liquid waste of any kind containing chemicals, fats, greases, oils, tars or other matters in solution or suspension, which may clog, obstruct or fill the same, or which may in any way damage or interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, or which may necessitate or require frequent repair, cleaning out or flushing of such sewer to render the same operative;

C. Any discharge or effluent which may obstruct or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of treatment of the sewage, or which may introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which creates a fire or explosive hazard in the sewer or POTW, pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than specified in Section 20.36.420, pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW, or which may introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which may cause pass through or interference; 

D. Stormwater runoff, unless authorized pursuant to Section 20.36.390.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 12, 2010.)


13.50.246 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.406 amended – Slug discharge control plan – When required.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.406 is amended as follows:

A slug discharge control plan shall be prepared, implemented and maintained by SIUs discharging to the sanitary sewer system unless determined to be unnecessary by the director. Such plan shall be submitted in conjunction with an application to discharge industrial waste to a public sewer or within one year of being designated a SIU, which ever comes first. SIUs shall immediately notify the director of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge. At a minimum the plan shall contain the following elements:

A. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;

B. Description of stored chemicals; 

C. Procedures for immediately notifying the director of slug discharges, including any discharges that would violate a prohibition under Section 20.36.400 with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days;

D. When appropriate, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including maintenance and inspection of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 13, 2010.)


13.50.247 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.450 amended – Ground garbage – Condition.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.450 is amended as follows:

Garbage resulting from the preparation of food may be discharged into the public sewer (but not into a STEP sewer system unless as septic tank effluent) if ground to a fineness sufficient to pass through a three-eighths-inch screen. Ground garbage, dishwasher effluent or other ground food wastes shall not be discharged into any FOG disposal system. Excessive or unnecessarily large quantities of water shall not be used to flush ground garbage in the sewer.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 14, 2010.)


13.50.248 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.475 amended – Maintenance of existing, nonused facility for industrial waste deposit, discharge or storage.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.475 is amended as follows:

A person shall obtain a permit from the director to maintain an existing but nonused facility designed or formerly used for the deposit, discharge or storage of industrial waste. The annual fee for such permit shall be the same as that for Inspection Class A.

Exception: Such permit is not required when, to the satisfaction of the director, compliance with the permit cancellation criteria of Section 20.36.220 has been provided.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 15, 2010.)


13.50.249 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.595 amended – FOG disposal systems – Installation requirements.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.36.595 is amended as follows:

Each FOG disposal system shall be installed at a location shown on plans approved by the director and the health officer and in full compliance with the plumbing code. Such systems shall be located in an area that is at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, maintenance, and removal of the recovered FOG in a manner that does not require entry into a food or utensil handling area as follows:

A. Hydromechanical grease interceptors shall not be installed in a food or utensil handling area unless specifically approved by the health officer. Plumbing fixtures and equipment connected to such devices shall be provided with an approved type of flow control so that the total flow through the device or devices shall not be greater than the rated flow of the grease interceptor.

B. Grease removal devices (GRDs) shall be installed as provided for hydromechanical grease interceptors in subsection A with the additional provision that the storage of removed FOG also be outside food and utensil handling areas in a secure location that protects against the accidental spill of grease into floor drains, parking lots, catch basins, storm drains, sidewalks, streets, or gutters and is protected from inundation by stormwater flows.

C. Gravity grease interceptors shall be installed outside of the structure containing the kitchen, food or utensil handling area(s) in a location affording ease of inspection, maintenance and servicing without entry to the structure unless otherwise approved by the director and the health officer. Such devices shall be designed and sized to retain FOG until accumulations can be removed by pumping the interceptor. When so required by the director, gravity grease interceptors shall be equipped with an approved sample box.

(Ord. 10-1982 § 16, 2010.)


13.50.250 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.030 amended – Legislative intent – Basis for levy of charge.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.030 is amended as follows:

The sewers in the city must be properly maintained in order to protect the public health and safety of the residents therein and the general public. It is therefore necessary to impose a sewer maintenance service charge upon the properties within the city. As used herein, “maintenance” includes acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation, and sewer maintenance service charges collected under this chapter may be used for any purpose authorized by Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. In order to avoid the substantial costs of establishing a billing system for collection of the charges, the city council finds that the charges should be collected on the tax roll. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.260 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.040 amended – Levy of annual service charge – Amount.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.040 is amended as follows:

A. An annual sewer service charge is levied upon each parcel of real property in the city for the services and facilities furnished by the city. The amount of the charge for each parcel shall be computed by multiplying the sewage unit charges by the number of sewage units for current land use of the parcel, as shown in Table A, set out in Section 20.40.100. The sewage unit charge shall be established by resolution of the city council.

B. In addition to other remedies provided by law, an owner of a parcel of land may protest the imposition of charges imposed by this Section on any of the following grounds: (1) the parcel has not been included in the proper land use category; (2) the number of units of measure for the parcel has been incorrectly measured; or (3) a clerical error has been made. The protest must be submitted in writing to the city engineer within 30 calendar days of the date that the sewer charge is due.

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


13.50.270 Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.090 amended – Collection of charges.

Los Angeles County Code Section 20.40.090 is amended as follows:

The sewer service charge, additional sewer service charges and additional zone sewer service charges shall be collected for each fiscal year on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and separately from, the general taxes of the county of Los Angeles. 

(Ord. 08-1953 § 1, 2008.)


Chapter 13.54 OVERFLOW PREVENTION

Sections:

13.54.010    Purpose.

13.54.020    Duty of the discharger.

13.54.030    Duty of tributary jurisdictions.

13.54.040    House lateral maintenance.

13.54.050    Illicit discharge prohibited.

13.54.060    Limitations – Director may establish.

13.54.070    Existing FOG disposal system.

13.54.080    Investigation of SSO incidents.

13.54.090    Use of unauthorized substances prohibited.

13.54.100    FOG control programs.

13.54.110    Minimum standards – Director may develop.

13.54.120    Food service establishments – Operating permit required.

13.54.130    Food waste disposal units and dishwashers.


13.54.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement additional specific requirements for the use of the sanitary sewer system to ensure compliance with Statewide General Waste Discharge Requirements for Sanitary Sewer Systems, State Board Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ (state board order) and as may be hereinafter amended or superseded. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.020 Duty of the discharger.

All dischargers to the sanitary sewer system shall implement BMPs to ensure that their discharge, either singularly or in combination with other dischargers, does not create a condition in the system that might cause damage to the system or an SSO. Commercial and industrial discharges shall be made only in full compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.030 Duty of tributary jurisdictions.

Jurisdictions owning sanitary sewer systems greater than one mile in length that are tributary to or within the city’s sewer maintenance district shall enroll in the state board order and shall develop a sewer system management plan (SSMP) including adopting legal authority for the control of SSO equivalent to the provisions of this title. Jurisdictions that do not contract with the city for industrial waste control program services shall provide the director with evidence of FOG control program elements to effectively control FOG discharges from industrial and commercial sources. If a tributary enrollee determines that a FOG program is not needed, the enrollee shall provide justification to the director for why it is not needed.

Tributary jurisdictions shall furnish evidence to the director of compliance with the state board order within 60 calendar days from the effective date of this section, or any submittal date specified in the state board order, whichever occurs later. Failure to submit the required information may cause the director to initiate procedures to exclude the jurisdiction from a sewer maintenance district. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.040 House lateral maintenance.

Dischargers to the sanitary sewer system shall use house lateral maintenance procedures that maximize the recovery of deleterious materials and minimize the passage of FOG, debris, cut roots and similar materials to the main line sewers. No person shall interfere with the director’s access to house laterals extending from the main line sewer and the right-of-way boundary or property line. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.050 Illicit discharge prohibited.

No person shall cause any discharge to the sanitary sewer system unless such discharge:

A. Consists entirely of domestic sewage; or

B. Consists of industrial waste that is authorized pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.060 Limitations – Director may establish.

The director may establish numerical limitations on the amount of fats, oils, and grease, and other debris that may cause blockages or contribute to SSOs on discharges to all or portions of the sanitary sewer system where the director finds that such limitation is necessary to protect the system from damage or potential SSOs. Industrial waste disposal permits issued pursuant to this title shall include such limitations where imposed. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.070 Existing FOG disposal system.

Existing grease interceptors, grease traps or other FOG disposal systems, previously approved by the director, may remain in service, provided such systems are properly maintained to effectively reduce FOG discharges, are operating within original design parameters, have not been altered in a manner not approved by the director, and where required are operated under a valid industrial waste disposal permit pursuant to this title. Such authorization does not preclude the director from establishing discharge limitations which may require the modification, enlargement, addition, or replacement of FOG disposal systems to protect the sanitary sewer system from blockages or overflows. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.080 Investigation of SSO incidents.

The director shall investigate and determine the probable cause of an actual or potential SSO incident. In the course of any such investigation, the director may enter the premises of any discharger to the sanitary sewer system to determine the presence of potential sources of FOG, inspection of FOG disposal systems, review wastewater disposal procedures, ascertain if BMPs are in place and adequate, review records, photograph disposal systems, and take samples and other measurements in order to determine the cause or sources of an SSO. CMC 13.54.060 notwithstanding, where the director determines that additional, improved, upgraded, repaired or more frequently maintained FOG removal systems are required to prevent the contribution to actual or potential SSOs, the director may serve notice on the discharger to implement such improvements. Such notices may include prohibitions against unauthorized discharges, timetables and/or deadlines. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.090 Use of unauthorized substances prohibited.

No person shall introduce or use any chemical, biological, enzyme or bacterial agent or substance into a FOG disposal system with the intent to enhance performance and/or reduce maintenance of such system without the specific authorization of the director. Such prohibition is not intended to preclude the use of commercial drain-cleaning substances within plumbing fixtures not tributary to a FOG disposal system unless the director has found that such substances present a general hazard to the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.100 FOG control programs.

Where a discharger is required to install and maintain a FOG disposal system pursuant to the provisions of this title and/or is found to be a potential uncontrolled source of FOG, the director may require that the discharger develop and implement a FOG control program. Where required, such a program is subject to the approval of the director and may be included as a part of the conditions and limitations of any permit issued pursuant to this title. Such a program may be required to include but is not limited to the following provisions:

A. A plan and schedule for the education and training of personnel or employees that may dispose of FOG-containing effluent to the sanitary sewer system.

B. The development of source control measures to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sanitary sewer system and to maximize the efficiency of any required FOG disposal system and/or GRD.

C. A plan and schedule for the removal and legal disposal of FOG removed from effluent by a FOG disposal system and/or GRD. When so required by the director, such a plan and schedule may include the maintenance of a log record detailing cleaning, repair, inspection, accidental spill and disposal events in connection with the system or device. The director shall have access to any required log during all reasonable business hours and may specify a time period during which such a log is maintained.

D. A description of facilities used to store removed FOG prior to disposal and measures taken to prevent accidental and/or uncontrolled discharge of FOG to the sanitary sewer system, sidewalks, parking lots, streets, gutters, storm drains, or other private or public property.

E. A description of equipment and supplies, including the location of such materials, available for the cleanup of accidental and/or uncontrolled spills of FOG or similar materials.

F. The posting in a conspicuous place of notification requirements to the director or other specified entity in the event of any accidental and/or uncontrolled spill of FOG or similar materials that leave or may be carried off the discharger’s premises. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.110 Minimum standards – Director may develop.

The director may develop minimum standards for the performance, construction, installation and maintenance of FOG disposal systems, gravity grease interceptors, GRDs, hydromechanical grease interceptors, and/or components associated with such devices. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.120 Food service establishments – Operating permit required.

Where the director has determined that installation of a FOG disposal system at a food service establishment is necessary to protect the sanitary sewer system, such installation shall be subject to plan review and operating industrial waste disposal permit requirements pursuant to this title. Each separate system connected to the public sewer system shall require a separate permit. The director may authorize multiple food service establishments to discharge through a single FOG disposal system; provided, that each establishment enters into an agreement with a single entity that maintains the device including continuous maintenance of any permits required for operation of the facility. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


13.54.130 Food waste disposal units and dishwashers.

Unless specifically required or permitted by the director, no food waste disposal unit, garbage grinder or dishwasher shall be connected to or discharge into any FOG disposal system. Commercial food waste disposers shall discharge directly into the building’s sewage drainage system. (Ord. 10-1982 § 17, 2010.)


Title 14 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION1

Chapters:

14.02    Adoption of Codes by Reference

14.04    Building Code

14.05    Residential Code

14.06    Electrical Code

14.08    Mechanical Code

14.10    Plumbing Code

14.12    Fire Code

14.13    Fire Hazard Severity Zones

14.14    Uniform Housing Code

14.16    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

14.18    Building Safety Condition Placards

14.20    Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Unreinforced Masonry Buildings

14.44    Floodplain Management1

Code Reviser's Note: Pursuant to Building Standards Information Bulletin 13-07 dated December 18, 2103, the effective date of the 2013 California Energy Code, in Part 6, and the 2013 California Administrative Code, Chapter 10, in Part 1, Title 24, California Code of Regulations and 2013 California Energy Code, in Part 6, and the 2013 California Administrative Code, Chapter 10, in Part 1, Title 24, California Code of Regulations has changed from January 1, 2014, to July 1, 2014. You may read the bulletin here.

Prior history: 1964 Code §§ 6.2, 6.6, 6A.1, 6A.2, 6B.2, 11.1, 11.2, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 15A.1, 19.1, 23.50 – 23.62; Ords. 1175, 1186, 1288, 1289, 1290, 1291, 1292, 1293, 1294, 1328, 1336, 1338, 1394, 1402, 1459, 1461, 1462, 1463, 1464, 1465, 1524, 1542, 1582, 1584, 1587, 1595, 1608, 1616, 1628, 1629, 1630, 1650, 1670, 1679, 1702, 1705, 91-1719, 91-1720, 91-1729, 93-1753, 93-1756, 96-1803, 96-1804, 98-1824, 99-1848, 99-1849, 99-1857, 00-1861, 01-1882, 02-1889 and 06-1932. 


Chapter 14.02 ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE

Sections:

14.02.010    Adoption of codes by reference.


14.02.010 Adoption of codes by reference.

The city adopts by reference and makes part of this chapter by reference, subject to those certain amendments set forth in Chapters 14.04 through 14.18 CMC, the following California Building Standards Codes (California Code of Regulations, Title 24) and Uniform Codes (one copy of each is on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the clerk of the council of the city of Covina):

A. 2016 California Administrative Code;

B. 2016 California Building Code, including Volumes 1 and 2, and Chapters 1 through 35 and Appendices H, I, and J;

C. 2016 California Residential Code, Chapters 1 through 10 and 44, and Appendices A, B, C, G, H, I, J, K, and P;

D. 2016 California Electrical Code;

E. 2016 California Mechanical Code;

F. 2016 California Plumbing Code;

G. 2016 California Energy Code;

H. 2016 California Historical Building Code;

I. 2016 California Fire Code;

J. 2016 California Existing Building Code;

K. 2016 California Green Building Standards Code;

L. 2016 California Reference Standards Code;

M. Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition; and

N. Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition. (Ord. 16-2063 § 1, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 1, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 1, 2010; Ord. 09-1972 § 2, 2009; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


Chapter 14.04 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

14.04.010    2016 California Building Code adoption by reference.

14.04.020    Amendments to the 2016 California Building Code.

14.04.030    Section 101 of Division II, California Administration, amended – General.

14.04.040    Section 105 – Permits – Amended – Work exempt from permit.

14.04.050    Section 105 – Permits – Amended – Time limitation of application.

14.04.060    Section 105 – Permits – Amended – Expiration.

14.04.070    Section 107 – Submittal documents – Amended – General.

14.04.080    Section 107 – Submittal documents – Amended – Retention of construction documents.

14.04.090    Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Payment of fees.

14.04.100    Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Schedule of permit fees.

14.04.110    Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Work commencing before permit issuance.

14.04.120    Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Refunds.

14.04.130    Section 111 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Use and occupancy.

14.04.140    Section 111 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Temporary occupancy.

14.04.150    Section 112 – Service utilities – Amended – Temporary connection.

14.04.160    Section 113 – Appeals – Amended.

14.04.170    Section 114 – Violations – Amended – Unlawful acts.

14.04.180    Section 114 – Violations – Amended – Violation penalties.

14.04.190    Section 114 – Violations – Amended – Legalizing procedures.

14.04.200    Appendix J – Grading – Amended.

14.04.210    Expedited review of small residential rooftop solar energy system permits.

14.04.211    Expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations.

Prior legislation: Ord. 15-2041.


14.04.010 2016 California Building Code adoption by reference.

The city adopts the 2016 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, including Chapters 1 through 35 and Appendices H, I, and J, together with the amendments provided in this chapter, for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all nonresidential buildings and/or structures in the city. Said code shall be and become the building code of Covina.

One copy of said code is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010.)


14.04.020 Amendments to the 2016 California Building Code.

The 2016 California Building Code, including the appendices adopted pursuant to CMC 14.04.010, is amended as set forth in CMC 14.04.030 through 14.04.200. (Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010.)


14.04.030 Section 101 of Division II, California Administration, amended – General.

Subsection 101.4 of Section 101 is amended to read as follows:

101.4 Referenced codes. Whenever any of the names or terms defined in this Section is used, each such name or term shall be deemed or construed to have the following meaning within the Covina Municipal Code:

‘Building Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.04 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Residential Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.05 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Electrical Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.06 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Mechanical Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.08 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Plumbing Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.10 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Fire Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.12 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Uniform Housing Code’ shall mean Chapter 14.14 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings’ shall mean Chapter 14.16 of the Covina Municipal Code.

‘Technical Codes’ shall mean Chapters 14.04, 14.06, 14.08, 14.10, 14.12, 14.13, 14.14, 14.16, 14.18, 14.20, and 14.44 of the Covina Municipal Code.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.040.)


14.04.040 Section 105 – Permits – Amended – Work exempt from permit.

Subsection 105.2 is amended to read as follows:

105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Building:

1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11 m2).

2. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.

3. Oil derricks.

4. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, 

unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III A liquids.

5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter does not exceed 2:1.

6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and not part of an accessible route.

7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

9. Prefabricated swimming pool accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons ( 18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.

10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

11. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one-and two-family dwellings.

12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.

13. Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.

14. Walls constructed of masonry materials including but not limited to brick, stone, block and concrete that are six (6) feet or less in height measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall.

15. Window replacements which do not otherwise enlarge or reduce an existing opening or require the removal of an exterior or interior finish material.

Electrical:

Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.

Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.

Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.

Low Voltage Systems: Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

Gas:

1. Portable heating appliance.

2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

Mechanical:

1. Portable heating appliance.

2. Portable ventilating equipment.

3. Portable cooling unit.

4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.

5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6. Portable evaporative cooler.

7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 w) or less.

Plumbing:

1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.050.)


14.04.050 Section 105 – Permits – Amended – Time limitation of application.

Subsection 105.3.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation. Submittal documents and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official.

The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. An application shall not be extended more than once.

An application shall not be extended if this Code, or other pertinent laws or ordinances, have been amended after the date of application. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit submittal documents and pay a new plan review fee.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010.)


14.04.060 Section 105 – Permits – Amended – Expiration.

Subsection 105.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

105.5 Expiration. Except as set forth in subsection 105.5.1, every permit issued for property within the City of Covina shall expire by limitation and become null and void as follows:

(i) If work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of such permit.

(ii) If work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of such permit, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned. For purposes of this subsection, ‘suspended or abandoned’ shall mean that the permittee has, for a period of 180 days or longer after commencing the work authorized by such permit, failed to make substantial progress toward completion of the work, as determined by the Building Official after inspection. The Building Official may, in his or her discretion, grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

(iii) In the event of permit expiration, before work authorized by the expired permit can be commenced or recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained (hereafter, a ‘renewal permit’). To obtain a renewal permit, the applicant may be required to resubmit plans and specifications, if deemed necessary by the Building Official and/or Chief Planning Official. The applicant must pay all applicable fees, including but not limited to, a plan check fee and building permit fees, in the amount then established by resolution of the City Council. If renewal permits are applied for, a mandatory site inspection shall be performed by the Building Division to determine compliance of existing conditions and materials with this Code. All work to be performed under a renewal permit must be performed in accordance with all applicable technical codes, regulations, laws, and ordinances in effect on the date of issuance of the renewal permit. Renewal permits are subject to expiration as set forth in (ii), above.

(iv) In the event of permit expiration, any work performed under that permit is ‘unpermitted’ as defined in Section 114.1.1 of this chapter, and is subject to the legalization provisions of Section 114.5 of this chapter.

105.5.1 Unpermitted structures or grading. Notwithstanding any provision of Section 105.5, if a building permit was issued in order to bring an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading (as defined in Section 14.04.100 of this Code) or other unlawful, substandard, or hazardous condition into compliance with any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void sixty (60) days after the date on which the permit was issued. The Building Official may, in his or her sole discretion, extend the validity of the permit for a period not exceeding 180 days beyond the initial 60 day limit upon written request by the applicant filed with the Building Official prior to the expiration date of the original permit, if the Building Official determines that substantial progress has been made toward completing the work authorized by the permit.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010.)


14.04.070 Section 107 – Submittal documents – Amended – General.

Subsection 107.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. Further, except for plans of a common interest development as defined in section 1351 of the California Civil Code, plans need not to be prepared by registered licensed professionals for the following projects:

(a) One and two family dwellings of wood frame construction, not exceeding one story in height where design follows latest LARC Wood Frame Prescriptive Provision.

(b) Garages and other structures appurtenant to buildings where design follows latest LARC Wood Frame Prescriptive Provision.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010.)


14.04.080 Section 107 – Submittal documents – Amended – Retention of construction documents.

Subsection 107.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

107.5 Retention of construction documents. The Building Official shall maintain an official copy, which may be on microfilm, electronic media, or other type of photographic copy, of the plans of every building, during the life of the building, for which a permit was issued.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.070.)


14.04.090 Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Payment of fees.

Subsection 109.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.

When submittal documents are required by Section 107, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of the submittal of the documents for plan review. Said plan review fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. When plans are incomplete or structurally/architecturally changed after submittal, additional plan review fees shall be charged as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010.)


14.04.100 Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Schedule of permit fees.

Subsection 109.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fee for each permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. An additional permit application fee shall be charged for issued permit alterations.

109.2.1 – Fee waiver.

A. The City Manager may waive permit fees for projects that meet one or more of the following criteria:

(1) City projects when the contractor is expressly exempt, under the terms of the contract, from payment of such fees.

(2) City projects that do not incur external consultant costs when the permit applicant is an employee, official, or representative of the City acting in his/her official capacity.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.080.)


14.04.110 Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Work commencing before permit issuance.

Subsection 109.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council in addition to the required permit fees. Any person who wishes to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading, as defined in Section 114.1 and 114.2, shall submit construction documents as set forth in Section 107 of this chapter.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010.)


14.04.120 Section 109 – Fees – Amended – Refunds.

Subsection 109.6 is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.6 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize the refund of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit, plan review, and energy fee paid when no work has been commenced under a permit, or when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn.

The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.080.)


14.04.130 Section 111 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Use and occupancy.

Subsection 111.1 is amended to read as follows:

111.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, nor shall any person, firm, company, corporation or officer, agent or employee thereof, permit or allow a building or structure to be used or occupied or a change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof to be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.090.)


14.04.140 Section 111 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Temporary occupancy.

Subsection 111.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

111.3. Temporary occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The Building Official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. The fee for issuance of each temporary certificate of occupancy shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.090.)


14.04.150 Section 112 – Service utilities – Amended – Temporary connection.

Subsection 112.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

112.2 Temporary connection. The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. Each such method of temporary connection shall be submitted to the Building Official for review. The fee for review of each temporary connection of utilities application shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.100.)


14.04.160 Section 113 – Appeals – Amended.

Section 113 is hereby amended to read as follows:

SECTION 113

APPEALS

113.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.160 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

113.1 Scope. A. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Technical Codes, an appeal is limited to the following orders, decisions, or determinations of the Building Official:

(1) Denials of the proposed use of alternative materials, design or method of construction, installation, and/or equipment;

(2) Orders to Vacate and/or Not Enter a building, structure or premises; however, such order shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal;

(3) Orders to Demolish a building or structure; however, an order to vacate that may be issued in conjunction with the Order to Demolish shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal.

B. The right of appeal shall not exist for determinations of the Building Official, or a designee thereof, that a violation of any provision of the Technical Codes exists in a building or structure, or portion thereof, or on any premises.

113.2 Appeal Procedure. A. Any person who is aggrieved by an order, decision or determination of the Building Official as provided in Section 113.1 may appeal said order, decision or determination. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) business days from the date of service of the order, decision or determination being appealed. The appeal must specify the basis for the appeal in detail, provide a mailing address and telephone number for the appellant, and include the applicable appeal fee. Appeals shall be scheduled in the manner set forth in Section 1.26.090 of the Covina Municipal Code. If a timely appeal is not received by the City Clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the order, decision or determination of the Building Official is deemed final and binding.

B. Appeals shall be heard before an impartial hearing officer, designated by the public works director or his/her designee. Only those matters or issues specifically raised in the written appeal shall be considered in the hearing. The order, decision or determination of the Building Official shall be prima facie evidence of the violation. The hearing officer may affirm, modify or rescind the order, decision or determination of the Building Official. Appeals before a hearing officer shall be conducted, and decisions shall be issued, in the manner set forth in Section 1.26.100 of the Covina Municipal Code. The decision of the impartial hearing officer shall be final.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 16-2059 § 1(A), 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.110.)


14.04.170 Section 114 – Violations – Amended – Unlawful acts.

Subsection 114.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

114.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, occupy or maintain any building, structure, equipment, installation or land regulated by the Technical Codes, or cause or permit the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the Technical Codes.

114.1.1 Unpermitted Structures. No person shall own, use, occupy, or maintain an unpermitted structure. For purposes of this section, ‘unpermitted structure’ shall be defined as any building or structure, or portion thereof, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, converted, demolished, or equipped, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the Building Official which subsequently expired and became null and void.

114.1.2 Unpermitted Grading. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain unpermitted grading. For purposes of this section, ‘unpermitted grading’ shall be defined as any land which has been excavated, cut, filled, graded, compacted or terraced, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the Building Official which subsequently expired and became null and void.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.120.)


14.04.180 Section 114 – Violations – Amended – Violation penalties.

Subsection 114.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

114.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of the Technical Codes, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or maintains a building, structure, installation or equipment, or excavates, cuts, fills, grades, compacts or maintains land in violation of approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Technical Codes, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the punishments set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Covina Municipal Code.

Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of the Technical Codes occurs or continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.130.)


14.04.190 Section 114 – Violations – Amended – Legalizing procedures.

Section 114 is hereby amended by adding thereto Subsection 114.5, Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading, to read as follows:

114.5 Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading. The procedures specified within subsections 114.5.1 through 114.5.6 shall be followed whenever an attempt is made to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading.

114.5.1 Permits. Any person who wishes to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading, as defined in Section 114.1.1 and 114.1.2, shall obtain all applicable permits. Unpermitted structures and grading shall comply with all current Technical Code requirements and other required approvals pursuant to the Covina Municipal Code in order to be legalized.

Permits obtained to legalize unpermitted structures or grading shall expire as set forth in Section 105.5.1 of this code.

114.5.2 Plans. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize an unpermitted structure, plans showing the plot plan, exterior elevations, existing structures proposed structures, and proposed finish materials shall be submitted to the Chief Planning Official and Building Official for review and approval.

114.5.3 Grading. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize unpermitted grading, a grading and drainage plan showing the original grade and existing unpermitted grade on the premises and the existing grade on adjoining properties, and a soils report shall be submitted to the Chief Planning Official, Building Official, and City Engineer for review and approval.

114.5.4 Inspections. Unpermitted structures or unpermitted grading for which a permit has subsequently been obtained shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official in accordance with, and in the manner prescribed in, the Technical Codes. The Building Official may require the removal of finish materials in order to expose framing elements, electrical components, plumbing fixtures, or mechanical systems, or may require the removal of fill, to verify that installation, construction, or grading was performed in conformance with the Technical Codes.

114.5.5 Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced on land or in connection with any type of structure without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. For purposes of this section, “special investigation” shall include, but is not limited to, inspecting premises and structures, reviewing permit, license and other records of the City or other agencies, reviewing plans, taking photographs, engaging in conferences and communications with other officials of the City or other agencies, and engaging in conferences and communications with owners or other responsible persons concerning the unpermitted structure or grading.

14.5.5.1 Fee. A special investigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit for an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading. The fee shall be equal to the amount of time expended by city officials in undertaking the special investigation, as defined in Section 114.5.5, charged at the hourly rate that has been established by resolution of the City Council for recovery of code enforcement fees pursuant to Section 1.28.020.

The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provision of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

114.5.6 Unpermitted structures or grading which cannot be legalized.

If the Chief Planning Official determines that the City’s zoning regulations prohibit legalization of any unpermitted structure, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals.

If the Building Official determines that an unpermitted structure cannot be made to conform to the current applicable Technical Code requirements, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals.

If the Building Official and/or City Engineer determines that unpermitted grading and/or lot drainage cannot be made to conform with current applicable Technical Code requirements, the land shall be fully restored to the condition that preceded the unpermitted grading, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.140.)


14.04.200 Appendix J – Grading – Amended.

Where the term “Building Official” appears in Appendix J, it shall mean “Building Official or City Engineer.” (Ord. 16-2063 § 2, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 2, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 2, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 1, 2010. Formerly 14.04.150.)


14.04.210 Expedited review of small residential rooftop solar energy system permits.

A. Definitions.

1. “Electronic submittal” shall have the same meaning as provided in the Solar Rights Act, Government Code Section 65850.50(2), as the same may be amended from time to time.

2. “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” shall have the same meaning as provided in the Solar Rights Act, Government Code Section 65850.50(3), as the same may be amended from time to time.

B. Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Standard Plan and Permit Application Checklist.

1. The city shall adopt standard plan(s) and checklist(s) of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The small residential rooftop solar system standard plan(s) and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklists and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

2. All documents required for the submission of a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit application, the standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

3. Electronic permit applications shall be submitted through the method of electronic submittal specified by the building official and shall be available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

C. Permit Application Review.

1. An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist(s) and standard plan(s) shall be deemed complete.

2. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

3. The building official shall issue a building permit for any complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist(s) and standard plan(s) as follows: within three business days for any application, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

4. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

D. Inspection Requirements.

1. Inspection requests may be submitted by electronic submittal, as required by the building official.

2. Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building official for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

3. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner. The building official shall use its best efforts to schedule an inspection within two business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window.

4. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this section.

E. Fees. Fees for permits and inspections associated with this chapter may be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 17-01 § 3, 2017.)


14.04.211 Expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations.

A. Applicability. This section applies to applications for expedited building permits for electric vehicle charging stations consistent with California Government Code Section 65850.7.

B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this section:

1. “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electric Code, as it read on January 1, 2016, and delivers electricity from a source outside of an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

2. “Electronic submission” means a submission of an application utilizing email, the internet, and/or facsimile transmission.

3. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date an application was deemed complete.

C. Process.

1. The building official shall adopt a checklist of all application requirements for expedited building permits for electric vehicle charging stations. The checklist shall substantially conform to the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” found in the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The checklist, application form, and any other documents required by the building official shall be published on the city’s website.

2. Anyone seeking to install an electric vehicle charging station at any site within the city shall apply to the building official for an expedited nondiscretionary building permit.

3. An application for an expedited building permit for an electric vehicle charging station, and all associated documentation, may be submitted to the building official in person, by mail, or by electronic submission. Electronic signatures may be used in lieu of wet signatures.

4. An application that, in the opinion of the building official, satisfies the information requirements of the checklist adopted by the city shall be deemed complete.

5. If an application for an expedited building permit is deemed incomplete, the building official shall provide a written correction notice of the deficiencies and the additional information required to complete the application.

6. If the building official determines that an application for an expedited building permit is complete, the building official shall review the application. If the building official determines that the proposed charging station meets all health and safety requirements of state and federal law, and would not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the application shall be approved and a building permit shall be issued.

7. If the building official finds, based on substantial evidence, that a proposed charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the city may require the applicant to apply for an electric vehicle charging station use permit in order to install the proposed charging station.

8. An application for an electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be reviewed by the building official. The building official shall not deny such an application without making written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed charging station would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety which could not feasibly be satisfactorily mitigated or avoided. The written findings required for rejection of an electric vehicle charging station use permit application shall include the building official’s basis for rejecting any potentially feasible alternatives that could mitigate or prevent the alleged adverse impact. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official’s review shall be limited to health and safety issues. Aesthetic concerns or other items not related to public health or safety may not be considered.

9. A decision of the building official made pursuant to subsections (C)(6) through (8) of this section may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission’s review shall also be limited to health and safety issues.

10. Any condition imposed on an application for an expedited building permit or electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

D. Fees. The city council may establish by resolution fees that shall be charged for permits issued under this section. (Ord. 18-06 § 3, 2018; Ord. 17-11 § 3, 2017.)


Chapter 14.05 RESIDENTIAL CODE

Sections:

14.05.010    2016 California Residential Code adoption by reference.

14.05.020    Amendments to the 2016 California Residential Code.

14.05.030    Section R105 – Permits – Amended – Work exempt from permit.

14.05.040    Section R105 – Permits – Amended – Time limitation of application.

14.05.050    Section R105 – Permits – Amended – Expiration.

14.05.060    Section R106 – Construction documents – Amended – Submittal documents.

14.05.070    Section R106 – Construction documents – Amended – Retention of construction documents.

14.05.080    Section R108 – Fees – Amended in its entirety.

14.05.090    Section R110 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Use and occupancy.

14.05.100    Section R110 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Temporary occupancy.

14.05.110    Section R111 – Service utilities – Amended – Temporary connection.

14.05.120    Section R112 – Appeals – Amended.

14.05.130    Section R113 – Violations – Amended – Unlawful acts.

14.05.140    Section R113 – Violations – Amended – Violation penalties.

14.05.150    Section R113 – Violations – Amended – Legalizing procedure.


14.05.010 2016 California Residential Code adoption by reference.

The city adopts the 2016 California Residential Code, together with the amendments provided in this chapter, for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of residential buildings and their accessory structures within the city. Said code shall be and become the residential code of Covina. (Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.020 Amendments to the 2016 California Residential Code.

The 2016 California Residential Code is amended as set forth in CMC 14.05.030 through 14.05.150. (Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.030 Section R105 – Permits – Amended – Work exempt from permit.

Subsection R105.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

Building:

1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2).

2. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.

3. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge.

4. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

5. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and not part of an accessible route.

6. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.

8. Swings and other playground equipment.

9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

10. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.

11. Walls constructed of masonry materials including but not limited to brick, stone, block and concrete that are six (6) feet or less in height measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall.

12. Window replacements which do not otherwise enlarge or reduce an existing opening or require the removal of an exterior or interior finish material.

Electrical:

1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.

2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor.

3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location.

4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

5. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.

Gas:

1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.

2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.

Mechanical:

1. Portable heating appliances.

2. Portable ventilation appliances.

3. Portable cooling units.

4. Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.

5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

6. Portable evaporative coolers.

7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.

8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.

Plumbing:

1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.040 Section R105 – Permits – Amended – Time limitation of application.

Subsection R105.3.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation. Submittal documents and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official.

The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. An application shall not be extended more than once.

An application shall not be extended if this Code, or other pertinent laws or ordinances, have been amended after the date of application. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit submittal documents and pay a new plan review fee.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.050 Section R105 – Permits – Amended – Expiration.

Subsection R105.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R105.5 Expiration. Except as set forth in Section R105.5.1, every permit issued for property within the City of Covina shall expire by limitation and become null and void as follows:

(1) If work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of such permit.

(2) If work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of such permit, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned. For purposes of this subsection, ‘suspended or abandoned’ shall mean that the permittee has, for a period of 180 days or longer after commencing the work authorized by such permit, failed to make substantial progress toward completion of the work, as determined by the Building Official after inspection. The Building Official may, in his or her discretion, grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

(3) In the event of permit expiration, before work authorized pursuant by the expired permit can be commenced or recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained (hereafter, a ‘renewal permit’). To obtain a renewal permit, the applicant may be required to resubmit plans and specifications, if deemed necessary by the Building Official and/or Chief Planning Official. The applicant must pay all applicable fees, including but not limited to, a plan check fee and building permit fees, in the amount then established by resolution of the City Council. If renewal permits are applied for, a mandatory site inspection shall be performed by the Building Division to determine compliance of existing conditions and materials with this Code. All work to be performed under a renewal permit must be performed in accordance with all applicable technical codes, regulations, laws, and ordinances in effect on the date of issuance of the renewal permit. Renewal permits are subject to expiration as set forth in (ii), above.

(4) In the event of permit expiration, any work performed under that permit is ‘unpermitted’ as defined in Section R113.1.1 of this chapter, and is subject to the legalization provisions of Section R116 of this chapter.

R105.5.1 Unpermitted structures or grading. Notwithstanding any provision of Section R105.5, if a building permit was issued in order to bring an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading (as defined in Section 14.05.090 of this Code) or other unlawful, substandard, or hazardous condition into compliance with any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void sixty (60) days after the date on which the permit was issued. The Building Official may, in his or her sole discretion, extend the validity of the permit for a period not exceeding 180 days beyond the initial 60 day limit upon written request by the applicant filed with the Building Official prior to the expiration date of the original permit, if the Building Official determines that substantial progress has been made toward completing the work authorized by the permit.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.060 Section R106 – Construction documents – Amended – Submittal documents.

Subsection R106.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R106.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Code. Further, except for plans of a common interest development as defined in section 1351 of the California Civil Code, plans need not to be prepared by a registered licensed professional for the following projects:

(a) One and two family dwellings of wood frame construction, not exceeding one story in height where design follows latest LARC Wood Frame Prescriptive Provision.

(b) Garages and other structures appurtenant to buildings where design follows latest LARC Wood Frame Prescriptive Provision.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.070 Section R106 – Construction documents – Amended – Retention of construction documents.

Subsection R106.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R106.5 Retention of construction documents. The Building Official shall maintain an official copy, which may be on microfilm, electronic media, or other type of photographic copy, of the plans of every building, during the life of the building, for which a permit was issued.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.080 Section R108 – Fees – Amended in its entirety.

Section R108 is hereby amended to read as follows:

SECTION R108

FEES

R108.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall any amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. When submittal documents are required by Section R106, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of the submittal of the documents for plan review. Said permit and plan review fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time. When plans are incomplete or structurally/architecturally changed after submittal, additional plan review fees shall be charged as established by resolution of the city council.

R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fee for each permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. An additional permit application fee shall be charged for issued permit alterations.

R108.2.1 Fee waiver. A. City Manager may waive permit fees for projects that meet one or more of the following criteria:

(1) City projects when the contractor is expressly exempt, under the terms of the contract, from payment of such fees.

(2) City projects that do not incur external consultant costs when the permit applicant is an employee, official, or representative of the City acting in his/her official capacity.

R108.3 Building permit valuations. Building permit valuations shall include total value of the work for which a permit is being issued, such electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other permanent systems, including materials and labor.

R108.4 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.

R108.5 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit, plan review, and energy fee paid when no work has been commenced under a permit, or when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn.

The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.

R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences work requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. Any person who wishes to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading, as defined in Section R113.1.1 and R113.1.2, shall submit construction documents as set forth in Section R106 of this chapter.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.090 Section R110 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Use and occupancy.

Subsection R110.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R110.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, nor shall any person, firm, company, corporation or officer, agent or employee thereof, permit or allow a building or structure to be used or occupied or a change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof to be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the city. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city shall not be valid.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.100 Section R110 – Certificate of occupancy – Amended – Temporary occupancy.

Subsection R110.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R110.4 Temporary occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The Building Official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. The fee for issuance of each temporary certificate of occupancy shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.110 Section R111 – Service utilities – Amended – Temporary connection.

Subsection R111.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R111.2 Temporary connection. The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. Each such method of temporary connection shall be submitted to the Building Official for review. The fee for review of each temporary connection of utilities application shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.120 Section R112 – Appeals – Amended.

Section R112 is hereby amended to read as follows:

SECTION R112

APPEALS

R112.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.05.120 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

R112.2 Scope of appeal. A. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Technical Codes, an appeal is limited to the following orders, decisions, or determinations of the Building Official:

(1) Denials of the proposed use of alternative materials, design or method of construction, installation, and/or equipment;

(2) Orders to Vacate and/or Not Enter a building, structure or premises; however, such order shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal;

(3) Orders to Demolish a building or structure; however, an order to vacate that may be issued in conjunction with the Order to Demolish shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal.

B. The right of appeal shall not exist for determinations of the Building Official, or a designee thereof, that a violation of any provision of the Technical Codes exists in a building or structure, or portion thereof, or on any premises.

R112.3 Appeal procedure. A. Any person who is aggrieved by an order, decision or determination of the Building Official as provided in Section 112.1 may appeal said order, decision or determination. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be filed with the Director of Public Works within ten (10) business days from the date of service of the order, decision or determination being appealed. The appeal must specify the basis for the appeal in detail, provide a mailing address and telephone number for the appellant, and include the applicable appeal fee. Appeals shall be scheduled in the manner set forth in Section 1.26.090 of the Covina Municipal Code. If a timely appeal is not received by the Director of Public Works, the right to appeal is waived and the order, decision or determination of the Building Official is deemed final and binding.

B. Appeals shall be heard before an impartial hearing officer, designated by the public works director or his/her designee. Only those matters or issues specifically raised in the written appeal shall be considered in the hearing. The order, decision or determination of the Building Official shall be prima facie evidence of the violation. The hearing officer may affirm, modify or rescind the order, decision or determination of the Building Official. Appeals before a hearing officer shall be conducted, and decisions shall be issued, in the manner set forth in Section 1.26.100 of the Covina Municipal Code.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 16-2059 § 1(B), 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.130 Section R113 – Violations – Amended – Unlawful acts.

Subsection R113.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, occupy or maintain any building, structure, equipment, installation or land regulated by this code, or cause or permit the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.

R113.1.1 Unpermitted structures. No person shall own, use, occupy, or maintain an unpermitted structure. For purposes of this section, ‘unpermitted structure’ shall be defined as any building or structure, or portion thereof, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, converted, demolished, or equipped, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the Building Official which subsequently expired and became null and void.

R113.1.2 Unpermitted grading. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain unpermitted grading. For purposes of this section, ‘unpermitted grading’ shall be defined as any land which has been excavated, cut, filled, graded, compacted or terraced, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the Building Official which subsequently expired and became null and void.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.140 Section R113 – Violations – Amended – Violation penalties.

Subsection R113.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of the Technical Codes, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or maintains a building, structure, installation or equipment, or excavates, cuts, fills, grades, compacts or maintains land in violation of approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Technical Codes, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the punishments set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Covina Municipal Code.

Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of the Technical Codes occurs or continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


14.05.150 Section R113 – Violations – Amended – Legalizing procedure.

Subsection R113.5, Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading, is hereby added to read as follows:

R113.5 Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading. The procedures specified within subsections R113.5.1 through R113.5.6 shall be followed whenever an attempt is made to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading.

R113.5.1 Permits. Any person who wishes to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading, as defined in Section R113.1.1 and R113.1.2, shall obtain all applicable permits. Unpermitted structures and grading shall comply with all current Technical Code requirements and other required approvals pursuant to the Covina Municipal Code in order to be legalized.

Permits obtained to legalize unpermitted structures or grading shall expire as set forth in Section R105.5.1 of this code.

R113.5.2 Plans. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize an unpermitted structure, plans showing the plot plan, exterior elevations, existing structures proposed structures, and proposed finish materials shall be submitted to the Chief Planning Official and Building Official for review and approval.

R113.5.3 Grading. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize unpermitted grading, a grading and drainage plan showing the original grade and existing unpermitted grade on the premises and the existing grade on adjoining properties, and a soils report shall be submitted to the Chief Planning Official, Building Official, and City Engineer for review and approval.

R113.5.4 Inspections. Unpermitted structures or unpermitted grading for which a permit has subsequently been obtained shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official in accordance with, and in the manner prescribed in, the Technical Codes. The Building Official may require the removal of finish materials in order to expose framing elements, electrical components, plumbing fixtures, or mechanical systems, or may require the removal of fill, to verify that installation, construction, or grading was performed in conformance with the Technical Codes.

R113.5.5 Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced on land or in connection with any type of structure without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. For purposes of this section, “special investigation” shall include, but is not limited to, inspecting premises and structures, reviewing permit, license and other records of the City or other agencies, reviewing plans, taking photographs, engaging in conferences and communications with other officials of the City or other agencies, and engaging in conferences and communications with owners or other responsible persons concerning the unpermitted structure or grading.

R113.5.5.1 Fee. A special investigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit for an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading. The fee shall be equal to the amount of time expended by city officials in undertaking the special investigation, as defined in Section R113.5.5, charged at the hourly rate that has been established by resolution of the City Council for recovery of code enforcement fees pursuant to Section 1.28.020.

The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provision of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

R113.5.6 Unpermitted structures or grading which cannot be legalized. If the Chief Planning Official determines that the City’s zoning regulations prohibit legalization of any unpermitted structure, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals.

If the Building Official determines that an unpermitted structure cannot be made to conform to the current applicable Technical Code requirements, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals.

If the Building Official and/or City Engineer determine that unpermitted grading and/or lot drainage cannot be made to conform with current applicable Technical Code requirements, the land shall be fully restored to the condition that preceded the unpermitted grading, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 3, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 3, 2010.)


Chapter 14.06 ELECTRICAL CODE

Sections:

14.06.010    2016 California Electrical Code adoption by reference.

14.06.020    Amendments to the 2016 California Electrical Code.

14.06.030    Subsection 89.108.4.2 – Fees – Amended.

14.06.040    Subsection 89.108.8 – Appeals – Amended.

14.06.050    Subsection 89.108.9.2 – Actions and proceedings – Amended.


14.06.010 2016 California Electrical Code adoption by reference.

The city adopts the 2016 California Electrical Code, together with the amendments provided in this chapter, for the purpose of regulating all installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and other operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures and other electrical appliances on premises within the city.

One copy of said code is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. Said code shall be and become the electrical code of Covina. (Ord. 16-2063 § 4, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 4, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 4, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.06.020 Amendments to the 2016 California Electrical Code.

The 2016 California Electrical Code adopted by this chapter is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 14.06.030 through 14.06.050. (Ord. 16-2063 § 4, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 4, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 4, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.06.030 Subsection 89.108.4.2 – Fees – Amended.

Subsection 89.108.4.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

89.108.4.2 Permit fees. A fee for each electrical permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. An additional permit application fee shall be charged for issued permit alterations.

89.108.4.2.1 Plan review fees. A fee for each plan review shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. When plans are incomplete or the design is changed after submittal, additional plan review fees shall be charged as established by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 4, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 4, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 4, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007. Formerly 14.06.050.)


14.06.040 Subsection 89.108.8 – Appeals – Amended.

Subsection 89.108.8 is hereby amended to read as follows:

89.108.8 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.160 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 4, 2016; Ord. 16-2059 § 1(C), 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 4, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 4, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 2, 2010. Formerly 14.06.030.)


14.06.050 Subsection 89.108.9.2 – Actions and proceedings – Amended.

Subsection 89.108.9.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

89.108.9.2 Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 4, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 4, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 4, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007. Formerly 14.06.060.)


Chapter 14.08 MECHANICAL CODE

Sections:

14.08.010    2016 California Mechanical Code adoption by reference.

14.08.020    Amendments to the 2016 California Mechanical Code.

14.08.030    Section 107 – Appeals – Amended.

14.08.040    Section 106.3 – Penalties – Amended.

14.08.050    Section 104.5 – Fees – Amended.


14.08.010 2016 California Mechanical Code adoption by reference.

The city adopts the 2016 California Mechanical Code, together with the amendments provided in this chapter, for the purpose of regulating all related installations, arrangements, alterations, repairs, uses and other operations of mechanical systems, appliances, and apparatus on premises within the city.

One copy of said code is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. Said code shall be and become the mechanical code of Covina. (Ord. 16-2063 § 5, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 5, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 5, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.08.020 Amendments to the 2016 California Mechanical Code.

The 2016 California Mechanical Code adopted by this chapter is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 14.08.030 through 14.08.050. (Ord. 16-2063 § 5, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 5, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 5, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.08.030 Section 107 – Appeals – Amended.

Section 107 of the mechanical code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 107 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.160 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 5, 2016; Ord. 16-2059 § 1(D), 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 5, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 5, 2010; Ord. 10-1978 § 5, 2010. Formerly 14.08.040.)


14.08.040 Section 106.3 – Penalties – Amended.

Section 106.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 106.3 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the Covina Municipal Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 5, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 5, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 5, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007. Formerly 14.08.050.)


14.08.050 Section 104.5 – Fees – Amended.

Section 104.5 of the mechanical code is hereby amended to read as follows:

104.5 Permit fees. A fee for each mechanical permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. An additional permit application fee shall be charged for issued permit alterations.

104.5.1. Plan review fees. A fee for each mechanical plan review shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. When plans are incomplete or the design changed after submittal, additional plan review fees shall be charged as established by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 5, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 5, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 5, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007. Formerly 14.08.060.)


Chapter 14.10 PLUMBING CODE

Sections:

14.10.010    2016 California Plumbing Code adoption by reference.

14.10.020    Amendments to 2016 California Plumbing Code.

14.10.030    Section 107 – Appeals – Amended.

14.10.040    Section 106.3 – Penalties – Amended.

14.10.050    Section 104.5 – Plan review and permit fees – Amended.


14.10.010 2016 California Plumbing Code adoption by reference.

The city adopts the 2016 California Plumbing Code, together with the amendments provided in this chapter, for the purpose of regulating the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of plumbing systems within the city.

One copy of said code is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. Said code shall be and become the plumbing code of Covina. (Ord. 16-2063 § 6, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 6, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 6, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.10.020 Amendments to 2016 California Plumbing Code.

The 2016 California Plumbing Code adopted by this chapter is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 14.10.030 through 14.10.050. (Ord. 16-2063 § 6, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 6, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 6, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.10.030 Section 107 – Appeals – Amended.

Section 107 of the plumbing code is hereby amended to read as follows:

107.0 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.160 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.


14.10.040 Section 106.3 – Penalties – Amended.

Section 106.3 of the plumbing code is hereby amended to read as follows:

106.3 Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with chapter 1.16 of this Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 6, 2016.)


14.10.050 Section 104.5 – Plan review and permit fees – Amended.

Section 104.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

104.5 Permit Fees. A fee for each Plumbing permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. An additional permit application fee shall be charged for issued permit alterations.

104.5.1 Plan Review Fees. A fee for each plan review shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. When plans are incomplete or the design changed after submittal, additional plan review fees shall be charged as established by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 16-2063 § 6, 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 6, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 6, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007. Formerly 14.10.040.)


Chapter 14.12 FIRE CODE

Sections:

14.12.010    Adoption of codes by reference.

14.12.020    Amendments to the 2017 Los Angeles County Fire Code.

14.12.030    Section 108 – Appeals – Amended.

14.12.040    Subsection 109.4 – Violation penalties – Amended.

14.12.050    Subsection 113.2 – Schedule of permit fees – Amended.


14.12.010 Adoption of codes by reference.

The city adopts by reference and makes part of this chapter by reference, subject to those certain amendments set forth in CMC 14.12.020 through 14.12.050, the following Los Angeles County Fire Code (Title 32, Los Angeles County Code) (one copy of which is on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the clerk of the council of the city of Covina) which is referred to and by this reference expressly incorporated in this chapter, is adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as fully and for all intents and purposes as though set forth in this chapter at length. If there is any inconsistency between any provisions of such fire code and other provisions of this municipal code, such other provisions of this municipal code shall prevail. (Ord. 17-19 § 1, 2018; Ord. 13-2027 § 7, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 7, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.12.020 Amendments to the 2017 Los Angeles County Fire Code.

The 2017 Los Angeles County Fire Code adopted by this chapter is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 14.12.030 through 14.12.050. (Ord. 17-19 § 1, 2018; Ord. 13-2027 § 7, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 7, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.12.030 Section 108 – Appeals – Amended.

Section 108 of the fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:

108 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.160 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 17-19 § 1, 2018; Ord. 16-2059 § 1(E), 2016; Ord. 13-2027 § 7, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 7, 2010.)


14.12.040 Subsection 109.4 – Violation penalties – Amended.

Subsection 109.4 of the fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with chapter 1.16 of this Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.

(Ord. 17-19 § 1, 2018; Ord. 13-2027 § 7, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 7, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.12.050 Subsection 113.2 – Schedule of permit fees – Amended.

Subsection 113.2 of the fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:

113.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit/plan review shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. An additional permit application fee shall be charged for issued permit alterations. When plans are incomplete or the design changed after submittal, additional plan review fees shall be charged as established by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 17-19 § 1, 2018; Ord. 13-2027 § 7, 2013; Ord. 10-1990 § 7, 2010; Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007. Formerly 14.12.030.)




Chapter 14.13 FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES

Sections:

14.13.010    Designation.

14.13.020    Map.

14.13.030    Notice to county.


14.13.010 Designation.

The city council hereby designates within the city of Covina a very high fire hazard severity zone (“FHSZ”) as required by California Government Code Section 51179 and as recommended by the Director of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. The FHSZ is designated on a map titled “City of Covina FHSZ, Tile 1” (“FHSZ Map”). The FHSZ map is intended to be used in conjunction with the most current edition of the California Building Standards Code and supersedes any other maps previously adopted by the city of Covina designating high fire hazard areas. (Ord. 08-1959 § 1, 2008.)


14.13.020 Map.

The FHSZ map shall be retained on file with the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 08-1959 § 2, 2008.)


14.13.030 Notice to county.

The city shall post a notice at the office of the Los Angeles County recorder, Los Angeles County assessor, and Los Angeles County planning department identifying the location of the FHSZ map adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 08-1959 § 3, 2008.)


Chapter 14.14 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE

Sections:

14.14.010    Uniform Housing Code adoption by reference.

14.14.020    Amendments generally.

14.14.030    Section 203 amended – Housing advisory and appeals board.

14.14.040    Section 204 amended – Violations and penalties.

14.14.050    Section 302 amended – Fees.

14.14.060    Section 401 amended – Definitions.

14.14.070    Chapter 13 amended – Procedures for conduct of hearing appeals.


14.14.010 Uniform Housing Code adoption by reference.

The city adopts as its housing code the 1997 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures. 

One copy of said code is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.14.020 Amendments generally.

The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code, adopted by this chapter, is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 14.14.030 through 14.14.070. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.14.030 Section 203 amended – Housing advisory and appeals board.

Section 203 of Chapter 1 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by deleting the section and substituting the following:

Section 203 Board of Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.110 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 10-1978 § 7, 2010.)


14.14.040 Section 204 amended – Violations and penalties.

Section 204 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 204 Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this code may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with chapter 1.16 of this Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.

(Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.14.050 Section 302 amended – Fees.

Section 302 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 302 Fees. When a building permit is required by Section 301 of this code, the appropriate fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.14.060 Section 401 amended – Definitions.

Section 401 is hereby amended as follows:

BUILDING CODE is the 2007 California Building Code, based on the 2006 International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as amended and adopted by this jurisdiction.

MECHANICAL CODE is the 2007 California Mechanical Code, based on the 2006 Uniform Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as amended and adopted by this jurisdiction.

(Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.14.070 Chapter 13 amended – Procedures for conduct of hearing appeals.

Chapter 13 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by deleting the chapter and substituting the following:

Chapter 13 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.110 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 10-1978 § 8, 2010.)


Chapter 14.16 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

Sections:

14.16.010    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adoption by reference.

14.16.020    Amendments generally.

14.16.030    Section 203 amended – Violations and penalties.

14.16.040    Section 205 amended – Board of appeals.

14.16.050    Chapter 5 amended – Appeal.

14.16.060    Chapter 6 amended – Procedures for conducting hearing of appeals.


14.16.010 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adoption by reference.

The city adopts as its dangerous building code the 1997 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, providing a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the building code or housing code or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. 

One copy of said code is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.16.020 Amendments generally.

The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, adopted by this chapter, is amended and changed as set forth in CMC 14.16.030 through 14.16.060. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.16.030 Section 203 amended – Violations and penalties.

Section 203 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 203 Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this code may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with chapter 1.16 of this Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.

(Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.16.040 Section 205 amended – Board of appeals.

Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended by deleting the section and substituting the following:

Section 205 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.110 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 10-1978 § 9, 2010.)


14.16.050 Chapter 5 amended – Appeal.

Chapter 5 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended by deleting the section and substituting the following:

Chapter 5 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Section 14.04.110 of the Covina Municipal Code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with said Section.

(Ord. 10-1978 § 10, 2010.)


14.16.060 Chapter 6 amended – Procedures for conducting hearing of appeals.

Chapter 6 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended to read as follows:

Chapter 6 Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals. Appeals of the Building Official’s order, decision or determination under the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the City shall be requested, processed and conducted in the same way as set forth in Section 14.04.090 of the Covina Municipal Code.

(Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


Chapter 14.18 BUILDING SAFETY CONDITION PLACARDS

Sections:

14.18.010    Intent.

14.18.020    Application of provisions.

14.18.030    Definitions.

14.18.040    Safety assessment.

14.18.050    Placement of condition placards.

14.18.060    Removal of placards prohibited.

14.18.070    Inspection for enforcement.

14.18.080    Violation.

14.18.090    Appeals.


14.18.010 Intent. 

This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a building or structure for continued occupancy. This chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placards at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.020 Application of provisions. 

The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies located within and regulated by the city of Covina. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Building official” shall mean the city of Covina building official, or his or her authorized representative.

B. “Entry point” shall mean any and all doorways, entryways, and access points to a building or structure through which persons gain access to said building or structure from a ground- or street-level sidewalk, alleyway, street or right-of-way, whether private or public. Buildings and structures may have multiple entry points for which compliance with this chapter is required. 

C. “Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or any other recognized legal entity.

D. “Safety assessment” is a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure, interior and exterior, for the purpose of determining the building or structure’s condition for continued occupancy. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.040 Safety assessment.

The building official is hereby authorized to enter any building or structure within the city of Covina at reasonable times to conduct a safety assessment pursuant to this chapter. If such building or structure is occupied, the building official shall present his or her credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such building or structure is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or structure and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.050 Placement of condition placards. 

A. After conducting a safety assessment of a building or structure, the building official shall make a determination as to whether the building or structure is safe for occupancy, safe for restricted occupancy, or unsafe for occupancy. Once such determination is made by the building official, he or she shall place or cause to be placed at each entry point of the building or structure a placard indicating its condition for continued occupancy.

B. Based upon the building official’s determination, one of three types of placards shall be placed at each entry point of a building or structure. The following are verbal descriptions of the three types of placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of the forms for actual placards to be used are set forth at the end of this chapter. 

1. “INSPECTED – LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED” is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found by the building official. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

2. “RESTRICTED USE” is to be posted on any building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The building official shall note on the placard in general terms the type of damage encountered and shall clearly and concisely note the restriction on continued occupancy.

3. “UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY” is to be posted on any building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life or safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstances except as authorized in writing by the building official. The building official shall note on the placard in general terms the type of damage encountered.

C. A reference to this chapter, the name of the city, its address and phone number shall be printed on each placard. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.060 Removal of placards prohibited.

Once the building official has attached a placard or placards to a building or structure, no person shall remove, alter, cover or relocate said placard or placards without the express authorization of the building official. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.070 Inspection for enforcement. 

When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the building official may enter the building or structure at reasonable times to conduct such inspection, in accordance with the procedures set forth in CMC 14.18.040. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.080 Violation. 

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, cover or relocate any placard unless authorized to do so pursuant to this chapter.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or occupy any building or structure that has been posted with a placard stating “UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY,” except where authorized in writing by the building official.

C. Where a building or structure has been posted with a placard stating “RESTRICTED USE,” it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or occupy any portion of the building or structure that has been restricted from entry or occupancy, as indicated on the placard, or to occupy or operate the building or structure in any manner that violates the restrictions indicated on the placard.

D. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon determination thereof, shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.16 CMC. (Ord. 07-1947 § 2, 2007.)


14.18.090 Appeals. 

Persons may appeal a determination of the building official resulting in the posting of a placard on a building or structure which orders “Restricted Use” or “Unsafe – Do Not Enter or Occupy”; however, these orders shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. Appeals of these determinations shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with CMC 14.04.110, except that said written appeal must be received by the city clerk within 10 working days from the date the placard was posted at the premises. (Ord. 10-1978 § 11, 2010.)


Chapter 14.20 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS

Sections:

14.20.010    Purpose.

14.20.020    Scope.

14.20.030    Definitions.

14.20.040    General requirements.

14.20.050    Seismic hazard classification.

14.20.060    Time limits.

14.20.070    Hardship extension.

14.20.080    Permits.

14.20.090    Administration.

14.20.100    Analysis and design.


14.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death and injury resulting from the effects of earthquakes on unreinforced masonry buildings constructed prior to the adoption and enforcement of building codes that required earthquake-resistant design. Unreinforced masonry buildings are widely recognized for sustaining life-hazardous damage, including partial or complete collapse, during moderate to strong earthquakes.

The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of injury and loss of life. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily entirely prevent injury or loss of life or prevent earthquake damage to rehabilitated buildings. This chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems unless they constitute a hazard to life or property.

This chapter provides systematic procedures and standards for identification and classification of life-safety hazards in unreinforced masonry buildings based on their present use and condition. Priorities, time periods and standards are also established under which these buildings are required to be structurally analyzed and strengthened or demolished. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.020 Scope.

A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following:

1. All masonry buildings constructed or under construction prior to the adoption and enforcement of the current California Standards Building Code as adopted through this title.

2. Buildings containing unreinforced masonry foundations or piers, or unreinforced masonry walls or parapets, including unreinforced masonry infill walls and unreinforced masonry veneer walls.

B. The following buildings are exempt from the scope of this chapter:

1. Detached one- or two-family dwellings.

2. Detached apartment houses containing five or fewer dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes.

3. Structures used solely as warehouses or similar purposes not for human habitation.

4. Buildings owned and occupied by the state or federal governments. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Words used in the singular include the plural, and vice versa. Terms, phrases and words not defined herein shall have their ordinary accepted meaning in accordance with applicable sections of this title.

“CEBC” means the 2007 California Existing Building Code, as adopted through this title.

“Complete” or “completion” means compliance with the requirements of this chapter to the satisfaction and approval of the building official.

“Essential buildings” means structures which are necessary for post-earthquake emergency operations, including medical facilities and fire or police stations.

High Hazard Building. Refer to CMC 14.20.050(B).

Medium Hazard Building. Refer to CMC 14.20.050(C).

Low Hazard Building. Refer to CMC 14.20.050(D).

“Occupant load” means the occupant load for the entire structure as determined in accordance with Section 1004 of the 2007 Uniform California Building Code, regardless of degree of actual use.

“Owner” means any person, agent, firm, corporation or other entity having legal or equitable interest in property.

“Parapet” means a nonstructural wall that extends above the building roof line at the perimeter of the building, intended primarily for fire protection purposes and to conceal mechanical equipment upon the roof.

“Unreinforced masonry” means a masonry element which lacks steel reinforcement.

“Unreinforced masonry infill wall” means an unreinforced masonry wall element, commonly installed between the structural beams and columns of older concrete or steel-framed structures.

“Unreinforced masonry veneer wall” means decorative unreinforced masonry that is neither reinforced nor anchored to the main structural system of the building. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.040 General requirements.

A. Before June 30, 2009, the owner of each building within the scope of this chapter shall submit to the building official a structural analysis which fully addresses the life-safety hazards of the building. The structural analysis shall be prepared by a civil or structural engineer or architect, licensed by the state of California. The owner shall obtain all required permit(s) to either complete the necessary structural modifications identified in the structural analysis, in accordance with the requirements and time periods of this chapter, or demolish the building.

B. If the owner changes the use or occupancy of a building and the change results in a different seismic hazard classification, the owner shall comply with the time limit for the new classification. No change in use or occupancy will be allowed which causes the building to come under a seismic hazard classification for which a time limit has already expired. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.050 Seismic hazard classification.

A. The seismic hazard classifications for this chapter are hereby established. Each building within the scope of this chapter shall be placed in one such classification by the building official.

B. High Hazard Building. Any building within the scope of this chapter having one or more of the following conditions present:

1. An occupant load of 100 or more.

2. A foundation, all or part of which is unreinforced masonry, including footings, piers, stemwalls, etc., which places any part of the mudsill (or equivalent) of the building 12 inches or more above interior or exterior grade at any point. All measurements shall be vertical.

3. Wall(s) constructed of unreinforced masonry and 15 feet or more in height, all or part, measured vertically from the bottom surface of the wall base (equivalent to sole plate) to the top surface of the wall (equivalent to top plate).

4. Parapet wall(s) constructed of unreinforced masonry; and (a) 24 inches or more in height, all or part, measured vertically from the uppermost part of the parapet to the top surface of the contiguous subroof deck, or (b) in a deteriorated and/or unstable condition, regardless of wall height, as determined by the building official.

5. More than one story in height, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of the 2007 California Building Code, including buildings otherwise classified as low hazard or medium hazard buildings.

6. In a physical condition, as determined by the building official, or by the engineer or architect placed in responsible charge by the owner, to be a hazardous building and dangerous to human life as defined in Chapter 3 of the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

7. An essential building.

C. Medium Hazard Building. Any one-story unreinforced masonry building, not classified as a high hazard building, having an occupant load between 50 and 100.

D. Low Hazard Building. Any one-story unreinforced masonry building having an occupant load of less than 50. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.060 Time limits.

A. For High Hazard Building. The owner shall obtain all necessary permit(s) to mitigate all life-safety hazards as identified in the 2007 California Building Standards Code by June 30, 2010, and shall complete all abatement work or demolish the building by June 30, 2012.

B. For Medium Hazard Building. The owner shall obtain all necessary permit(s) to mitigate all life-safety hazards by June 30, 2011, and shall complete all abatement work or demolish the building by June 30, 2013.

C. For Low Hazard Building. The owner shall obtain all necessary permit(s) to mitigate all life-safety hazards by June 30, 2012, and shall complete all abatement work or demolish the building by June 30, 2014.

D. For buildings with a mixed seismic hazard classification the most restrictive classification shall apply. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.070 Hardship extension.

For high hazard buildings, the property owner may appeal to the building official for an extension as specified in this title. No extensions shall be provided for medium hazard and low hazard buildings. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.080 Permits.

The building owner or his/her agent shall obtain all required permit(s) prior to commencement of work in accordance with the requirements established by the Covina Municipal Code whether the building is to be demolished or altered for compliance. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.090 Administration.

A. Responsibility. The building official shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter.

B. Notification. The building official shall issue a notice to the owner of each building within the scope of this chapter within 90 days of the adoption of this chapter. The notice shall be served either personally or by certified registered mail upon the owner as shown in the records of the Los Angeles County tax assessor.

C. Contents of Notice. The notice shall be in writing and shall specify that the subject building has been determined, by the building official, to be within the scope of this chapter, and therefore is required to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The notice shall specify (1) the seismic hazard classification of the building, (2) the owner’s alternatives, and (3) the time limits for compliance under CMC 14.20.060.

D. Relief from Notice. The owner or his/her agent may obtain relief from the notice by submitting to the building official proof that the building is not within the scope of this chapter. Proof shall include the investigative method employed and shall be certified by a civil or structural engineer or architect licensed by the state of California. The building official may require additional information to substantiate the relief requested.

E. Recordation. Forty-five days after the notice is served, the building official shall record with the office of the Los Angeles County recorder a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter, and that the owner thereof has been ordered to have the building structurally analyzed and altered to comply with this chapter or demolish the building.

If the building is found not to be within the scope of this chapter, or as a result of structural analysis and alteration is found to comply with this chapter, or is demolished, the building official shall file with the office of the Los Angeles County recorder a certificate terminating the status of the subject building or property as being classified within the scope of this chapter. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


14.20.100 Analysis and design.

A. General. Any building within the scope of this chapter shall be analyzed and structurally modified to resist seismic forces in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or be demolished.

B. Information Required on Plans.

1. General. The owner shall cause to be submitted to the building official the necessary number of complete sets of plans and supporting documentation for the work proposed in accordance with requirements of this chapter. In addition to the required analysis, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the analysis shall determine and record on the submitted plans the information required by both this section and the CEBC.

2. Construction Details. Plans for all structural elements related to the seismic retrofit shall contain:

a. An overall description of the subject building, listing and describing specific conditions which constitute or contribute to structural hazards, problems, questions, etc., and, in each case, details of the necessary repairs and alterations.

b. The type(s), description, dimensions and condition of the existing foundation of the building, and necessary repairs and alterations.

c. The type(s), description and dimensions of existing walls, and necessary repairs and alterations.

d. The size(s), spacing(s), and span(s) of floor and roof members and the necessary repairs and alterations.

e. The extent, type and condition of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof, and the necessary repairs and alterations.

f. The extent, type and condition of parapet walls and their connection to walls and roof, and the necessary repairs and alterations.

g. Complete, accurately dimensioned floor plans showing the use of all affected rooms and spaces.

h. Masonry wall elevations with dimensioned openings, corbels, piers, wall thickness(es) and height(s).

i. Extent, type, size, condition and adequacy of headers, lintels, etc., over openings in masonry-bearing walls, and the necessary repairs and alterations.

j. The location and extent of cracks or damaged portions of masonry walls, parapets, etc., and the necessary repairs and alterations.

k. The condition of mortar joints throughout, whether pointing is required, and the extent of this need.

3. Use of Existing Materials. Where use of existing materials is proposed in the structural design, and established design values acceptable to the building official do not exist, in-place testing of such materials shall be performed by an approved special inspector in accordance with Chapter 17 of the 2007 California Building Code. The methodology and results of such tests shall be submitted as part of a special inspection report with the permit application. The building official shall approve in advance the number and location of such tests. (Ord. 08-1964 § 1, 2008.)


Chapter 14.44 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT

Sections:

14.44.010    Statutory authorization.

14.44.020    Statement of purpose.

14.44.030    Definitions.

14.44.040    General provisions.

14.44.050    Administration.

14.44.060    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.


14.44.010 Statutory authorization. 

The Legislature of the State of California has, by passage of Government Code Section 65300 et seq., and Government Code Section 65800 et seq., conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt planning, zoning and development regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Covina does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 08-1954 § 1, 2008.)


14.44.020 Statement of purpose. 

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in areas of special flood hazard by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 

G. Ensure that those who occupy areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions;

H. Ensure that those who propose to build or develop within areas of special flood hazard do so with foreknowledge of the potential risks and additional regulatory requirements associated with the proposed development. (Ord. 08-1954 § 1, 2008.)


14.44.030 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

A. “Area of special flood hazard” means the land within the city of Covina subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

B. “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 

C. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 

D. “Flood” or “flooding” means:

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

E. “Floodplain administrator” means the city engineer, or designee thereof, appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and any other floodplain management regulations.

F. “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

G. “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and any other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, or special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) which control development in areas of special flood hazard. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 

H. “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the United States Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the United States Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3. Individually listed on the inventory of historic places by the state of California; or

4. Individually listed on the inventory of historic places by the city of Covina, or any other local agency with jurisdiction over the structure.

I. “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.

J. “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

K. “New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, newly built structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 

L. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

M. “Start of construction” means the date the building permit was issued for any new construction or substantial improvement, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit’s issuance.

N. “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

O. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its prior condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

P. “Subsequent improvement” means any proposed addition, expansion, alteration, repair or rehabilitation of an existing structure for which the cost of which is less than 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure before the start of the construction of the improvement. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

Q. “Substantial improvement” means (1) any reconstruction or rehabilitation of structures that have suffered substantial damage, regardless of the ultimate cost of the improvement or (2) any proposed addition, expansion or alteration of an existing structure that has not suffered substantial damage, but the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. (Ord. 08-1954 § 1, 2008.)


14.44.040 General provisions. 

A. This chapter shall apply to all properties within the jurisdiction of the city of Covina.

B. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from the federal government, from the state of California, or from any other source to identify areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Covina. This data shall be maintained on file with the Department of Public Works, 534 N. Barranca Avenue, Covina, California 91723, or at such future address where the department of public works may be located.

C. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable floodplain management regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with said requirements) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Covina from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

D. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

E. For purposes of interpreting and applying this chapter, all provisions shall be:

1. Considered as minimum requirements;

2. Liberally construed in favor of the city of Covina; and

3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted to the city under state or federal law.

F. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within areas of special flood hazard will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Covina, the city council, nor any elected or appointed officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the federal government, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 08-1954 § 1, 2008.)


14.44.050 Administration.

For all new construction, substantial improvements, proposed subdivisions and all other proposed new developments, including manufactured homes and manufactured home parks, the floodplain administrator shall review all building permits and development entitlements to determine whether such new construction, substantial improvement, proposed subdivision or other proposed new development is located within an area of special flood hazard. If such new construction or substantial improvement is located within an area of special flood hazard, the floodplain administrator shall ensure that: 

A. All requirements of this chapter and related floodplain management regulations have been satisfied;

B. All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and

C. The site is reasonably safe from flooding in order to allow the new construction or substantial improvement. (Ord. 08-1954 § 1, 2008.)


14.44.060 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

A. Standards for Construction. If a proposed building site is in an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall:

1. Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2. Be constructed:

a. With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

b. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

c. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

B. Standards for Subdivisions or Other Proposed Development. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed development, including a manufactured home park, is in an area of special flood hazard, any such proposal shall be reviewed by the floodplain administrator to assure that:

1. It is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the area of special flood hazard;

2. All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

3. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

C. Standards for Utilities.

1. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

a. Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

b. Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

2. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 08-1954 § 1, 2008.)


Title 15 (RESERVED)


Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:

16.02    General Provisions

16.04    Definitions

16.06    Map Requirements

16.08    Tentative Maps

16.10    Vesting Tentative Maps

16.12    Common Interest Development Conversions

16.14    Final Maps and Parcel Maps

16.16    Lot Line Adjustments

16.18    Merger of Contiguous Parcels

16.20    Reversion to Acreage

16.22    Certificate of Compliance

16.24    Correction and Amendment of Map

16.26    Subdivision Design

16.28    Park Dedication and In-Lieu Fee Regulations

16.30    Improvements

16.32    Monuments

16.34    Enforcement


Chapter 16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

16.02.010    Authority.

16.02.020    Purpose.

16.02.030    Scope and applicability.

16.02.040    Exceptions.

16.02.050    Review and approval authority of advisory agencies.

16.02.060    Conformance to general plan, specific plans, and zoning regulations.

16.02.070    Severability.

16.02.080    Conditions of land use approval.

16.02.090    Lease projects, condominiums and community apartment projects.

16.02.100    Public hearing notice.

16.02.110    Fees and deposits.

16.02.120    Appeals.

16.02.130    Violation – Penalty.


16.02.010 Authority.

This title is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution to supplement and implement the California Subdivision Map Act, California Government Code Sections 66410 et seq. and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city of Covina. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to provide the city with legal authority for the review of the design and improvement of subdivisions and the processing of any proposed subdivision, reconfiguration and/or consolidation of land within the city of Covina to the extent authorized by the California Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.030 Scope and applicability.

Except as specifically excluded by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the provisions of this title shall apply to any division of real property wholly or partially within the incorporated area of the city, and shall govern the filing, processing, approval, conditional approval or disapproval of tentative maps, final maps, parcel maps, lot line adjustments and any other real property subdivision actions within the scope of this title. Except as otherwise provided in this title and in the Subdivision Map Act, all subdivisions shall be subject to the same substantive and procedural requirements. Subdivisions and incorporated territory adjacent to the city shall be subject to these provisions to the extent permitted and as provided by California Government Code Section 66454. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.040 Exceptions.

This title shall not apply to:

A. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks;

B. Mineral, oil or gas leases;

C. Land dedicated to cemetery purposes under the California Health and Safety Code;

D. Lot line adjustments between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where no new parcels are created; provided, that subject to the provisions of Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act, the lot line adjustment is approved pursuant to Chapter 16.16 CMC;

E. Any separate assessment under California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 2188.7;

F. The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvement;

G. The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel;

H. The construction, financing or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to California Government Code Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to California Government Code Section 65852.2; but this title shall apply to the sale or transfer, but not the leasing, of those units;

I. Leasing of agricultural land for agricultural purposes, meaning the cultivation of food or fiber, or the grazing or pasturing of livestock;

J. Subdivision of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square feet;

K. Any other mandatory exceptions to the applicability of the Subdivision Map Act, as provided in the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.050 Review and approval authority of advisory agencies.

The authority for review and approval of subdivisions and related land actions is as follows:

Table 1-1 – Review and Approval Authority

	Type of Action	Review Authority	Approval Authority

	Tentative maps	Planning commission	City council

	Vesting tentative maps	Planning commission	City council

	Correction/amendment of maps	City staff and other responsible agencies	Chief planning official or city engineer

	Tentative map extensions	City staff and other responsible agencies	Planning commission

	Parcel maps (4 or less lots/parcels)	City staff and other responsible agencies	City council

	Final maps (5 or more lots/parcels; all others)	City staff and other responsible agencies	City council

	Waivers of parcel maps	City staff and other responsible agencies	Chief planning official or city engineer

	Reversion to acreage	City staff and other responsible agencies	Planning commission

	Lot and parcel mergers	City staff and other responsible agencies	City engineer

	Lot line adjustments	City staff and other responsible agencies	Chief planning official or city engineer

 (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.060 Conformance to general plan, specific plans, and zoning regulations.

No land shall be divided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with this title and with the Covina general plan, any applicable specific plan, the Covina zoning code (CMC Title 17), or any other regulatory ordinance of the city.

The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and any applicable specific plan shall determine, together with the requirements of the California Subdivision Map Act and this title, the type of streets, roads, highway, utilities and public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.070 Severability.

If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the title and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.080 Conditions of land use approval.

As a condition of the approval of a subdivision, the subdivider shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, agents, officers, and employees from any claim, action, or proceeding filed against the city, its elected officials, agents, officers and employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an approval by the city, its advisory agencies, chief planning official, city engineer, planning commission or the city council concerning a subdivision, which action is brought within the time period provided in California Government Code Section 66499.37. Upon receipt of any such claim, action, or proceeding, the city shall promptly notify the subdivider and shall cooperate fully in the defense. The subdivider shall further agree to reimburse the city for any attorneys’ fees and costs which the city may be required to pay as a result of any claim, action, or proceeding filed against the city resulting from approval by the city, its advisory agencies, chief planning official, city engineer, planning commission or the city council.

Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any claim, action, or proceeding if:

A. The city bears its own attorneys’ fees and costs;

B. The city defends the action in good faith; and

C. The subdivider is not required to pay or perform any settlement unless the settlement is approved by the subdivider. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.090 Lease projects, condominiums and community apartment projects.

Provisions of this title which except or exempt a subdivider from complying with a design, improvement, dedication or fee requirement, or which provide for the waiver of such a requirement because of the size of parcels resulting from a subdivision shall not be construed to apply to lease projects, condominiums, or community apartment projects. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.100 Public hearing notice.

Except as otherwise provided by this title, whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to this title, notice of hearing shall be given as prescribed by California Government Code Sections 66451.3, 65090 and 65091, as those sections may be amended from time to time. Unless and until these sections are amended, notice shall be given as follows:

A. Notice shall be published pursuant to California Government Code Section 6061 (published one time) in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 10 days prior to the hearing, or if there is no such newspaper of general circulation, the notice shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the city limits.

B. Notice shall also be mailed or delivered at least 10 days prior to the hearing to any person who has filed a written request for notice with the city clerk or with any other person designated by the city council to receive these requests.

C. Where a public hearing concerns consideration of a specific real property project under this title, notice shall also be given in following ways:

1. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least 10 days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner’s duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant, if different from the owner or agent;

2. In the event the hearing concerns the conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, notice of the hearing shall also be mailed or delivered at least 10 days prior to the hearing to each tenant residing at the property that is the subject of the hearing;

3. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least 10 days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected by an approval under this title;

4. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least 10 days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing;

5. Special Rule. If the number of owners (and tenants, if applicable) to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to subsections (C)(1), (2) and (4) of this section is greater than 1,000, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, notice may be given by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Publication of such notice shall also satisfy the notice publication requirements of subsection (A) of this section.

D. The notice shall include the following information:

1. The date, time and place of the public hearing;

2. The identity of the hearing body or officer;

3. A general explanation of the matter to be considered;

4. A general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the public hearing. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.110 Fees and deposits.

All applicants submitting maps as required by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by this title and by city council resolution establishing applicable fees and deposits. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.120 Appeals.

A. Appeal of Decision by Chief Planning Official or City Engineer.

1. Any subdivider or city officer or any other interested person aggrieved by or adversely affected by a decision of the chief planning official or the city engineer may appeal to the planning commission for review of the action.

2. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the planning secretary within 10 days after the date of the chief planning official’s or city engineer’s decision. The appeal shall fully state the grounds for such appeal and the action or relief requested. Upon the filing of an appeal, the planning department shall transmit to the planning commission a report of the chief planning official’s or city engineer’s decision.

3. After the filing, the planning secretary shall set the matter for public hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be as provided by CMC 16.02.100.

4. Within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision.

5. With respect to tentative maps and common interest development subdivisions, if the planning commission fails to act upon an appeal within the time limit specified above, the decision of the chief planning official or city engineer shall be deemed to be approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved, insofar as the map or other subdivision action complies with the applicable requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. With respect to all other subdivision applications, if the planning commission fails to act upon an appeal within the time limit specified above, the matter shall be deemed continued to the next regular meeting of the planning commission until such time that the planning commission renders a decision on the subdivision application.

6. The fee for filing of an appeal shall be established by city council resolution.

B. Appeal of Action by Planning Commission.

1. Any subdivider or city officer or any other interested person aggrieved by or adversely affected by an action of the planning commission may appeal to the city council for review of the action.

2. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within 10 days after the date of the planning commission’s action. The appeal shall fully state the grounds for such appeal and the action or relief requested. Upon the filing of an appeal, the planning department shall transmit to the city clerk a report of the planning commission’s action.

3. After the filing, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be as provided by CMC 16.02.100.

4. Within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. Where the appeal concerns a tentative map, the decision of the city council shall comply with the provisions of Government Code Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474.

5. With respect to tentative maps, final maps, parcel maps and common interest development subdivisions, if the city council fails to act upon an appeal within the time limit specified above, the action of the planning commission shall be deemed to be approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved, insofar as the map or other subdivision action complies with the applicable requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. With respect to all other subdivision applications, if the city council fails to act upon an appeal within the time limit specified above, the matter shall be deemed continued to the next regular meeting of the city council until such time that the city council renders a decision on the subdivision application.

6. The fee for filing of an appeal shall be established by city council resolution. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.02.130 Violation – Penalty.

A violation of the Subdivision Map Act shall be punishable in accordance with California Government Code Section 66499.31. Any violation of this title which is not also a violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of any other state statute is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $10,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.04 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

16.04.010    Incorporated definitions.

16.04.020    Specific definitions.


16.04.010 Incorporated definitions.

Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined herein but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act or in CMC Title 17 (Zoning), such definitions shall be deemed incorporated herein and shall apply as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.04.020 Specific definitions.

Throughout this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as described in this section:

A. “CEQA” shall mean the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 as amended.

B. “Chief planning official” shall mean the community development director of the city, or his or her designee.

C. “City” shall mean the city of Covina.

D. “City engineer” shall mean the city engineer of the city and shall include his or her designated deputies.

E. “Condominium” shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. In addition, a condominium may include a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

F. “County” shall mean the county of Los Angeles.

G. “County recorder” shall mean the recorder for the county of Los Angeles.

H. “Design” shall mean:

1. Street alignments, grades, and widths;

2. Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof;

3. Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

4. Lot size and configuration;

5. Traffic access;

6. Grading;

7. Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes;

8. Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan; and

9. The linking of components of the built environment, thereby establishing a sense of order and organization to what otherwise can be perceived as disjointed or haphazard development.

I. “Development agreement” shall mean an agreement duly entered into pursuant to California Government Code Section 65864 et seq.

J. “Final map” shall mean a map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder.

K. “General plan” shall mean the general plan of the city of Covina, including all adopted elements and maps, as it may be amended from time to time.

L. “Geologically hazardous area” shall mean an area which may be affected by one or more of the geologic hazards discussed in the hazards element of the general plan of the city.

M. “Government Code” shall mean the Government Code of the State. If at any time any of the sections of the Government Code referred to in this chapter are redesignated by a new number, such new number shall thereupon be deemed substituted for such old number wherever the same appears in this chapter.

N. “Gross area” shall mean the entire area within the boundaries of a lot or parcel, measured to the centerline of adjoining alleys, highways or streets or to the underlying fee ownership of such adjoining alleys, highways or streets, whichever is applicable.

O. “Improvement” shall mean any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map or parcel map. It also means any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by any other entity approved by the city, or by a combination of them, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with city engineering specifications, where applicable.

P. “Lot” shall mean a unit or portion of land separate from other units or portions by description, as shown on a final map or parcel map, or by such other map or instrument approved by the city or applicable governmental entity under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing.

Q. “Lot line adjustment” shall mean a boundary realignment between four or fewer existing adjoining lots or parcels, under the same or different ownership, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels other than originally existed is not thereby created.

R. “May” shall mean permissive.

S. “Net area” shall mean that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of:

1. Public alleys, highways or streets;

2. Proposed public facilities, easements and dedications such as alleys, highways, streets or other proposed public sites, when included within the lot or parcel; and

3. Other public or private easements where the owner of the servient tenement does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land.

T. “Parcel” shall mean the same as a “lot.”

U. “Parcel map” shall mean a map which is designated to be placed on record with the office of the county recorder for any subdivision creating four or fewer lots or five or more lots if the subdivision complies with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66426(a), (b), (c), or (d).

V. “Person adversely affected” shall mean all persons designated in California Government Code Section 66452.5.

W. “Public hearing” shall mean a meeting whereby notice is given pursuant to CMC 16.02.100.

X. “State” shall mean the state of California.

Y. “Subdivider” shall mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for oneself or others. Employees or consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.”

Z. “Subdivision” shall mean the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351(f), a community apartment project, as defined California Civil Code Section 1351(d), or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351(m).

AA. “Subdivision Map Act” shall mean the provisions of California Government Code Title 7, Division 2, Section 66410 et seq. and such amendments thereto as may be made from time to time.

BB. “Tentative map” shall mean a map for a proposed subdivision creating five or more lots, for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act for the purpose of showing the design of the proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. A tentative map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed field survey.

CC. “Tract map” may be used as a synonym for the term “final map.”

DD. “Vesting tentative map” shall mean a tentative map prepared in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.10 CMC that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed.

EE. “Zoning code” shall mean CMC Title 17, including all text and maps, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.06 MAP REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

16.06.010    Subdivisions of four or less lots – Parcel map.

16.06.020    Subdivisions of five or more lots – Tentative and final map.

16.06.030    Calculation of parcels/lots.

16.06.040    Exceptions.

16.06.050    Exclusions.

16.06.060    Map numbers.


16.06.010 Subdivisions of four or less lots – Parcel map.

Except where exempted by CMC 16.02.040, a parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or less parcels, or four or less condominiums or stock cooperative units, a community apartment project containing four or less parcels or lots or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing four or less dwelling units. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.06.020 Subdivisions of five or more lots – Tentative and final map.

Except where exempted by CMC 16.02.040, a tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land into five or more parcels or lots, five or more condominium units or stock cooperative units, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels or lots or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units.

Notwithstanding the above, the subdivision of land into five or more lots shall only require a parcel map, in accordance with CMC 16.06.010, where any of the following occurs:

A. The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the city council;

B. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway;

C. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway, which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city council as to street alignments and widths;

D. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section;

E. The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision pursuant to Government Code Section 66418.2. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.06.030 Calculation of parcels/lots.

Any conveyance of land to the city, a governmental agency, public utility, public entity, or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance of right-of-way shall not be counted as a parcel or lot for purposes of computing the number of parcels or lots. “Conveyance” includes a fee interest, leasehold, easement or license. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.06.040 Exceptions.

Exceptions to the preparation of tentative maps, parcel maps and final maps shall be in accordance with California Government Code Sections 66426 and 66428. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.06.050 Exclusions.

Exclusions to Subdivision Map Act and this title shall be in accordance with California Government Code Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2, 66412.3, and 66412.5. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.06.060 Map numbers.

Map numbers for subdivisions requiring preparation of a parcel map shall be obtained from the planning department. Map numbers for subdivisions requiring preparation of a final map shall be obtained from the subdivision mapping section of the land development division of the county of Los Angeles department of public works, or such other section, department or division of Los Angeles County charged with the responsibility to issue map numbers. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE MAPS

Sections:

16.08.010    General.

16.08.020    Compliance with the general plan, specific plan and zoning code.

16.08.030    Filing application.

16.08.040    Determination of application completeness.

16.08.050    Tentative map review and distribution procedures.

16.08.060    Reserved.

16.08.070    Information to be contained on tentative maps.

16.08.080    Documentation to be submitted with tentative maps.

16.08.090    Referrals.

16.08.100    Planning and city department staff review.

16.08.110    Staff reports and recommendations for tentative maps.

16.08.120    Time frames for planning commission recommendation on tentative maps.

16.08.130    Time frames for action by city council on tentative maps.

16.08.140    Findings for denial of tentative maps.

16.08.150    Expiration of a tentative map.

16.08.160    Extensions of time for tentative maps.

16.08.170    Modifications of tentative maps.

16.08.180    Withdrawal of tentative map.


16.08.010 General.

The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to tentative maps. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.020 Compliance with the general plan, specific plan and zoning code.

All divisions of land pursuant to this title shall conform to those development standards set forth in the zoning code for the zoning district in which the property to be divided is located at the time the application for the tentative map is deemed complete. All divisions of land pursuant to this title shall also conform with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan, including all maps, goals, objectives, policies and implementation measures, in effect at the time the tentative map is deemed complete. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.030 Filing application.

Unless otherwise provided in this title, each proposed final map, tract map or vesting tract map shall first be submitted to the city in the form of a tentative map. Tentative maps shall be prepared and submitted in compliance with all applicable state laws and city ordinances. Tentative maps shall be filed with the planning department. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.040 Determination of application completeness.

When the required number of copies of a tentative map and accompanying reports (including required environmental reports) and applications have been received by the planning department, the tentative map shall be examined by the planning department staff in light of the requirements of this chapter to determine whether or not it contains all of the required information and is acceptable for filing. The case planner shall notify the applicant of his or her determination of completeness of the subdivision application, as required by California Government Code Section 65943. The applicant shall have the right to appeal a decision that an application is incomplete to the planning commission, pursuant to California Government Code Section 65943(c), through the appeal process set forth in CMC 16.02.120(A).

Tentative map applications shall not be deemed complete until all environmental documentation required under CEQA and local environmental processing procedures have been completed. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.050 Tentative map review and distribution procedures.

The review and distribution procedures for tentative map applications filed with the planning department shall be as follows:

A. Environmental Review. After an application has been determined to be complete, an initial study of the project’s potential environmental impacts shall be completed pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section 15063. During the review period, the chief planning official shall determine the appropriate type of environmental review. The chief planning official may request the preparation of additional studies to respond to issues raised during the review of the tentative map and preparation of the initial study. Once required studies have been completed and/or the chief planning official has determined the appropriate environmental action, the chief planning official shall prepare and distribute the proper environmental notice.

B. Distribution of Maps and Receipt of Comments. Within five business days after an application has been determined to be complete, the chief planning official shall send notice of said determination to affected school districts pursuant to California Government Code Section 66455.7. The application shall be forwarded to other cities and local agencies for review pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66453 et seq. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.060 Reserved.


16.08.070 Information to be contained on tentative maps.

All tentative maps shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the chief planning official and city engineer and shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or state registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying. The map shall consist of one or more sheets which shall all be of equal size and shall not exceed 36 inches along any side. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals 100 feet or larger. The chief planning official or city engineer may approve the use of another scale or sheet size not specified herein if warranted due to the size of the subject property. The number of copies of tentative maps to be submitted shall be as specified in the application for tentative maps. The map shall contain the following information in addition to any other requirement of the city’s general plan, any applicable specific plan, or the zoning code:

A. General Information.

1. Map number;

2. Name, address and telephone number of subdivider;

3. Name, address, and telephone number of person preparing the tentative map;

4. Name and address of subdivision owner of record;

5. North arrow and scale of tentative map;

6. Date tentative map was prepared and/or revisions;

7. Registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor signature and seal;

8. Area of the subdivision, both as total area and as area excluding existing right(s)-of-way dedicated for public use;

9. General plan designation, existing zoning of subject property and proposed land use, as well as any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future;

10. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of utilities, school districts, fire protection agencies, and cable television services serving the tract.

B. Vicinity Information.

1. A vicinity or area map, located on the tentative map, at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet, or as otherwise approved by the chief planning official or city engineer, showing only the existing major street pattern and major watercourses and flood control channels within one-half mile of exterior boundaries of the subdivision;

2. All boundary lines of the subdivision with approximate bearing and distances described with any identifying tree rows, dikes, or channels;

3. Existing buildings or structures identified by use, including those within 100 feet of the subdivision boundary;

4. Adjoining property lines and land uses, including adjacent subdivision map numbers, if any;

5. Average lot area of adjacent subdivisions;

6. Location of existing trees (including a description of species/type and breast height diameter) and proposed tree removals.

C. Topographic Information.

1. Topography, including: one-foot contour lines where slope is less than five percent; two-foot contour lines where slope is between five and 10 percent and five-foot contour lines where slopes are greater than 10 percent. Every fifth contour shall be clearly labeled and indicated so as to be distinctive. Contour lines shall extend a minimum of 100 feet beyond the subdivision boundary. Dashed lines shall represent existing contours. Topographic mapping shall include any significant features which can materially affect the design of the subdivision, including but not limited to structures, fences, walls and utility poles. Source and date of existing contours shall be included;

2. Pad elevation and drainage pattern of each lot;

3. Tops and toes of all manufacturers’ slopes, including all daylight lines;

4. Estimated quantities of cut and fill material in cubic yards; and

5. Existing and proposed retaining wall locations and heights.

D. Site Access and Circulation Information.

1. Existing and proposed street alignments, including public alleys, cross sections, and rights-of-way widths;

2. Existing and future adjacent and connecting street alignments including widths of rights-of-way;

3. Proposed street grades;

4. Centerline radii of street curves;

5. The location and radii of the rights-of-way at all curb returns and cul-de-sacs;

6. The width and location of all necessary and approved off-site access from the proposed subdivision onto the nearest public street; and

7. Street names on all existing streets within, fronting, or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Proposed public or private streets shall be designated as such and those not officially named should be shown as “A” Street, “B” Court, or “C” Road, unless a current listing of desired names has been approved for said tentative subdivision.

E. Utilities Information.

1. Names and addresses of all operators and providers of proposed subdivision utility systems; if to be served by an established mutual water company or an established public utility, a letter shall be furnished to indicate that satisfactory arrangements have been made or can be made for water supply;

2. All watercourses, storm drainage easements, utility facilities, fire hydrants, street lights, wells, and special flood hazard areas which are subject to inundation or storm water overflow in accordance with current Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps;

3. Location of and size of existing overhead utilities on peripheral streets;

4. Preliminary plan of off-site drainage channel and any other drainage devices;

5. Approximate location of all existing and proposed public and private easements and easements to be abandoned pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.20-1/2;

6. Location and size of existing and proposed water, sewer, and storm drain lines with their approximate slope, connection point, and elevation; and

7. Method of collection and disposal of storm water runoff including detention facility location and storage volume.

F. Lot Information.

1. Minimum, maximum, and average lot sizes within the subdivision;

2. The location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be indicated by deed reference to the existing record boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has an area of five acres or more; remainder parcels shall be subject to review for design access, water and sewer availability and other such improvements as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, are necessary for orderly development, and are consistent with the intent of this title;

3. Total number of lots proposed;

4. Lot lines, dimensions, and identifying number or letter; common lots shall be lettered lots and define use or purpose of such common lot(s);

5. If phasing is proposed, show all phase boundaries and the number of each phase; and

6. The location of each lot boring shall be shown on the exhibit attached to the preliminary soils report described in CMC 16.08.080(K).

G. Other Information.

1. Proposed recreation sites, trails, and parks for private or public use;

2. Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.080 Documentation to be submitted with tentative maps.

A. A signed statement by all owners in fee simple estate, or authorized agents thereof, consenting to such filing of the subdivision of the parcel(s) involved;

B. A legal description of the land within the proposed subdivision;

C. The disposition to be made of all existing structures, tree rows, and other significant vegetation and natural features, wells, tanks, irrigation facilities and public utility lines;

D. A statement as to the intention of the subdivider in regard to slope planting and erosion control;

E. Source, name of supplier, quality and estimate of available quantity of water, or, if to be served by an established mutual water company or an established public utility, a letter shall be furnished to indicate that satisfactory arrangements have been made or can be made for water supply;

F. A description of the proposed method and plan of sewage disposal. Whenever the method of sewage disposal proposed is other than by a public sewage disposal system, a soil evaluation report or geologic report, acceptable to the Los Angeles County environmental health division, indicating that individual sewage disposal systems will function properly, shall also be submitted. A public sewage system is a sewage disposal system directly controlled by public authority;

G. A certification by the applicant, supported by a preliminary title report (dated within 60 days of tentative map submittal), that the design of the subdivision and the type of improvements will not conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through, or use of, land within the proposed subdivision;

H. A list of all proposed deviations to city standards for map, street and storm drainage design, together with justification for each;

I. A preliminary drainage report describing the proposed method and plan of storm water disposal (the plan including location of storm drain lines, detention facilities, inlets and ultimate outlet may be shown on the tentative map) prepared by a state registered civil engineer. The drainage report shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic study, indicating the following conditions before and after development: drainage areas, major watercourses, quantity of storm water and patterns, diversions and collection systems. Flood hazard areas, based on 100-year storm frequency, shall be delineated on the tentative map. Special flood hazard areas as shown on applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps shall also be delineated on the tentative maps. Building sites, as designated in the soils report, shall be located outside of flood hazard areas. Drainage requirements of the city of Covina, as published by the city engineer’s office and as updated, and Los Angeles County road standards also apply;

J. The disclosure of all proposed mitigation measures recommended by any applicable environmental document, with a statement of how measures will be incorporated within the project;

K. A soils report, prepared by a civil or geotechnical engineer registered in the state of California and based upon adequate test borings to adequate depths (subject to review by the city engineer), will be required for use in evaluating and reporting the impact that the subdivision may have upon the environment.

1. The soils report shall describe the nature of the subsurface soils and any soil conditions which would affect the geometrics of the proposed subdivision. The soils report shall state whether the proposed plan is feasible and provides general solutions for all known geotechnically hazardous conditions or problems. The report shall include the locations and logs of any test borings, percolation test results and a hydrological evaluation of on-site sewage disposal if proposed. A liquefaction report shall also be required in areas of high ground water, less than 50 feet deep, or as determined by the city engineer. The city engineer may require that the soils report address all additional issues deemed pertinent by him or her.

2. If the city engineer has knowledge of, or the soils report indicates, the presence of critically expansive soils, collapsible soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, could possibly lead to structural damage to any structure proposed to be developed upon the subdivision, investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required. Such soils investigation shall be performed by a civil or geotechnical engineer, registered in this state, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage and eliminate any hazards to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where the soils problems exist. The city council may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where these soils problems exist if it determines the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated into the construction of each structure.

3. An engineering geology evaluation, prepared by an engineering geologist registered in the state of California, defining the geologic conditions of the subdivision shall be submitted. The geologic evaluation shall state any geologically hazardous conditions which may exist in the subdivision and whether the proposed plan is feasible and shall provide general solutions for all known hazardous conditions or problems. The evaluation report shall point out specific areas where development may create geologically hazardous conditions. The engineering geology evaluation requirements may be waived if the chief planning official or city engineer finds that, due to the knowledge his or her staff has as to the geologic characteristics of the subdivision, no engineering geology evaluation is necessary.

4. The geotechnical/engineering geology report shall designate a suitable building site for each lot, which is safe from liquefaction, settlement, landsliding, mudsliding, seismic fault rupture and flood hazards and which has reasonable access thereto as determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.090 Referrals.

The planning department shall transmit copies of the tentative map and, where applicable, the accompanying drawings and statements to the responsible city departments, together with a request for written recommendations on the proposed subdivision to be returned to the project. The case planner may transmit additional applicable copies to such other public and private agencies or departments as may be affected by the proposed subdivision, together with requests for written recommendations thereon. Failure to submit such written recommendations may be deemed recommended approval of the proposed subdivision. Copies of reports by city departments and/or agencies shall be transmitted to the subdivider upon completion. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.100 Planning and city department staff review.

Prior to planning commission hearing, the staff of the planning department and other responsible city departments shall review the tentative map for conformity with the provisions of this title, conformity of the proposed uses with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, the zoning code, and any other applicable ordinances, and shall advise on possible improvements in the design of the proposed subdivision. The staff of the planning department and other responsible city departments also shall advise on the requirements, if any, of county, special district, state and other public or private agencies affected by the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.110 Staff reports and recommendations for tentative maps.

Any staff report or recommendation on a tentative map to the planning commission shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be made available to the subdivider or applicant at least three working days prior to any hearing on such map by the planning commission. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.120 Time frames for planning commission recommendation on tentative maps.

A. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map. Unless the planning commission makes any of the findings for denial contained in CMC 16.08.140, it shall issue a written report to the city council recommending that the council approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, or if such findings are made, it shall issue a written report to the city council recommending that the council deny the tentative map. The planning commission shall issue its written report on the tentative map to the city council within 50 days after the tentative map is filed with the planning department and is deemed complete, except as this time frame may be extended by California Public Resources Code Section 21151.5, and California Government Code Sections 66452 and 66452.1.

B. The time frames noted above may be extended as provided by other prevailing statutory law or court decisions. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.130 Time frames for action by city council on tentative maps.

A. At the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of the planning commission’s recommendation report with the council, the city council shall fix the public hearing date at which the tentative map will be considered by it, which date shall be not later than 30 days thereafter.

B. On the date fixed by the city council, it shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the tentative map. Unless the city council makes any of the findings for denial contained in CMC 16.08.140, it shall approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, or if such findings are made, it shall deny the tentative map. The city council shall take such action within the same 30-day period.

C. The time frames noted above may be extended as provided by California Public Resources Code Section 21151.5, California Government Code Sections 66452 and 66452.1, or other prevailing statutory law or court decisions.

D. In the event that action on a tentative map application is not taken in a timely manner by the city council and the application is deemed approved by operation of law, pursuant to California Government Code Section 66452.4, then the standard conditions of approval prepared by the city that are in effect at the time the application was deemed complete shall automatically be applied to the tentative map.

E. The decision of the city council to approve, conditionally approve, or to deny a tentative map application shall be final. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.140 Findings for denial of tentative maps.

Any tentative map shall be denied by the city council, or recommended for denial by the planning commission, if any of the following findings are made:

A. The proposed subdivision is not consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan for the area;

B. The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan for the area;

C. The tentative map proposes to divide land which is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965, or the land is subject to a Land Conservation Act contract and the resulting parcels following division of the land will be too small to sustain their agricultural use;

D. The subdivision is not physically suitable for the type and proposed density of development proposed by the tentative map;

E. The design of the subdivision and proposed improvements, with conditions of approval are either:

1. Likely to cause significant environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; or

2. An environmental impact report has been prepared and a finding has been made, pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 21081(a)(3), finding that specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

F. The design of the subdivision and the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

G. The design of the subdivision does not provide for future passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities in the subdivision to the extent feasible;

H. The design of the subdivision and the type of improvements will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision, or the design of the alternate easements which are substantially equivalent to those previously acquired by the public will not be provided;

I. The subdivision is not consistent with the city’s parkland dedication requirements (Quimby Act – see Chapter 16.28 CMC);

J. The subdivider is unable to demonstrate that a sufficient water supply will be available to serve the subdivision, in accordance with California Government Code Section 66473.7. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.150 Expiration of a tentative map.

Except as may be extended by California Government Code Section 66452, the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from the date the map was approved or conditionally approved.

Failure to cause a timely filing in accordance with CMC 16.08.160 with the city within 24 months after approval shall terminate all proceedings, and any subdivision of the same land shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative map. The subdivider shall be responsible for keeping a record as to when a map will expire. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.160 Extensions of time for tentative maps.

Notwithstanding CMC 16.08.150, the initial 24-month term of tentative maps may be extended as follows:

A. Request by Subdivider. Not more than 60 calendar days before the expiration of the tentative map, the subdivider may apply for an extension of time not to exceed 12 months. The subdivider shall file with the chief planning official a completed application form, pay all applicable fees, and submit the required number of copies of the tentative map and all supporting materials and documents required on the city’s official application form, including, but not limited to, environmental analysis pursuant to CEQA.

B. The planning commission may additionally approve a maximum of six one-year time extensions, each extension not to exceed 12 months, but may not impose additional conditions of approval. Any time extension shall be denied by the city council, or recommended for denial by the planning commission, if any of the findings in CMC 16.08.140 are made.

C. If a subdivider is required to expend the amount specified in California Government Code Section 66452.6 to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the subdivision boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of that property, each filing of a final map authorized by California Government Code Section 66456.1 shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by 36 months from the date of its expiration or the date of a previously filed final map, whichever is later. The extensions shall not extend the term of the tentative map more than 10 years from its date of original approval.

D. The subdivider, city officer, or any interested party adversely affected may appeal any action of the planning commission related to the extension of a tentative map to the city council in accordance with CMC 16.02.120(B). (Ord. 17-07 § 7, 2017; Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.170 Modifications of tentative maps.

A. Tentative maps and/or their conditions of approval may be amended upon application by the subdivider or, with consent of the subdivider, by action initiated by the chief planning official, pursuant to this section. The applicant shall file a letter with the chief planning official requesting that a determination be made regarding the subdivision. The city shall respond within 30 days with its decision.

B. Minor modifications may be processed administratively by the chief planning official or city engineer, without notice or public hearing; provided, that the proposed changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval, do not affect off-site properties, and there are no resulting violations of this title or the zoning code. The following modifications are considered minor:

1. Modifications to less than 10 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision; provided, that there is no increase or decrease in the total number of lots within the subdivision.

2. Modifications to the horizontal alignment of 10 feet or less, or vertical alignment of five feet or less, of any cul-de-sac, local or collector roadway when such modification does not affect off-site property.

3. Any other changes, which in the opinion of the chief planning official or city engineer do not involve substantial changes to the map or the conditions of approval and which do not affect off-site property.

C. Any other amendment or modification of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be processed as a revised tentative map, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter for tentative map approval, except that such modification approval shall not alter the original expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.08.180 Withdrawal of tentative map.

Any subdivider wishing to withdraw a tentative map at any time prior to action thereon by the city council shall do so in writing. If such request for withdrawal is made prior to distribution of the map to the city departments and affected agencies, the filing fee, less a processing fee in an amount that may be set from time to time by a resolution of the city council, shall be refunded to the subdivider. (Ord. 09-1975 § 1, 2009; Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.10 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS

Sections:

16.10.010    Purpose.

16.10.020    Applicability.

16.10.030    Filing and processing of vesting tentative maps.

16.10.040    Application materials.

16.10.050    Development rights.

16.10.060    Vesting tentative map development inconsistent with zoning code.

16.10.070    Mandatory findings for denial.

16.10.080    Term of vesting tentative map.

16.10.090    Modifications to vesting tentative maps.

16.10.100    Expiration of vesting development rights.


16.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the review, approval and administration of vesting tentative maps in accordance with the authority granted by California Government Code Section 66498.1 et seq. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.020 Applicability.

Whenever this title requires the filing of a tentative map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.030 Filing and processing of vesting tentative maps.

A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, shall have the same content, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner described for tentative maps in Chapter 16.08 CMC, except as described in this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.040 Application materials.

At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.” The application shall be submitted like a tentative map in accordance with CMC 16.08.070 and 16.08.080, accompanied by the following additional materials:

A. A map showing division of the land for the sale of individual property, if any;

B. Proposed off-street parking, including the location, number of stalls, dimensions, and circulation pattern;

C. Lot dimensions and all recorded easements;

D. Locations and dimensions of proposed bicycle, pedestrian, and/or equestrian paths;

E. Details on the height, size, and location of proposed buildings;

F. Architectural elevations, schematic plans, and materials board for proposed building(s);

G. Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public or quasi-public buildings, and other such uses;

H. Areas proposed for any other uses to be established within the subdivision;

I. Proposed location and elevations of buildings on land, including dimensions, the size of structure, height, setback, materials, and yard areas;

J. Proposed landscaping, walls, fencing, screening, trash collection areas, and usable open space areas;

K. If phasing is proposed, a construction schedule for the off-site improvements to be associated with each phase; the total number of acres in the proposed subdivision and the number and percent thereof designated for various uses; and the number of dwelling units proposed, by type of dwelling unit, for each phase;

L. A detailed grading plan showing cut/fill quantities, pad elevations, typical drainage pattern, top/toe of slope, retaining walls, with information as required by the city engineer; and

M. Such additional information as may be required by the chief planning official and/or city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.050 Development rights.

A. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with this code, and the policies and standards described in California Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if any provision of this code or California Government Code Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the provisions of this code and any other ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map was approved or conditionally approved.

B. The above notwithstanding, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or may be denied if any of the following are determined:

1. Failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

2. The condition(s) or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

C. The provisions of this section shall not:

1. Limit the city from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequently required approvals or permits necessary for the development and authorized by the ordinances, policies, and standards described in subsection (A) of this section.

2. Diminish or alter the types of conditions which may be imposed by the city on a development or the city’s power to protect against a condition dangerous to the public health or safety. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.060 Vesting tentative map development inconsistent with zoning code.

Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with any provision of the zoning code in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the vesting tentative map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned upon the subdivider obtaining the necessary change in the zoning code to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning code is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding CMC 16.10.050, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning code and the vesting tentative map, as approved. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.070 Mandatory findings for denial.

A vesting tentative map shall be denied by the city if any of the findings listed in CMC 16.08.140 can be made. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.080 Term of vesting tentative map.

A. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map by the city shall expire 24 months after such approval. Not more than 60 calendar days before the expiration of the vesting tentative map, the subdivider may apply for an extension of time not to exceed 12 months in the same manner as provided in CMC 16.08.160(A) for tentative maps. The planning commission may also approve a maximum of five one-year time extensions, each extension not to exceed 12 months, but may not impose additional conditions of approval. However, the planning commission may deny any extension if it makes a finding that:

1. The extension will adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare;

2. The map fails to comply with state or federal law;

3. That any of the findings set forth in CMC 16.08.140 can be made.

B. If a final map is approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map, the tentative map vesting rights for the final map area shall last for the periods listed below:

1. An initial time period of one year following recordation of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year time period for each final map shall begin on the date of recordation of that final map.

2. The initial time period set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days; provided, however, that such extension shall only be for the number of days in excess of 30 days.

3. If, during the 24-month period following approval of a final map, the city receives a complete application for a building permit and the subdivider has satisfied all requirements for the issuance of a building permit, the right to proceed with development in accordance with the vesting tentative map shall continue until the expiration of the building permit. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.090 Modifications to vesting tentative maps.

At any time prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider, his or her successor, or his or her assignee, may apply for a modification to such map. Any application involving a modification to the vesting tentative map or by the development related thereto shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth for the modification of tentative maps in CMC 16.08.170. Approval of a modification to a vesting tentative map or development related thereto shall be evaluated for compliance with the city regulations, standards, and policies in effect at the time the request for modification is deemed complete. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.10.100 Expiration of vesting development rights.

The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not filed for approval prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in CMC 16.10.080. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.12 COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT CONVERSIONS

Sections:

16.12.010    Applicability.

16.12.020    Development review required.

16.12.030    Physical standards for condominium conversions.

16.12.040    Tenant provisions.

16.12.050    Notice to new tenants.

16.12.060    Findings.


16.12.010 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to all conversions of existing residential real property to condominium, community apartments, or stock cooperative projects or any other form of ownership except conversion projects for which a final or parcel map has been approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, or where the conversion involved a limited equity housing cooperative as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 33007.5. All provisions, conditions, and further definitions of condominium development as approved included in the California Civil Code shall apply to the divisions of real property as permitted herein. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.12.020 Development review required.

In addition to the limitations and restrictions contained within this chapter, the California Subdivision Map Act and applicable building and fire regulations, no residential apartment unit shall be converted for sale, transfer, or conveyance as a community apartment project, stock cooperative project or condominium, without concurrently obtaining approval of a conditional use permit. The following information is required:

A. Physical Elements Report. A report prepared by a registered engineer or architect or licensed qualified contractor describing the physical elements of all structures and facilities, sound transmission levels between units, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. 

Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each element; the cost of replacing said element; and any variation or noncompliance of said element from the zoning code or this chapter in effect at the time the application is filed with the city and from the city building code in effect on the date the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

B. A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure.

C. A report on soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, ground water, and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soil problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report.

D. A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a level of appearance and safety consistent with applicable codes and ordinances, as specified in subsection (A) of this section.

E. A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions in draft or outline form which would be applied to any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to: the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance; description of a provision for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit; and a plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering.

F. Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including but not limited to the following:

1. Square footage and number of rooms in each unit;

2. Rental rate history for each unit for previous five years;

3. Monthly vacancy rate for each month during preceding two years;

4. Makeup of existing tenants’ households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants, and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies;

5. Proposed sale price of each unit;

6. Proposed homeowners’ association fee;

7. Financing available; and

8. Names and addresses of all tenants.

When the subdivider can demonstrate that such information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the development director.

G. Signed copies from each tenant of a notice of intent to convert, as specified in CMC 16.12.050. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of said notice is not submitted. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with legal requirements for service by mail.

H. Any other information which, in the opinion of the chief planning official or city engineer, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

I. Submittal of Budget. The subdivider shall provide the city with a copy of the proposed budget for maintenance and operation of common facilities, including needed reserves, with the tentative map application. The budget shall show estimated monthly costs to the owner of each unit, projected over a five-year period, or such time as is required by the California Department of Real Estate. Such budget shall be prepared or reviewed and approved by a professional management firm experienced with management of condominium complexes. The management firm shall submit a statement of professional qualifications.

J. Copy to Buyers. The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all submittals (in their final acceptable form) required by subsections (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (H) and (I) of this section, prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit within the project, and the subdivider shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said information. Copies of the submittals shall be made available at all times at the sales office and a notice indicating that such reports are available shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. Copies shall be provided to the homeowners’ association upon its formation.

K. Final Information Submitted. Prior to entering into escrow on the first unit, the subdivider shall submit the following information to the planning department:

1. Name, address and phone number of homeowners’ association;

2. Actual sales price of units;

3. Actual homeowners’ association fee;

4. Number of prior tenants who intend to purchase units; and

5. Number of units purchased with intent to be used as rentals.

The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the planning department for review by any interested persons until the conclusion of the conversion process. The reports shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the planning commission. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.12.030 Physical standards for condominium conversions.

A. Adequate Physical Condition. To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the city shall require that all condominium conversions conform to the zoning code, in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter. In making the determination that the project is in conformance with the zoning code, the following will be required:

1. Prior to scheduling the tentative map for a public hearing, an inspection shall be conducted by the city building department to determine project-wide conformance with zoning code and other applicable chapters of the Covina Municipal Code. A report of any violations shall be included in the staff reports to the planning commission and city council. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of any fees related to the inspection of the project.

2. Prior to the approval of the final map, a physical inspection of the project site, including each individual unit, shall be made by the city building department and planning department. Such inspection shall be made to ensure compliance with all applicable conditions of approval as specified in the tentative map. All such corrections shall be made prior to the approval of the final or parcel map. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of any fees related to the inspection of the project.

B. Specific Physical Standards. The city shall require conformance with the standards of this subsection in approving the map:

1. Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code and Uniform Electrical Code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure or structures except as provided herein.

2. Health and Safety. Each bathroom in each living unit shall be provided with ground fault circuit interrupters.

3. Fire Prevention.

a. Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat, conforming to the latest code standards as adopted by the city.

b. Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other protective appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in an operable condition at all times.

4. Parking. Each unit shall be provided parking in accordance with Chapter 17.72 CMC.

5. Sound Transmission.

a. Shock Mounting Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors which are determined by the city to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertial or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building department.

b. Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the Uniform Building Code (UBC). In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the city may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units.

6. Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for water, gas, and electricity, and each unit shall have a separate lateral connection to a trunk sanitary sewer. Alternatively, a plan for equitable sharing of these utilities shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions.

7. Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least 175 cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the city, but shall not be divided into two or more locations.

8. Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and one dryer equivalent capacity for every five units with two or more bedrooms; and every seven units with one bedroom.

9. Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained in accordance with approved landscape plans. If a significant amount of new landscaping is required, revised/new landscape plans shall be submitted and approved by the planning department as part of the conditional use permit application. Such plans shall be subject to all applicable city ordinances.

10. Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The subdivider shall provide a warranty to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks and air conditioners that are provided have a useful life of at least one year. At such time as the subdivider relinquishes control over management of the project, pursuant to the covenants, conditions and restrictions, the subdivider shall provide a warranty to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association have a useful life of one year. Prior to final map approval, the subdivider shall provide the city with a copy of warranty insurance covering equipment and appliances pursuant to this subsection.

11. Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscape areas, and additional elements as required by the planning department shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a degree of appearance, quality and safety consistent with applicable standards. The subdivider shall provide to the homeowners’ association and/or purchaser a one-year warranty on all physical improvements required under this subsection. If substantial restoration is required, the design plans shall be subject to city council approval.

12. Long-Term Reserves. Prior to approval of the final map, the subdivider shall provide satisfactory evidence to the city that a long-term reserve fund for replacement and repair has been established in the name of the homeowners’ association. Such fund shall equal at least two times the estimated monthly homeowners’ assessment for each dwelling unit or an amount otherwise required by law. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.12.040 Tenant provisions.

A. Notice of Intent. As provided in California Government Code Section 66427.1(a), a notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the subdivider to each tenant at least 60 days prior to submitting an application for the tentative map and conditional use permit. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined in California Government Code Section 66452.9 and approved by the planning department and shall inform the tenants of all rights provided under this chapter and state law.

B. Notice of Public Report. As provided in California Government Code Section 66427.1(a), each tenant shall receive 10 days’ written notice that an application for a public report will be or has been submitted to the Department of Real Estate, and that such report will be available on request from the planning department. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

C. Notice of Final Map Approval. As provided in California Government Code Section 66427.1(b), each tenant shall receive written notification within 10 days of approval of a final map for the proposed conversion. The written notices to tenants required by this chapter shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

D. Tenant’s Right to Purchase. As provided in California Government Code Section 66427.1(d), any present tenant shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for purchase of his or her respective unit and upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

E. The subdivider shall provide suitable alternate housing to tenant households, at no additional cost to the tenant, whose unit undergoes substantial remodeling or rehabilitation during conversion, if the unit being remodeled or rehabilitated is not habitable. The final determination of habitability and suitability shall be made by the city building department. The subdivider shall avoid the economic displacement of nonpurchasing tenants in accordance with California Government Code Section 66427.5. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.12.050 Notice to new tenants.

After submittal of the tentative map and development plan applications to the city, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit. The form of the notice shall be as follows:

To the prospective occupant(s) of _________________________(Address)

The owner(s) of this building/project, at_______________________(address), has/have filed an application for a Tentative Map and Development Plan with the city of Covina to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project). No units may be sold in this building unless and until the conversion is approved by the city and subsequently a public report is issued by the California Department of Real Estate. If you become a tenant of this building, you shall be given notice of each hearing for which a notice is required pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66451.3 and 66452.5, and you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at such hearing.

_________________________________(Signature of owner’s agent)

_________________________________(Dated)

I have received notice on ________(Date)

_________________________________Prospective tenant or tenants signature(s) 

(Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.12.060 Findings.

Prior to approval of the tentative map and development plan, the planning commission and city council shall both hold public hearings as required for processing of tentative maps pursuant to CMC 16.08.120 and 16.08.130. Notice of the hearings shall be given in accordance with CMC 16.02.100. A copy of any staff report shall be served by the subdivider on each tenant of the subject property at least three days prior to the planning commission hearing, either by personal service or by posting the report on the front door of the unit and mailing it to the tenant. The planning commission shall not recommend approval of a tentative map for conversion of apartment units and the city council shall not approve a tentative map for conversion of apartment units unless both find that:

A. Findings when there is not an increase in the number of units:

1. All provisions of this chapter are met;

2. The proposed conversion is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan, including the housing element, and with any applicable specific plan;

3. The overall design, physical condition and amenities of the condominium conversion are consistent with those associated with condominium developments throughout the city and such elements achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety;

4. There is no evidence in the public hearing record to indicate that vacancies in the project were intentionally increased for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion; and

5. There is no evidence in the public hearing record to indicate that tenants have been coerced to publicly support or approve the conversion, or to refrain from publicly opposing it, or to forgo any assistance to which they may be entitled.

B. Findings when there is an increase in the number of units:

1. All provisions of this chapter are met;

2. The proposed conversion is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan, including the housing element, and with any applicable specific plan;

3. The maximum number of units proposed is consistent with the objectives, purposes and standards of the general plan, zoning code, and/or any applicable specific plan;

4. With the increase in units, the project still meets the requirements of the zoning code and provides adequate parking, landscaping, open space, etc.;

5. The overall design, physical condition and amenities of the condominium conversion are consistent with those associated with condominium developments throughout the city and such elements achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety;

6. There is no evidence in the public hearing record to indicate that vacancies in the project were intentionally increased for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion; and

7. There is no evidence in the public hearing record to indicate that tenants have been coerced to publicly support or approve the conversion, or to refrain from publicly opposing it, or to forgo any assistance to which they may be entitled. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.14 FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS

Sections:

16.14.010    General.

16.14.020    Submittal to and review by the chief planning official or city engineer.

16.14.030    Complete final map or parcel map filing with the chief planning official or city engineer.

16.14.040    Final map or parcel map approval by the city council.

16.14.050    Limitation on final map denial by the city council.

16.14.060    Filing with the office of the county recorder.

16.14.070    Administrative approval of certain simple parcel maps.

16.14.080    Information to be contained on final maps and parcel maps.

16.14.090    Map preparation, form and content.

16.14.100    Documentation to be submitted with final maps and parcel maps.

16.14.110    Soils and geologic reports.

16.14.120    Bearings.

16.14.130    Orientation.

16.14.140    Standard practices.

16.14.150    Limit of error.

16.14.160    Reliance upon prior recorded maps and data.

16.14.170    Final map and parcel map dedications.

16.14.180    Acceptance or rejection of offers of dedication.

16.14.190    Multiple final maps.


16.14.010 General.

The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of the final map or parcel map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter and applicable standards imposed by the county of Los Angeles for maps filed with the office of the county recorder. The final map or parcel map and any accompanying data or additional information shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice in the state of California. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.020 Submittal to and review by the chief planning official or city engineer.

Final and parcel map submittal and review procedures shall be pursuant to this chapter and applicable city standards.

A. Final maps or parcel maps being submitted for approval shall be first submitted to the chief planning official or city engineer who shall examine the final map or parcel map and determine whether it is technically correct and is in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and, to the extent applicable, is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map or vesting tentative map. The number of copies of a final map or parcel map to be submitted shall be as specified by the chief planning official or city engineer. Submitted final maps or parcel maps shall be signed by all parties required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Prior to the execution of the chief planning official’s or city engineer’s certificate pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall pay all required map checking fees as established by city council resolution.

B. If the chief planning official or city engineer is satisfied that the final map or parcel map complies with the standards set forth in subsection (A) of this section, he or she shall sign a certificate so stating. The chief planning official or city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the city clerk for consideration by the city council.

C. If the chief planning official or city engineer is not satisfied as to these matters, he or she may deem the final map or parcel map incomplete and return all or portions of a submittal and inform the subdivider of the reasons for rejection. Said reasons include, but are not limited to, the following: incomplete submittal or filing; untimely submittal or filing; nonconformance with the tentative map or vesting tentative map (if there is a tentative map or vesting tentative map); nonconformance with the conditions of approval applied to the tentative map or vesting tentative map (if there is a tentative map or vesting tentative map); nonconformance with this chapter; nonconformance with city standards; errors or omissions on the final map or parcel map, or on any accompanying data, or on any additional information. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.030 Complete final map or parcel map filing with the chief planning official or city engineer.

A. The chief planning official or city engineer shall determine that a complete and timely final map or parcel map filing has been made if he or she determines that, at a minimum, the following items have been received:

1. Improvement plans approved by the chief planning official or city engineer;

2. Complete and accepted public improvements or acceptable subdivision improvement agreement(s) and securities;

3. Proof of payment of all applicable fees;

4. Will serve letters from all applicable utilities and agencies;

5. Noninterference letters from all applicable easement or title interest holders;

6. Original and copies of all sheets of the final map or parcel map in their required form and content;

7. Proof of ownership of all affected properties;

8. Subdivision guarantee from a title company, less than 60 days old;

9. Letter from all affected property owners requesting approval of the final map or parcel map;

10. Small-scale map (one inch equals 1,000 feet scale) of the proposed subdivision;

11. Written clearance from all affected city departments;

12. Written clearance from all affected noncity public agencies;

13. All applicable agreements or documents to be approved by the city council, or filed or recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map;

14. Proof that all additional requirements of Chapter 16.08 CMC (Tentative Maps) or Chapter 16.10 CMC (Vesting Tentative Maps), if applicable, have been satisfied;

15. The city’s parkland dedication requirements of Chapter 16.28 CMC (Quimby Act) have been satisfied;

16. Complete and accepted public park or acceptable and/or landscape agreement(s) and securities;

17. Public park plans approved by the parks department and public works department.

B. Upon finding all statements and submittals complete and satisfactory in accordance with this section, the city engineer shall sign the appropriate statements and transmit the original final map, and any other items requiring city council approval, to the city clerk within 20 days of receipt of a complete filing, with a recommendation of map approval. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.040 Final map or parcel map approval by the city council.

A. The date the final map or parcel map shall be deemed filed with the city council shall be the date on which the city clerk receives the recommendation for map approval from the chief planning official or city engineer. The city council shall consider approval of any subdivision improvement agreement and improvement security, and any other required agreements, in conjunction with the approval of the final map or parcel map.

B. The city council shall approve or disapprove the subdivision improvement agreement, improvement security, final map and/or parcel map at the meeting at which it receives the final map or parcel map, or at the next regular meeting following the meeting at which it received the map. If the final map or parcel map, and any subdivision improvement agreement related thereto, is not in substantial compliance with the terms and conditions of this title, the Subdivision Map Act, the zoning code, or any approved tentative map or vesting tentative map (if a tentative map or vesting tentative map applies), the city council shall recommend corrections and instruct the chief planning official or city engineer to draft a new agreement or to revise the final map or parcel map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and final map or parcel map has been resubmitted. If the city council does not approve or disapprove the final map or parcel map within this time period or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved. The city clerk shall certify or state its approval thereon.

C. The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map or parcel map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map or parcel map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. However, in such case, prior to final map or parcel map approval, the subdivider shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city to complete such improvements pursuant to California Government Code Section 66462 and/or Chapter 16.30 CMC, upon acquisition of said title and interest by the city. Upon entering into such agreement, the city shall acquire the subject property interest in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66462.5. Failure of the subdivider to execute such an agreement shall be cause of the city council to refuse approval of the final map or parcel map.

D. If the final map or parcel map, and any subdivision improvement related thereto, are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the mayor or city manager to execute the subdivision improvement agreement on behalf of the city. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.050 Limitation on final map denial by the city council.

The city council shall not deny approval of a final map if the city has previously approved a tentative map or vesting tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the city council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, and the approved tentative map or vesting tentative map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.060 Filing with the office of the county recorder.

A. Upon approval of the final map or parcel map and any applicable subdivision improvement agreement and improvement security (if applicable) by the city council (or the chief planning official or city engineer pursuant to CMC 16.14.070), the city clerk shall execute the appropriate statement on the statement sheet, subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66464, transmit the map, or cause the chief planning official or city engineer to transmit the map to the county of Los Angeles recorder’s office for filing. The final tract map or final parcel map and any separate documents (if required) shall be filed concurrently.

B. If, for any cause of the subdivider, the final map or parcel map is not recorded by the Los Angeles County recorder’s office the map will be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66466(b). (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.070 Administrative approval of certain simple parcel maps.

A. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, city council approval shall not be required, and the chief planning official or city engineer is authorized to administratively approve certain parcel maps when the following findings can be made:

1. No dedications, easements, restrictions, or fee title is being granted to the city or any public agency as a function of the parcel map.

2. No agreements involving the city, CC&Rs or maintenance entities are required as part of the conditions of approval of the parcel map.

3. No mitigation measures are required as part of the conditions of approval of the parcel map.

4. Four or fewer parcels are created by the parcel map.

5. No public improvements are required as part of the subdivision.

6. It has been determined to the satisfaction of the chief planning official or city engineer that sufficient monumentation of the parcels exists so as not to justify an additional land survey.

7. The proposed division of land complies with requirements established by this chapter or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this chapter or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto.

B. The chief planning official or city engineer may decline to approve the parcel map, and instead deem it incomplete and return any or all portions of a submittal in accordance with CMC 16.14.020.

C. Except as they have been amended by this section, any parcel map approved by the chief planning official or city engineer in accordance with this section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.080 Information to be contained on final maps and parcel maps.

The provisions of this section shall govern the content and form of final maps and parcel maps.

A. Map Scale. The scale of the final map or parcel map shall be large enough to show details clearly, but in no case shall be less than one inch equals 100 feet. A sufficient number of sheets shall be used to accomplish this standard. All letter size shall be a minimum of eight-hundredths of an inch. A map scale of between one inch equals 40 feet and one inch equals 100 feet, as dictated by parcel size, may be approved by the chief planning official or city engineer. A graphical scale not less than three inches in length shall be shown in addition to the numerical scale.

B. Boundary Line. The exterior boundary lines of a subdivision shall be shown on the final map or parcel map as a black opaque ink line that is at least three times the width of any other line on the maps excluding the one-inch border line.

C. Title Sheets. The title sheet of a final map or parcel map shall consist of a title block as provided by subsection (E) of this section and all certificates, statements, acknowledgments, and nonreferences required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

D. Key Map. When the final map or parcel map consists of more than two sheets exclusive of the title sheet, a key map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet with lot lines showing the relation of the sheets shall be placed on the first map sheet. Every sheet comprising the map shall bear a sheet number and shall indicate the total number of sheets comprising the map. A north point shall be located on each sheet. A location map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet indicating the geographical location of the proposed subdivision and the tract access roads shall be placed on the first map sheet. With the approval of the chief planning official or city engineer, the scale of the key map may be modified.

E. Title Block. The title, showing the parcel map number or the tract number, the date of preparation, the map scale, the designation of the latest legal subdivision of which it is a part, together with a reference to the legal record of such subdivision and the words “in the city of Covina” shall appear on each sheet of the final map or parcel map.

F. Engineer’s Certificate. The certificate of the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and the final map or parcel map containing the information required by California Government Code Sections 66441 and 66449(a) shall appear on the title sheet of the final map or parcel map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.090 Map preparation, form and content.

A. Survey Data. Final maps and parcel maps shall show: the bearings and distances of the centerlines of all streets; radius, arc length and central angle of all curves, except that where arc segments of a larger curve are shown, only arc length and central angle need to be indicated on the map for the segments; the bearings of radial lines to each corner lot on a curve; the total width of each street, including the portion offered for dedication, the existing right-of-way, and the width on each side of the centerline; and the width of the right-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels, and any other easements of record. Sufficient data shall be shown to readily determine the bearing and length of each lot line of the final map or parcel map. Each lot or parcel shall be shown entirely on one sheet and to scale. Distances and bearings on the sidelines of any lot which are cut by an easement shall be so shown as to indicate clearly the actual length of the lot or parcel lines. No ditto marks shall be used. No lot in a subdivision shall be divided by the boundary line of a city, county, or special district. The area of all lots or parcels shall be identified to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre if lots or parcels are over one acre.

B. Street Location and Names. Location and names, without abbreviations, of all existing and proposed streets and alleys and adjoining streets shall be identified on maps.

C. Dimensions. Dimensions shall be in feet and hundredths of a foot.

D. Easements. The location on the final map or parcel map of all existing easements as shown in the subdivision guarantee (see CMC 16.14.100(D)) and all proposed easements which are to remain after approval and which are not within streets in the subdivision shall be shown by means of broken lines, together with the name of the owner, the use of the easement and the record reference, if any. A statement identifying any easements of record to be abandoned pursuant to California Government Code Section 66499.20-1/2 shall be placed on the title sheet.

E. Labeling. On lots or parcels, the widths of easements, the lengths or bearings of the lines thereof, and sufficient ties to locate the easement shall be clearly labeled and identified on the final map or parcel map. Regardless of lot size, a statement as to the easements of record shall appear on the title sheet.

F. Monuments. All monuments required by the Subdivision Map Act and pursuant to city standards shall be fully and clearly shown and identified as such on the parcel map or final map together with sufficient information so that an engineer or surveyor could readily locate each monument.

G. Established Lines. Whenever the city engineer has established a centerline of a street or alley, the data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the parcel map or the final map. All monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field notes or maps of public record relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated.

H. City Boundaries. City boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision shall be properly designated upon the parcel map or final map and shall be properly tied to the survey data.

I. Lot Numbers and Parcel Letters. The lots on a final map or a parcel map shall be numbered consecutively commencing with the number “one” with no omissions or duplications; provided, that where the subdivision is a continuation of or an addition to an existing subdivision, the lot number shall commence with the number immediately following the last or highest lot number of such existing subdivision and in all other respects shall conform with the preceding requirements. The last lot number shall be circled. Flood control channels to be offered for dedication are to be designated as “Parcel X.” All other areas, other than streets and alleys, which are to be offered in whole for dedication on the map or subsequent to recordation of the map and which do not meet zoning requirements as to size and shape, are to be designated as “parcels” and consecutively lettered. The purpose for each such parcel shall be so stated upon the final map or parcel map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.100 Documentation to be submitted with final maps and parcel maps.

When a final map or parcel map is submitted to the chief planning official or city engineer, it shall be accompanied by each of the documents in this section:

A. Improvement Plans. Improvement plans and specifications required by this title, together with such calculations and additional information which will assist the city engineer to properly check the improvement plans and specifications, shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map. The form and number of sets of such improvement plans and specifications submitted shall be as specified by the city engineer.

B. Improvement Agreements. All agreements and improvement securities required by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter shall be submitted prior to the final map or parcel map being approved by the city council.

C. Tax Collector’s Letter. A current letter signed by the Los Angeles County tax collector certifying that there are no liens against the subdivision, or any part thereof, for unpaid state, county, municipal, or local taxes, or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable, and certifying the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien, but which are not yet payable, shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map. A letter shall be deemed current if it is dated no more than 90 days prior to submission.

D. Subdivision Guarantee. A preliminary subdivision guarantee and a title report containing the legal description of the lands being subdivided, issued by a title company acceptable to the Los Angeles County recorder and authorized by the laws of the state to write the same, shall be submitted with any final map or parcel map to the city engineer for approval pursuant to this chapter. A subdivision guarantee issued by a title company acceptable to the county recorder and authorized by the laws of the state of California to write the same, showing the names of all persons having any record title interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein, shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map at the time of the recordation of the map. Said subdivision guarantee shall be for the benefit and protection of the city in an amount equal to the assessed value of and shall cover all lands to be dedicated for public use and shall not be less than $1,000.

E. Deeds. Whenever land, easements, or rights-of-way are to be dedicated for public use or whenever access to land, easements, or rights-of-way are to be submitted to public agencies, all such land, easements, or rights-of-way not dedicated or granted by the owner’s certificate on the final map or parcel map shall be submitted prior to the city’s approval of the final map or parcel map.

F. Off-Site Easements. Written evidence, acceptable to the city engineer, of rights-of-entry or permanent easements on or across private property not within the proposed subdivision, as may be necessary to allow performance of the work necessary to improve the subdivision, to allow for the maintenance of the subdivision improvements once completed, to allow for permanent public access to the proposed subdivision, and to allow for and to grant necessary slope rights, shall be submitted prior to the city’s approval of the final map or parcel map except as otherwise provided in California Government Code Section 66462.5.

G. Utility Statements. A statement from each operator of proposed subdivision utility systems and cable television companies stating that the easements shown on the final map or parcel map are satisfactory for use by that utility or company for service to the proposed subdivision and that arrangements have been made to convey such easements to the utility or company that is to use them shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map.

H. Storm Water Acceptance Easements. Written evidence of such deeds, easements, or rights-of-way within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary to provide for the acceptance of storm waters generated by the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map except as otherwise provided in California Government Code Section 66462.5.

I. Railroad Crossings. The certification of any affected railroad company that satisfactory arrangements providing for all required railroad crossings have been made shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map.

J. Dedication of Easements for Public Use. All titles, rights and easements specified in this chapter shall be offered for dedication to the city or other appropriate public agency not later than the time the final map or parcel map is filed for approval. The city clerk shall certify on the map the action taken by the city council.

K. Rights-of-Way. All rights-of-way for public streets and alleys, pedestrian ways, equestrian trails, and bicycle paths shown on the final map or parcel map and all rights-of-access to and from residential lots of the proposed subdivision abutting on controlled access roads shall be offered free and clear of any prior easements or rights-of-way for dedication to the city unless when otherwise determined to be infeasible by the city engineer. The rights-of-access to and from lots or parcels abutting on controlled access roads and streets or public rights-of-way shall be such that owners of such lots shall have no rights whatsoever in such roads, except in the general right of travel which belongs to the whole public.

L. Private Street Easements. Easements allowing applicable governmental agencies, which provide for the public safety, health, and welfare, access on all private streets, or lanes serving as access for more than two lots, shall be offered for dedication to the city not later than the time the final map or parcel map is filed for approval.

M. Other Easements. All other easements for public use required as a condition for approval of the tentative map for the proposed subdivision shall be offered for dedication to the city or other appropriate agency not later than the time the final map is filed for approval.

N. Consent Certificate. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map or parcel map, subject to the exceptions provided in California Government Code Section 66436, is required unless other record title interests made by separate instrument are recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map. When land is divided into four or fewer parcels, where dedication or offers of dedication are not required, the certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the subdivider only. However, where a subdivider does not have a record title ownership interest in the property to be divided, the subdivider shall provide the city engineer with satisfactory evidence that the persons with record title ownership have consented to the proposed subdivision, pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66445(e) and (f). (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.110 Soils and geologic reports.

A certificate signed by the engineer making the soils report and by the engineering geologist making the geologic report shall be required. The certificate shall indicate the date or dates of all geologic reports known by the geologist prepared specifically for the subdivision and indicate that the report, or reports, are on file for public inspection in the engineering department of the city. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.120 Bearings.

The basis of bearings referred to on the final map or parcel map shall be a line defined by two found monuments shown on the same record and shall be clearly delineated or identified on the map. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map or parcel map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.130 Orientation.

Each sheet of the final map or parcel map and lettering thereon shall be so oriented that the north point shall be directed toward the top of the sheet or toward the left of the sheet. The direction of the top of the sheet shall be determined by the orientation of the title block information required pursuant to CMC 16.14.080. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.140 Standard practices.

All surveys and all drafting in connection with the preparation of tentative maps, vesting tentative maps, final maps, parcel maps, and improvement plans to be submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the standard practices and principles of drafting and land surveying as acceptable to the chief planning official or city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.150 Limit of error.

A survey and traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision and all lots and blocks shall close within a limit of error of one foot in 10,000 feet of perimeter for field closures and one foot in 20,000 feet for calculated closures. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.160 Reliance upon prior recorded maps and data.

A final map or parcel map may be compiled from data shown on prior recorded final maps, recorded parcel maps, and records of survey only if such recorded maps were based upon field surveys and were recorded within the last 15 years. Data from a field survey made within the last 15 years and filed with the chief planning official or city engineer may also be used. The 15-year time limit and unresolved discrepancies may be waived by the chief planning official or city engineer if it is shown that record monumentation exists and that existing angles and distances on the ground measure within the required limits of record angles and distances. Final maps and parcel maps compiled from filed or recorded data shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. All other final maps and parcel maps shall be based on a field survey made in conformity with the California Land Surveyor’s Act and shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.170 Final map and parcel map dedications.

All dedications, or offers of dedication, to the city or to a governmental agency made pursuant to this chapter for final maps and parcel maps shall be made by certificate on the final map or parcel map unless made by separate instrument recorded prior to or simultaneously with the recording of the final map or parcel map. Such dedications or offers of dedication, whether by certificate or separate instrument, shall be signed by the same parties and in the same manner as set forth in California Government Code Section 66439 for dedication by a final map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.180 Acceptance or rejection of offers of dedication.

At the time the city council approves a final map or parcel map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The city clerk or designee shall certify on the map the action by the city council. Offers of dedication shall be rejected and terminated as provided by California Government Code Sections 66477.1 and 66477.2. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.14.190 Multiple final maps.

Filing multiple final maps shall be in accordance with California Government Code Section 66456.1. Each final map which constitutes a part of the approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall have a separate subdivision phase number. The subdivision improvement agreement to be executed by the subdivider shall include provisions for the construction of such improvements as may be required by the city engineer to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision by phases and each phase shall be functionally self-sufficient. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.16 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

16.16.010    Purpose and intent.

16.16.020    Applicability.

16.16.030    Filing of lot line adjustments.

16.16.040    Evaluation criteria.

16.16.050    Processing procedures.

16.16.060    Conditions of approval.

16.16.070    Appeals.


16.16.010 Purpose and intent.

This chapter establishes procedures for adjusting the boundary lines between four or fewer existing adjoining lots. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.16.020 Applicability.

Lot line adjustment may be utilized to reconfigure four or fewer adjoining lots into sizes or shapes appropriate for desired uses. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.16.030 Filing of lot line adjustments.

Requests for lot line adjustment shall be filed with the engineering department on an approved city application form. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.16.040 Evaluation criteria.

The following conditions shall be met:

A. The adjustment is between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels;

B. The adjustment does not create a greater number of parcels than originally existed;

C. The adjustment does not impair any existing access or create a need for access to any adjacent lots or parcels;

D. The adjustment does not impair any existing easements or create a need for any new easements serving adjacent lots or parcels;

E. The resulting lot(s) conform to the general plan, any applicable specific plan, the zoning code and city building codes;

F. The adjustment does not cause existing uses of the property to be out of compliance with any provisions of the Covina Municipal Code;

G. All lots involved are legal lots. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.16.050 Processing procedures.

A. Lot line adjustment applications filed with the city engineer shall include the following:

1. A completed application;

2. Preliminary title report;

3. Current deeds and new grant deeds, which reflect the approved lot line adjustment;

4. New legal descriptions and corresponding revised deeds; a plot plan or record of survey map showing the location of the old and new lot lines;

5. Any other information determined to be necessary for review of the proposed work; and

6. Required fee(s).

B. The city engineer shall determine the completeness of the application within 30 days of its submittal. Once the application has been determined complete, the city engineer shall distribute the lot line adjustment request for review and comment to the planning department and other appropriate departments or agencies.

C. Within 30 days following a determination that the application is complete, the city engineer shall either approve the lot line adjustment, approve with conditions, or deny the lot line adjustment.

D. Upon approval or conditional approval of the lot line adjustment and receipt by the city of recorded deeds reflecting the new configuration, the city engineer shall issue either a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance as required, indicating the city’s acceptance and approval of the request. The city shall also record or cause to be recorded new grant deeds reflecting such lot line adjustment and provide copies to the applicant. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.16.060 Conditions of approval.

The city engineer may not impose conditions or exactions on the approval of a lot line adjustment except:

A. To conform with the zoning code and any applicable building codes;

B. To require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to the approval of the lot line adjustment; and

C. To facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.16.070 Appeals.

All appeals shall be processed as provided in CMC 16.02.120. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.18 MERGER OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS

Sections:

16.18.010    Purpose.

16.18.020    When parcels may be merged.

16.18.030    Reserved.

16.18.040    Property owner requested merger.

16.18.050    Effective date of merger.

16.18.060    Appeal of merger.


16.18.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for the merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.18.020 When parcels may be merged.

The owner of any contiguous parcel may initiate the merger of any parcel. The chief planning official, city engineer, planning commission or city council may require the owner of any contiguous parcel to request the merger of any or all contiguous parcels within the city in conjunction with the giving of any variance, conditional use permit, or any other development approval under this title or the zoning code. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.18.030 Reserved.


16.18.040 Property owner requested merger.

A. Requirements. A voluntary merger of lots may be requested by a property owner/applicant. A lot may be merged with one or more contiguous lots held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous lots held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum lot size or dimension specified by the applicable land use district or if at least one such lot meets one or more of the requirements specified in CMC 16.18.030(A)(3).

B. When the owner or owners of record of any contiguous parcel requests the merger of said contiguous parcels, application shall be made on the forms and in the manner specified by the city engineer.

C. Within 30 days following receipt of a completed application to merge parcels, the city engineer shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged. To merge contiguous parcels the city engineer shall make the following findings:

1. The merged parcel complies with the appropriate provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and all applicable city requirements for the merging of contiguous parcels;

2. The merged parcel does not adversely affect the purpose and intent of the city’s general plan or the public health, safety and welfare.

D. If the city engineer determines that the subject parcels shall be merged, he or she shall cause the notice of determination of voluntary merger to be recorded with the county recorder, specifying the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the affected property, and particularly describing the real property merged. The city engineer shall also send the written notice of determination of voluntary merger to the owner(s) of record of the affected property at least 10 days prior to recordation of the said notice.

E. If the city engineer determines that the subject parcels should not be merged, the city engineer shall send notice by standard mail to the owner(s) not later than 10 days following his or her determination, explaining the reasons why the subject parcels should not be merged and outlining the city engineer’s findings. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.18.050 Effective date of merger.

The merger of any contiguous parcels shall become effective upon recordation of the notice of determination of voluntary merger with the county recorder. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.18.060 Appeal of merger.

The appeal of the city engineer’s determination either to merge or deny merger of contiguous parcels shall be made in accordance with the appeal provisions contained in CMC 16.02.120. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.20 REVERSION TO ACREAGE

Sections:

16.20.010    Reversion requirements.

16.20.020    Initiation of proceedings by owners.

16.20.030    Initiation of proceedings by the planning commission.

16.20.040    Data for reversion to acreage.

16.20.050    Proceedings before the planning commission.

16.20.060    Required findings.

16.20.070    Filing of parcel maps.

16.20.080    Return of fees and deposits, and release of securities.

16.20.090    Merger and resubdividing without reversion.


16.20.010 Reversion requirements.

Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. This chapter shall apply to final maps and parcel maps. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.020 Initiation of proceedings by owners.

Initiation shall be by petition pursuant to California Government Code Section 66499.12. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the chief planning official or city engineer and shall contain the information required by the Subdivision Map Act and such other information as specified by the chief planning official or city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.030 Initiation of proceedings by the planning commission.

The planning commission, at the request of all of the owners of record of the real property within the subdivision or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage. The resolution of the planning commission shall direct the chief planning official or city engineer to obtain all information necessary to accomplish the proposed reversion. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.040 Data for reversion to acreage.

The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision;

B. Evidence sufficient to enable the planning commission to make all of the determinations and findings required by California Government Code Section 66499.16;

C. A final map or parcel map in the form prescribed in this chapter which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which will be required as a condition of reversion; and

D. Such other pertinent information as may be required by this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.050 Proceedings before the planning commission.

A noticed public hearing on the proposed reversion to acreage shall be held before the planning commission pursuant to CMC 16.02.100. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.060 Required findings.

Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage only if the planning commission can make findings in accordance with California Government Code Section 66499.16. The planning commission shall impose those conditions imposed by California Government Code Section 66499.17 for any reversion to acreage. A tax bond shall not be required as a condition of approval for reversion to acreage. After approval of the reversion to acreage, the documentation evidencing said reversion shall be delivered to the Los Angeles County recorder. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.070 Filing of parcel maps.

A. Any parcel map submitted for the purpose of reverting to acreage shall be accompanied by:

1. Evidence of title;

2. Non-use or lack of necessity of any public streets or public easements which are to be vacated or abandoned; and

3. A parcel map in a form acceptable to the chief planning official or city engineer, which delineates any streets or easements, which are to remain in effect after the reversion. After approval of the reversion by the planning commission, the parcel map shall be delivered to the county recorder.

B. The filing of the parcel map shall constitute legal reversion to acreage of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all public streets and public easements not shown on the parcel map; provided, that a written notation of each abandonment is listed by reference to the recording data creating said public streets or public easements, and certified to on the parcel map by the city clerk, or his or her designee. The filing of the map shall also constitute a merger of the separate parcels into one parcel for the purposes of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and shall thereby be shown as such on the assessment roll subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66445.

C. Except as provided in California Government Code Section 66445(f) on any parcel map used for reverting acreage, a certificate shall appear signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land being reverted consenting to the preparation and filing of the parcel map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.080 Return of fees and deposits, and release of securities.

Return of fees and deposits, and release of securities shall be in accordance with California Government Code Section 66499.19. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.20.090 Merger and resubdividing without reversion.

Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage through complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by this title and the Subdivision Map Act. The filing of the final map or parcel map shall constitute legal merging of the parcels into one parcel, and the resubdivision of such parcel, and the real property shall thereafter be shown with the new lot or parcel boundaries on the assessment roll. Any unused fees or deposits previously made pursuant to this division pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any of the requirements for the same purposes, which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. Any public streets or public easements to be left in effect after the resubdivision shall be adequately delineated on the map. After approval of the merger and resubdivision the map shall be delivered to the Los Angeles County recorder. The filing of the map shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map; provided, that a written notation of each abandonment is listed by reference to the recording data creating said public streets or public easements, and certified to on the parcel map by the city clerk, or his or her designee. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.22 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE

Sections:

16.22.010    Purpose.

16.22.020    Applicability.

16.22.030    Filing procedures.

16.22.040    Review and processing procedures.


16.22.010 Purpose.

Certificates of compliance provide a means for conferring legal status to parcels of land which were not created by legal means and shall be issued in accordance with California Government Code Section 66499.35 and this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.22.020 Applicability.

This chapter applies to parcels of land for which there is no final map, parcel map, official map, or approved certificate of exception which establishes legal status for the parcels. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.22.030 Filing procedures.

Requests for certificates of compliance shall be filed with the engineering department on an approved city application form and shall be accompanied by all required application materials. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.22.040 Review and processing procedures.

The city shall review the application and shall issue either a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. The determination shall be based on the following criteria:

A. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any parcel created prior to March 4, 1972, which meets the following criteria:

1. The parcels resulted from a division of the land in which fewer than five parcels were created; and

2. At the time of creation of parcels, there was no local ordinance regulating the division of land.

B. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any real property, which has been approved for development pursuant to California Government Code Section 66499.34.

C. A conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued for any parcel which does not, or at the time of creation did not, comply with the provisions of state law or local ordinances regulating the division of land. A conditional certificate of compliance may include the following conditions:

1. If the subdivider was not the owner of record at the time of the initial land division, the conditional certificate of compliance may impose conditions which would have been applicable to a division of land on the date the subdivider acquired the property.

2. If the subdivider was the owner of record at the time of the initial land division and currently owns one or more of the parcels involved in the land division, the conditional certificate of compliance may impose conditions which would be applicable to a current division of land.

D. The city shall file the completed conditional certificate of compliance with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office.

E. A certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall contain all information required in California Government Code Section 66499.35. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.24 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAP

Sections:

16.24.010    Amendments permissible with certificate of correction or amending map.

16.24.020    Submittal and approval of amending map by chief planning official or city engineer.

16.24.030    Certificate of correction.

16.24.040    Form and content of amendment.

16.24.050    Submittal and approval of certificate of correction by chief planning official or city engineer.

16.24.060    Filing with the county recorder.


16.24.010 Amendments permissible with certificate of correction or amending map.

Amendments permissible with a certificate of correction or an amending map shall be in conformance with California Government Code Section 66469 and any other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.24.020 Submittal and approval of amending map by chief planning official or city engineer.

The amending map, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the chief planning official or city engineer for review and approval. The chief planning official or city engineer shall examine the amending map and, if the only changes made are those set forth in this chapter, shall certify this fact on the amending map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.24.030 Certificate of correction.

After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction for any of the following purposes:

A. To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the map;

B. To show any course or distance that was omitted from the map;

C. To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

D. To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, and retirement from practice or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;

E. To show the proper location or character of any monument that has been changed in location or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;

F. To correct any additional information filed or recorded pursuant to California Government Code Section 66434.2 and CMC 16.14.100;

G. To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final tract map or final parcel map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.24.040 Form and content of amendment.

The certificate of correction shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 16.08 (Tentative Maps), 16.10 (Vesting Tentative Maps) or 16.14 CMC (Final Maps and Parcel Maps), whichever is applicable. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.24.050 Submittal and approval of certificate of correction by chief planning official or city engineer.

The certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the chief planning official or city engineer for review and approval. The chief planning official or city engineer shall examine the certificate of correction, and if the only changes made are those set forth in this chapter, this fact shall be certified as approved by the chief planning official or city engineer on the certificate of correction. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.24.060 Filing with the county recorder.

The certified certificate of correction shall be filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.26 SUBDIVISION DESIGN

Sections:

16.26.010    Design and improvement requirements.

16.26.020    Lot requirements.

16.26.030    Street rights-of-way.

16.26.040    Utility easements.

16.26.050    Drainage easements.

16.26.060    Energy conservation.


16.26.010 Design and improvement requirements.

All tentative maps, final maps and parcel maps must conform to the general plan, any applicable specific plans, the zoning code, and to all applicable planning, zoning, design, improvement and environmental requirements. Unless otherwise specified, design requirements and improvement requirements may be modified or waived only by the city council. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.26.020 Lot requirements.

All residential, commercial and industrial lots shall have direct access to public streets except where private street, common driveway or other access easement rights are specifically approved by the chief planning official and city engineer and made a matter of record in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office. Access easement(s) shall be reserved on the map in perpetuity for the benefit of the affected parcel(s). (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.26.030 Street rights-of-way.

The street layout of a proposed subdivision shall be consistent with all street right-of-way designations shown on the circulation element of the general plan or applicable specific plans at the time the tentative map is approved. For alignments not shown on the circulation element of the general plan, the chief planning official and city engineer shall approve alignments which are consistent with the general plan or applicable specific plan. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.26.040 Utility easements.

Whenever overhead utilities are allowed in a proposed subdivision by this title, utility easements of sufficient width shall be located along the rear or side lot lines. Whenever possible, such easements shall extend an equal distance into each of the two abutting lots. This requirement may be modified or recommended for modification by the planning commission if warranted by unusual circumstances in a particular proposed subdivision. To the extent practicable, underground utility easements, whenever necessary, shall be adjoining and parallel to lot lines. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.26.050 Drainage easements.

The design of a proposed subdivision shall provide for the proper drainage of the proposed subdivision and all lots and improvements therein, based on the runoff that can be anticipated from ultimate development of the watershed area in which the subdivision is located. Storm water detention measures shall be provided when required by the city engineer to reduce any adverse effects of increased runoff from development on downstream properties. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.26.060 Energy conservation.

The design of a subdivision shall be in conformance with California Government Code Section 66473.1, with respect to passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.28 PARK DEDICATION AND IN-LIEU FEE REGULATIONS

Sections:

16.28.010    Park and recreation dedication and fees.

16.28.020    Definitions.

16.28.030    Payment of impact fees or park dedication required.

16.28.040    Standards for determining dedication – Maximum requirement.

16.28.050    Standards for determining impact fees – Maximum fee.

16.28.060    Determination of dedication, fees or combination.

16.28.070    Subdivider credits.

16.28.080    Disposition of land or fees.

16.28.090    Time of payment of impact fees or land dedication.

16.28.100    Schedule of performance.


16.28.010 Park and recreation dedication and fees.

A. Authority and Purpose. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by California Government Code Section 66477 and shall be interpreted to be consistent with the provisions thereof. The park and recreational facilities for which payment of impact fees and/or dedication of land is required by the terms of this section shall be provided in accordance with the standards, specifications and requirements of the general plan of the city, any specific plan adopted thereto, and any other adopted resolution, policy or standard of the city.

B. Effect on Other Laws. With respect to the requirement of payment of impact fees or dedication of land for park and recreational purposes by any residential subdivider pursuant to this code, this chapter shall supersede all other ordinances or regulations of the city inconsistent herewith. The enactment of this chapter shall not supersede any other provisions or authority adopted by ordinance of the city council unless expressly stated in this chapter.

C. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to subdivisions containing less than five parcels; provided, however, that a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map, that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, an impact fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. The provisions of this chapter also shall not apply to commercial, industrial or other nonresidential subdivisions; nor to condominium or stock cooperative projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old and when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall govern the meaning of words in this chapter, unless from the context in which the word is used a different meaning is clearly intended:

A. “Fair market value” means the value of land set forth in the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plans which is earmarked to be acquired by the city upon which the city intends to locate park and recreational facilities to service residents of the subdivision. Fair market value shall be based upon an appraisal by a qualified appraiser selected by the city, which appraisal shall be updated from time to time by the city. The fair market value shall be determined as of the time the final map or parcel map is filed. With regard to any park and recreation improvements or equipment provided by the subdivider, the fair market value shall be the actual cost to acquire, construct or install the improvement or equipment.

B. “Park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land which is or are owned, operated and maintained by a public agency or private association and which provides recreational land and facilities for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the subdivision and of persons residing, working or visiting in the city. Parks may be classified as community parks, including community centers, athletic facilities, large multi-user swimming pools, picnic areas, cultural centers or similar facilities; public neighborhood parks, including playground equipment, sports fields, and picnic areas; and private neighborhood parks, generally intended to serve only the immediate subdivision/development or specified planned community in which they are located. Parks may also include, or be limited to, open space areas suitable for active or passive uses.

C. “Park and recreational facilities” means any public improvements deemed necessary by the city to develop, improve or rehabilitate land and facilities for park and recreational purposes. Such improvements may include but not be limited to grading; landscaped areas for active and passive recreational use, open space and sports fields; irrigation and drainage systems; lawn, shrubs and trees; facilities for recreational community gardening; walkways; bicycle facilities and park lighting; playground or other recreational equipment; picnic facilities; community center or other buildings; swimming pools; volleyball, basketball, tennis, racquetball and other courts; vehicle driveways and parking areas and any other facilities which may hereafter be authorized by state law or approved by the city.

D. “Private open space” means that privately owned land and facilities for park and recreation purposes provided within a subdivision and perpetually maintained and operated by the future residents or owner of the subdivision, which land and facilities can be credited against the dedication and payment requirements established in this chapter, when the following criteria are met:

1. That the private parkland meets a minimum size requirement of one-third acre;

2. That the proposed private parkland be reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location of the private parkland;

3. That the following areas or subdivision design features shall not be eligible for private park credit: yards, court areas, setbacks, subdivision edges, landscaped subdivision entries, greenbelts, meandering streams and circulation improvements such as bicycle, hiking and equestrian trails;

4. That the location of the land provides convenient access to housing and schools;

5. That the perpetual private ownership and maintenance of the land is adequately provided for by a recorded written agreement; and

6. That the use of the private parkland is perpetually restricted for park and recreational purposes which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city council and in no event without providing equivalent park and recreational space elsewhere in the subdivision. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.030 Payment of impact fees or park dedication required.

As a condition of approval of a tentative or final tract map or parcel map for a residential subdivision, or for a building permit within a subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay an impact fee, offer for dedication parkland in lieu thereof or both, at the sole and exclusive option of the city, in the amount provided in this chapter, for park and recreational purposes, unless the subdivider is exempted from this requirement by the express provisions of this chapter. The payment of an impact fee and/or offering for dedication of land shall be at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.040 Standards for determining dedication – Maximum requirement.

A. General. If the park dedication is required under CMC 16.28.030, the park area required shall be determined in accordance with the standards provided in this section.

B. Standard of Park Area to Population. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city require that three acres of property for every 1,000 persons residing within the city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes, and that such park area is necessary to provide for the needs of the current and future persons residing and working in the city. Said ratio of 0.003 is hereafter referred to as the “park area standard.”

C. Dwelling Unit Occupancy Factor. Based upon the latest available census data, the dwelling unit occupancy factors shall be as follows: 3.02 for owner-occupied dwelling units and 2.72 for rental dwelling units. These figures may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city council.

D. Computation of Maximum Area of Park to Be Dedicated. The maximum amount of parkland required for any subdivision shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units in the subdivision for each housing type by the occupancy factor for each housing type by 0.003 (i.e., the ratio of the maximum park area standard of three acres per 1,000 population). This is represented as follows:

(No. of dwelling units) x (occupancy factor) x (.003) = Area of park to be dedicated

The city council, by resolution, may require a dedication of parkland less than the maximum amount set forth above if the city finds that a smaller dedication will serve the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.

E. Qualification of Land Being Dedicated. In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in this section, any land offered for park dedication shall meet the criteria specified in CMC 16.28.060(D). (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.050 Standards for determining impact fees – Maximum fee.

When required by CMC 16.28.060, the subdivider shall pay to city a fee in lieu of making such offer of dedication. The fee shall be computed by multiplying the area of park to be dedicated under CMC 16.28.040(D) by the fair market value of the land to be developed by the city for park and recreational facilities. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.060 Determination of dedication, fees or combination.

A. Impact Fee Generally Required. Where required by the city or where no park or recreational facility located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision is designated in the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or other adopted resolution, policy or standard of the city, the subdivider shall pay an impact fee computed in accordance with CMC 16.28.050 to be used for park and recreational purposes to serve the residents of the area being subdivided and other members of the public.

B. Dedication in Lieu of Impact Fee. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or other adopted resolution, policy or standard of the city, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision and other members of the public, the city may require the subdivider to dedicate land for a park and provide recreational facilities thereon in lieu of payment of an impact fee as provided in this chapter if the city determines that dedication is desirable as provided in this section. If the fair market value of the park and recreational facilities provided is less than that required hereunder, the difference shall be paid by the subdivider as an impact fee.

C. Combination of Land and Fees. The city may accept a combination of land, recreational facilities and fees, with the respective amounts to be determined in the sole discretion of the city, so long as the aggregate fair market value of the land and recreational facilities plus in-lieu fees does not exceed the limits established in this chapter.

D. Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city requires payment of an impact fee, or requires land dedication in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall, in the city’s sole discretion, be determined by consideration of the following:

1. The provisions of the city’s general plan, any specific plan adopted thereto, and any other adopted resolution, policy or regulation of the city;

2. Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

3. Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

4. The feasibility of dedication;

5. Access and location of other park sites to subdivision; and

6. Need of other accessible park sites for development, improvement and rehabilitation.

The determination of the city as to whether an impact fee shall be charged or land shall be dedicated, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

E. Impact Fees for Subdivisions of 50 Parcels or Less. If the subdivision contains 50 parcels or less, only the payment of impact fees may be required, except that condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment projects may be required to dedicate land if they have more than 50 dwelling units. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.070 Subdivider credits.

A. Public Parks. The subdivider shall receive a credit against the impact fee payment or park dedication requirement for the fair market value of any land dedicated and for the value of any park and recreation improvements provided by subdivider in conjunction with any public park. The value of such improvements shall be determined by the city based upon CMC 16.28.050.

B. Private Park. In conjunction with any planned development, real estate development, stock cooperative, community apartment or condominium, as defined by state law, if the subdivider provides private open space as defined in CMC 16.28.020(D), then the subdivider may receive a credit against the park dedication requirement of this chapter in an amount to be determined by the city council or its designee, but such credit shall not exceed one-third of such impact fee payment or park dedication requirement. The actual amount of such credit shall be determined by the city council or its designee based upon the comparability of the private open space to public park area and the adequacy of such private open space to serve the needs of the subdivision for active recreational uses.

C. Application of Credits. The credits provided in this section shall be applied to reduce the subdivider’s obligation to dedicate and/or pay an impact fee as required under this chapter, but only to the extent of such credit. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.080 Disposition of land or fees.

The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the impact fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. In accordance with California Government Code Section 66477, it is expressly acknowledged that the land to be dedicated or impact fees to be paid may be for both neighborhood and community parks. In addition, such impact fees may be used to improve or rehabilitate existing parks. Impact fees paid by a subdivider pursuant to this chapter may be spent to develop, improve and rehabilitate community and neighborhood parks even though such parks may be used by nonresidents of the subdivision, so long as the benefit of the park and recreational facilities to residents of the subdivision is reasonable in relation to the location of the parks and amount of the impact fees. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.090 Time of payment of impact fees or land dedication.

All park impact fees shall be paid directly to the finance department at the time of issuance of a building permit for each lot within the subdivision. In the event of a dedication requirement, the subdivider shall make an irrevocable offer of dedication to the city at the time of recordation of the final map. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.28.100 Schedule of performance.

A. City’s Schedule. The city’s community development director shall prepare and maintain a schedule specifying how, when and where land or impact fees, or both, which were dedicated to the city to develop park or recreational facilities will be used. Any impact fees collected under this chapter shall be committed within five years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If any fees are not so committed, they shall be distributed to subdivision owners in accordance with law.

B. Subdivider’s Schedule. In the event that subdivider improves or develops parks for public or private ownership, he shall prepare a schedule specifying when, how and where he will develop the park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. This schedule will be required as a condition of subdivision map approval. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.30 IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

16.30.010    General.

16.30.020    Underground utilities installation.

16.30.030    Off-site improvements – Owner’s lack of title.

16.30.040    Deferred improvements.

16.30.050    Design of improvement plans and standards.

16.30.060    Subdivision improvement agreements and improvement security.

16.30.070    Completion of improvements.

16.30.080    Dedications.


16.30.010 General.

A. The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, in accordance with the standards approved by city council resolution and applicable city standards as provided by this chapter. Except as provided herein, the subdivider shall be required to install all improvements that are required as conditions of approval to the map, and to install all improvements that are required by city ordinance or resolution.

B. The applicant shall pay all impact fees, pursuant to the applicable impact fee ordinances, in the amount that is in effect at the time such fees are due. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.020 Underground utilities installation.

A. The city council finds and determines that in order to (1) decrease fire hazards, (2) to reduce health hazards to persons working on booms, cranes, trees, and other elevated structures and equipment, and (3) to generally increase public safety, it is in the public interest to require that all facilities and wires for supplying electrical, telephone, telegraph and cable television service which will be constructed in the city upon property which is undeveloped and which will be subdivided shall be placed underground.

B. All facilities and wires for the supply and distribution of electrical energy, telephone, telegraph and cable television service which will be constructed in the city upon property which is undeveloped and which will be subdivided pursuant to this title shall be placed underground unless special permission to construct such facilities or wires above the ground is granted as hereinafter provided. Any subdivider subdividing land pursuant to this title shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved to provide for the underground installation of these facilities.

C. For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground.

D. Where the enforcement of subsections (A) and (B) of this section would result in undue hardship, a subdivider may apply for an exception from subsections (A) and (B) of this section:

1. Written application shall be filed with the planning department.

2. The application shall include all information necessary to properly apprise the planning commission of the circumstances existing which require such an exception. A copy of this application shall be forwarded to the city engineer for his or her report and recommendation.

3. Within 30 days after the filing of a complete application, the planning commission shall conduct a hearing on the application. Notice of hearing shall be issued pursuant to CMC 16.02.100. Upon completion of the hearing, the planning commission may grant or deny the application.

4. The action of the planning commission may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in CMC 16.02.120(B).

E. This section shall not apply to:

1. Utility facilities and wires located on already developed property; or

2. Utility lines which do not provide service to the area being subdivided. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.030 Off-site improvements – Owner’s lack of title.

A. If the subdivider of a tentative map or vesting tentative map is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, then the subdivider shall make all good faith efforts to acquire all off-site interests in property required for the project, unless the chief planning official or city engineer finds, based on substantial evidence, that the subdivision design incorporates an alternative that would comply with city standards in the absence of the off-site improvement.

B. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the subdivider shall provide written evidence that a good faith effort has been made to acquire the title or interest in the land to construct required off-site improvements, in accordance with city standards. If the subdivider, after a good faith effort, is unable to acquire the property, the city shall, within 120 days of filing the final tract map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land, in substantial compliance with the procedures set forth in California Government Code Section 7260, or the city shall waive the condition for the off-site construction. Prior to approval of the final tract map, the city shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time that title or an interest in the land is acquired. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs, prior to initiation of acquisition proceedings by the city. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.040 Deferred improvements.

A. Any request for deferred construction of on-site and off-site improvements for tentative maps, final maps, or parcel maps may be approved by the city, in its sole discretion, at the time of approval of the tentative map, final map or parcel map.

B. The city attorney shall approve the form and content of all deferred improvement agreements prior to the city accepting the document. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.050 Design of improvement plans and standards.

A. Standards for design and construction of subdivision improvements shall be in accordance with the applicable city standards, the conditions of approval of the tentative map, and the requirements established by the city engineer.

B. Public improvement plans shall be acted on by the city engineer within the time frame set forth in California Government Code Section 66456.2.

C. Public improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of a registered civil engineer and shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer, if he or she can make the following findings:

1. The plans are signed and stamped by a registered civil engineer.

2. The plan designs are consistent with the tentative map, the conditions of approval and applicable city standards, with the exception of minor errors or incompleteness, which do not materially affect the design or the plan constructability thereof.

3. All reports and studies required to evaluate the facility design and the completeness of the plans have been prepared by a registered civil engineer and have been reviewed and approved by the city engineer.

4. All conditions of approval relative to public improvement requirements have been addressed to the satisfaction of any applicable public agency reviewing authority and the city engineer.

5. All title and interest has been obtained by the subdivider for off-site property interest.

6. All cost estimates have been approved by the city engineer, and payment of all applicable fees has been received.

7. Approval of designs and plans have been obtained from all other applicable public agencies, as required by the city engineer.

D. All improvement plans shall be prepared in accordance with the city standards in effect at the time the tentative map or parcel map is deemed complete. However, the city engineer may modify those city standards under the following conditions:

1. When necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare;

2. When needed to comply with state or federal laws;

3. When, in the opinion of the city engineer, with the consent of the subdivider, a new standard or requirement is needed which will not materially affect the intent of the subdivider or the conditions of approval. This shall include the adoption of other public agency standards for use by the city engineer.

E. City engineer approval of any public improvement plans, or any grading plans that are required as part of the approval of the final map or parcel map, shall expire upon the expiration of any applicable subdivision improvement agreement, or two years from the date the city engineer approves the plans, whichever is later. Upon expiration of those plans, new approvals from the city engineer, together with the payment of new plan review fees, shall be required for any portions of the subdivision for which grading and improvements have not been completed. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.060 Subdivision improvement agreements and improvement security.

Pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, if any public improvement required as part of the approval of the subdivision will not be completed and accepted prior to approval of the final map or parcel map, then prior to a determination of a complete and timely filing of the final map or parcel map by the chief planning official or city engineer, the subdivider, at his or her expense, shall be required to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement with the city to complete said public improvements. Performance of said agreement shall be guaranteed by the security specified in this section and Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act.

A. The form and content of subdivision improvement agreements shall be approved by the city attorney. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following minimum terms and conditions:

1. Construction of all improvements as set forth in the approved plans and specifications.

2. The maximum period within which all improvements shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

3. Provisions for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer and payment of fees by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection and all other incidental costs incurred by the city in enforcing the agreement.

4. A provision that if the subdivider fails to complete the work within the specified period of time, or any extended period of time that may have lawfully been granted to the subdivider, the city may, at its option, complete the required improvement work and the subdivider and his surety shall be firmly bound, under a continuing obligation, for payment of the full cost and expense incurred or expended by the city in completing such work, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid.

5. A provision that, in the event of litigation occasioned by a default of the owner or subdivider, his successors or assignees, the owner or subdivider, his successors or assignees, will pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, and that the same may be recovered as part of a lien against the real property.

6. Additional terms or provisions, as may be necessary, pertaining to the forfeiture, collection, and disposition of improvement security upon the failure of the contracting party to comply with the terms and provisions thereof or with the terms and provisions of this code.

B. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be valid for a period specified in the agreement, but not to exceed two years from the effective date of the agreement. The city engineer may, in his discretion after consultation with the city attorney, extend the term of the subdivision improvement agreement. The agreement shall not only bind the present subdivider, but also his heirs, successors, executors, administrators, and assignees, so that the obligation runs with the real property. All agreements shall be executed by all parties executing the final map or parcel map.

C. Improvement security shall be required to be posted as a guarantee of the performance of any act, improvement, or obligation required as a condition of approval of any final map, parcel map, lot line adjustment, or lot merger. Unless otherwise provided herein, all such improvement security shall be provided in one of the following forms, subject to the approval of the city engineer and city attorney:

1. A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties substantially in the form prescribed in the Subdivision Map Act and subject to the approval and acceptance of the city attorney and city engineer.

2. A deposit with the city of either immediately negotiable bonds or a letter of credit.

3. Any other form of security, including a lien or other security interests in real property, which the city engineer and the city attorney may, in their discretion, allow provided they determine that it is equivalent to the foregoing forms of security in terms of security and liquidity.

Any written contract or document creating a security interest established pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. From the time of recordation, a lien shall attach to the real property described therein, which lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien in the amounts specified.

D. The subdivider shall provide as security to the city:

1. For performance and guarantee: an amount determined by the city engineer equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement(s) to be performed, including costs and fees incurred by the city. The estimated cost of improvement(s) shall include a 10 percent contingency and a 10 percent increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction.

2. For payment: an amount determined by the city engineer equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement(s) to be performed, excluding grading and monumentation.

E. Improvement security shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work by the city engineer; provided, however, such release shall not apply to the amount of security deemed necessary by the city engineer for the guarantee and warranty period, nor to costs and reasonable expense fees, including reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in enforcing any subdivision improvement agreement. The subdivider shall not be entitled to any reduction in security, except in accordance with subsection (F) of this section, until all improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

F. A partial release of performance security may be requested by the subdivider by filing an application with the engineering department. The application shall state the amount of work completed/accepted. The portion of the performance security, in conjunction with acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses, may be released upon the approval of the city engineer. The following conditions shall be applied to applications submitted requesting partial release of security:

1. No release shall be considered until at least 50 percent of the improvements are completed and accepted by the city.

2. No release shall be for an amount less than 10 percent of the original total improvement security given for performance and guarantee.

3. The substitute security (or the remaining security) shall not be less than 150 percent of the revised estimated construction cost for the remaining required improvements.

4. The city engineer, or his or her designated representative, is responsible for reviewing all applications and shall determine the amount of substitute security required in accordance with subsection (F)(3) of this section.

5. The original performance security may be released only upon receiving the proper substitute security, which has been determined acceptable by the city attorney and the city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.070 Completion of improvements.

A. Public improvements required as a condition of approval shall be completed in accordance with this code, unless they are deferred pursuant to CMC 16.30.040 or 16.30.060. The city engineer shall review and approve any improvement agreement, conduct an inspection, and approve any constructed public improvement necessary to satisfy this provision.

B. Once begun, public improvements for a final map or a parcel map when required, shall be constructed to completion without interruption. The subdivider shall exercise due diligence to ensure that this provision is met to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Construction and inspection of public improvements shall be governed by city standards and the requirements of any applicable permit.

C. Notwithstanding any applicable agreement, the ownership of and responsibility for the construction and maintenance of any public improvement is held by the subdivider and shall remain so until such time as the city council accepts the completed public improvement(s).

D. Upon city council acceptance of a public improvement, the city engineer shall provide a notice of completion for that public improvement, and it shall authorize the city engineer to release applicable securities for that public improvement. This action shall serve to transfer ownership and maintenance responsibility of the public improvement from the subdivider to the city, and to provide full acceptance of the applicable dedication or easement, which acceptance had been contingent upon completion and acceptance of public improvements within said dedication or easement, subject to the terms of any applicable agreement. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.30.080 Dedications.

A. Dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu of dedication of parkland shall be pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.28 CMC.

B. Right-of-way dedications, irrevocable offers of dedication, and grants of easements required upon a final map or parcel map shall either be accepted, consented for recordation, accepted subject to improvement, or rejected at the time the final map or parcel map is approved by the city council. Acceptance of the dedication or easement shall serve to transfer the appropriate interest to the city, subject to the terms of the offer and the acceptance certificate. Rejection of the dedication or easement shall reserve the city’s ability to accept all or part of the dedication or easement in accordance with state law. The city council shall determine whether the dedication, irrevocable offer of dedication, or easement shall be accepted, accepted subject to improvement or rejected pursuant to city standards.

C. Fee title shall be granted by the subdivider when in the opinion of the city council, in consultation with the city engineer, it is necessary to carry out policies and requirements of the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and any city ordinance, resolution or standard.

D. The types of dedications, easements or grants of fee title that a subdivision may be subject to shall include, but shall not be limited to: streets, alleys, access rights, drainage, public utility, landscape, slope and sewer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.32 MONUMENTS

Sections:

16.32.010    Final map and parcel map monuments.

16.32.020    Monument construction.

16.32.030    Monument tie sheet.

16.32.040    Monument bond.


16.32.010 Final map and parcel map monuments.

At the time of making the survey of the final map or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in the Subdivision Map Act so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. The exterior boundary of the land being subdivided shall be adequately monumented or referenced before the map is recorded. The interior monuments shall be set prior to city council acceptance of the improvements or within one year following approval of the final map or parcel map, whichever comes later. Monuments shall be set as follows:

A. Exterior boundary monuments shall be set at or near each boundary corner and at intermediate points approximately 1,000 feet apart, or at such lesser distances as may be necessary by topography to ensure accuracy in reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty;

B. Centerline monuments shall be set to mark the intersections of all roads, streets, alleys, or ways. Centerline monuments shall also be set to mark either the beginning and end of curves or the points of intersections of tangents thereof; and

C. Corner monuments shall be set at or near each lot corner, except that the city engineer may waive certain corner monumenting where standard monumenting would not be feasible or beneficial in retracing a survey. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.32.020 Monument construction.

All exterior boundary monuments shall be of new galvanized iron pipe not less than one and one-half inches inside diameter and 18 inches long or shall be of such other type and dimension approved by the city engineer. Centerline monuments shall be of new galvanized iron pipe not less than one and one-half inches inside diameter and 15 inches long. The subdivider shall also provide proper ties to the location of the centerline monuments and these ties shall be shown on a tie sheet of a form approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.32.030 Monument tie sheet.

At the time of the completion of the monuments required pursuant to this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act, and as condition precedent to release of the improvement security pertaining to such monuments, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer, in a form satisfactory to the city engineer, a tie sheet showing proper ties to the location of the centerline monuments. A minimum of three such ties shall be shown for each centerline monument. All monuments set and tie monuments set shall be permanently marked or tagged with the engineer’s or surveyor’s registration or license number. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.32.040 Monument bond.

If the monuments are to be set following the submission of the final map or parcel map to the city engineer for his or her certificate, a bond meeting the requirements set forth in the Subdivision Map Act shall be filed. In determining the amount of the bond, the city engineer shall make the necessary estimate of the cost to set monuments not already existing. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Chapter 16.34 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

16.34.010    Purpose.

16.34.020    Prohibition.

16.34.030    Remedies.


16.34.010 Purpose.

The procedures set forth in this chapter shall provide for the enforcement of the State Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this code of the city of Covina. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.34.020 Prohibition.

A. No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or portion of parcels of real property, or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act, until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this title has been filed for record by the county recorder.

B. Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final map or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.

C. This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

D. Nothing contained in subsections (A) through (C) of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease of financing, or the commencement of such construction is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


16.34.030 Remedies.

A. Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase the real property, any heir, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within one year after date of discovery of such violation.

B. Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a recorded certificate of compliance, final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording.

D. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect, in any way, the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

E. This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

F. The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map or this title, if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny or approve such a permit shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant is either the current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

G. If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided under the provisions of subsection (F) of this section, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a certificate of compliance has been filed for recordation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.22 CMC, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Ord. 05-1915 § 1, 2005.)


Title 17 ZONING1

Chapters:

17.02    General Provisions

17.04    Definitions and Standards

17.06    Zones and Map

17.08    A-1 Agricultural and Residential Zone (Single-Family)

17.10    A-2 Agricultural and Residential Zone (Single-Family)

17.12    E-1/2 Estate Residential Zone (Single-Family Estate)

17.14    E-1 Estate Residential Zone (Single-Family Estate)

17.16    E-2-1/2 Estate Residential Zone (Single-Family Estate)

17.18    E-5 Estate Residential Zone (Single-Family Estate)

17.20    R-1-20,000 Residential Zone (Single-Family)

17.22    R-1-10,000 Residential Zone (Single-Family)

17.24    R-1-8500 Residential Zone (Single-Family)

17.26    R-1-7500 Residential Zone (Single-Family)

17.28    RD Residential Zone (Multiple-Family)

17.30    R-TP Residential Zone (Trailer and Mobile Home Parks)

17.32    R-R Residential Recreation Zone

17.34    C-P Commercial, Administrative and Professional Office Zone

17.36    C-1 Commercial Zone (Neighborhood Stores)

17.38    C-2 Commercial Zone (Neighborhood Shopping Center)

17.40    C-3 Commercial Zone (Central Business)

17.42    C-3A Commercial Zone (Regional or Community Shopping Center)

17.44    C-4 Commercial Zone (Highway)

17.46    C-5 Commercial Zone (Specified Highway)

17.48    C-R Commercial Zone (Recreation)

17.50    TC-P Town Center Medical and Professional Office Zone

17.52    TC-C Town Center Commercial Zone

17.54    M-1 Light Manufacturing Zone

17.55    Adult-Oriented Businesses

17.56    Overlay Zone (Outdoor Advertising Structures)

17.57    Outdoor Dining and Display

17.58    Planned Community Development (PCD) Districts

17.59    Repealed

17.60    Permitted Uses

17.61    Smoke Shops and Tobacco Stores

17.62    Conditional Use Permits

17.63    Family Day Care Homes

17.64    Site Plan Review

17.65    Wireless Communication Facilities

17.66    Highway Right-of-Way Lines

17.67    Body Art Facilities

17.68    Existing Lots

17.69    Accessory Dwelling Units

17.70    Nonconforming Lots, Buildings and Uses

17.72    Off-Street Parking and Loading

17.73    Off-Site Subdivision Directional Signs

17.74    Signs in Commercial Zones

17.75    Incidental Signs

17.76    Conversion of Residential Building

17.78    Variances

17.80    Zoning Amendments and Zone Changes

17.81    Historic Preservation

17.82    Water-Efficient Landscape Regulations

17.83    Tree Preservation

17.84    Cannabis Prohibitions and Regulations

17.85    Compliance and Penalties1

For statutory provisions regarding planning in general, see Government Code § 65000 et seq.; for provisions regarding the community redevelopment law, see Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq. 


Chapter 17.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.02.010    Intent and purpose.

17.02.020    Title.


17.02.010 Intent and purpose.

The purpose of this title is to encourage, classify, designate, regulate, restrict and segregate the highest and best location and use of buildings, structures and land for agriculture, residence, commerce, trade, industry or other purposes in appropriate locations; to regulate and limit the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures hereafter designed, erected or altered; to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces; and to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said purposes to divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement. Further, such regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air and to prevent and fight fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion of streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, school, parks and other public requirements; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.10.)


17.02.020 Title.

The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the “comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.20.)


Chapter 17.04 DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS

Sections:

Article I. Definitions

17.04.003    Definitions generally.

17.04.006    Abut.

17.04.009    Access and/or accessway.

17.04.012    Accessory building.

17.04.013    Accessory dwelling unit.

17.04.015    Accessory living quarters.

17.04.016    Accessory use.

17.04.021    Adjacent.

17.04.024    Adjoining.

17.04.025    Adult-oriented businesses.

17.04.027    Advertising structure.

17.04.030    Advisory agency.

17.04.033    Airport.

17.04.036    Aisle.

17.04.039    Alley.

17.04.042    Altered.

17.04.043    Alternative transportation.

17.04.045    Amendment.

17.04.046    Ancillary use.

17.04.048    Animal hospital.

17.04.051    Antique shop.

17.04.054    Apartment.

17.04.057    Apartment hotel.

17.04.060    Apartment house.

17.04.063    Assessor.

17.04.064    Assisted living facility.

17.04.066    Auto court.

17.04.069    Automobile and trailer sales lot.

17.04.070    Automobile impound.

17.04.072    Automobile repair garage.

17.04.075    Automobile service station.

17.04.076    Automobile towing.

17.04.078    Automobile wrecking.

17.04.081    Average angle setback.

17.04.084    Bachelor apartment.

17.04.087    Basement.

17.04.090    Billboard.

17.04.093    Billiard parlor.

17.04.096    Block frontage.

17.04.099    Boarding and/or rooming house.

17.04.100    Bona fide eating establishment.

17.04.102    Breezeway.

17.04.105    Building.

17.04.108    Building, height of.

17.04.111    Building line.

17.04.114    Building, main.

17.04.117    Building setback line.

17.04.120    Building site.

17.04.123    Bungalow court.

17.04.126    Business.

17.04.129    Cabana.

17.04.130    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

17.04.132    Carnival.

17.04.133    Carpool.

17.04.135    Carport.

17.04.138    Centerline.

17.04.141    Chapel.

17.04.143    Chief planning official.

17.04.144    Church.

17.04.147    Clinic.

17.04.150    Club.

17.04.153    Commerce.

17.04.156    Commission or planning commission.

17.04.158    Community apartments.

17.04.158.5    Community gardens.

17.04.159    Compatible use.

17.04.162    Condominium.

17.04.163    Congestion management program (CMP) network.

17.04.165    Contiguous.

17.04.168    Convalescent home.

17.04.171    Corner cutback.

17.04.172    Cottage food business.

17.04.174    Court.

17.04.177    Court, apartment.

17.04.180    Court, inner.

17.04.183    Court, outer.

17.04.186    Coverage.

17.04.187    Crankcase oil tanks.

17.04.189    Dance hall.

17.04.192    Day nursery.

17.04.193    Developer.

17.04.194    Development.

17.04.195    Development agreement.

17.04.196    Dormitory.

17.04.198    Drainage channel.

17.04.199    Dripline.

17.04.201    Driveway.

17.04.204    Dump.

17.04.207    Duplex.

17.04.210    Dwelling.

17.04.213    Dwelling, multiple.

17.04.215    Repealed.

17.04.216    Dwelling, single-family.

17.04.219    Dwelling, two-family.

17.04.222    Dwelling unit.

17.04.225    Easement.

17.04.228    Educational institution.

17.04.230    Electrical or mechanical games.

17.04.231    Employee parking area.

17.04.232    Erect.

17.04.234    Family.

17.04.237    Federal government.

17.04.240    Fence.

17.04.243    Flood control channel.

17.04.246    Floor area.

17.04.249    Floor space index.

17.04.252    Freeway.

17.04.255    Frontage.

17.04.258    Front wall.

17.04.261    Garage, private.

17.04.264    Garage, public.

17.04.267    Garage, storage.

17.04.270    Gasoline service station.

17.04.273    General plan.

17.04.276    Grade.

17.04.279    Greenhouse.

17.04.282    Ground sign.

17.04.285    Guest.

17.04.288    Guest home.

17.04.291    Guest house (accessory living quarters).

17.04.294    Guest room.

17.04.297    Half story.

17.04.299    Health spa.

17.04.300    Hedge.

17.04.303    Height of building.

17.04.304    High density.

17.04.306    Highway.

17.04.308    Highway industrial zone.

17.04.309    Highway right-of-way line.

17.04.312    Hospital.

17.04.315    Hospital, animal.

17.04.318    Hotel.

17.04.321    Hotel unit.

17.04.322    Indoor radio controlled hobby track.

17.04.323    Industrial park zone.

17.04.324    Industry.

17.04.325    In-home businesses.

17.04.327    Junk.

17.04.330    Junkyard.

17.04.333    Kennel.

17.04.336    Kitchen.

17.04.339    Landscaped freeway.

17.04.342    Landscape space.

17.04.345    Landscaping.

17.04.348    Land use zoning map.

17.04.349    Liquor.

17.04.349.5    Liquor, off-sale establishments.

17.04.350    Liquor, on-sale establishments.

17.04.351    Loading space.

17.04.354    Lodging house.

17.04.357    Lot.

17.04.360    Lot area.

17.04.363    Lot, corner.

17.04.366    Lot, cul-de-sac.

17.04.369    Lot depth.

17.04.372    Lot, interior.

17.04.375    Lot, key.

17.04.378    Lot line.

17.04.381    Lot line, front.

17.04.384    Lot line, rear.

17.04.387    Lot line, side.

17.04.390    Lot of record.

17.04.393    Lot, reduced area.

17.04.396    Lot, reversed corner.

17.04.399    Lot, substandard.

17.04.402    Lot, through.

17.04.405    Lot width.

17.04.406    Low income.

17.04.407    Manufactured housing.

17.04.408    Marquee.

17.04.411    Marquee sign.

17.04.414    Massage establishment.

17.04.414.5    Repealed.

17.04.414.7    Memory care facility, skilled nursing facility, and similar uses.

17.04.415    Mixed use.

17.04.416    Mobile food facility.

17.04.417    Mobile home.

17.04.420    Motel.

17.04.423    Motel unit.

17.04.425    Multi-tenant retail arcades.

17.04.426    Nonconforming building.

17.04.429    Nonconforming use.

17.04.430    Notice of preparation.

17.04.432    Nursery school.

17.04.435    Nursing home.

17.04.435.5    Oak tree.

17.04.436    Occasional sale.

17.04.438    Outdoor advertising.

17.04.441    Parcel of land.

17.04.444    Parking area, private.

17.04.447    Parking area, public.

17.04.450    Parking space, automobile.

17.04.453    Patio.

17.04.456    Porte cochere.

17.04.459    Poultry.

17.04.460    Preferential parking.

17.04.462    Private dance.

17.04.465    Property line.

17.04.466    Property owner.

17.04.468    Provision.

17.04.471    Public dance.

17.04.474    Public dancing place.

17.04.475    Public storage facility.

17.04.477    Quasi-public organization.

17.04.480    Ramada.

17.04.483    Residence.

17.04.486    Rest home.

17.04.489    Retail store.

17.04.492    Room.

17.04.495    Rooming house.

17.04.498    Sanitarium.

17.04.501    Schools, elementary, intermediate, junior high and high.

17.04.504    Schools, private.

17.04.507    Service bay.

17.04.510    Service stations.

17.04.513    Setback line, front yard.

17.04.516    Setback line, rear yard or side yard.

17.04.518    Shared-space commercial establishment.

17.04.519    Sign.

17.04.522    Sign area.

17.04.525    Site plan.

17.04.527    Slope.

17.04.528    South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

17.04.529    Specified anatomical areas.

17.04.530    Specified sexual activities.

17.04.531    Stable, private.

17.04.534    Stable, public.

17.04.537    Stacked.

17.04.539    Stock cooperatives.

17.04.540    Stored.

17.04.543    Story.

17.04.546    Story, half.

17.04.549    Street.

17.04.552    Street centerline.

17.04.555    Street line.

17.04.558    Street, local.

17.04.561    Street, side.

17.04.564    Structural alterations.

17.04.567    Structure.

17.04.570    Supermarket.

17.04.572    Surgery or surgical center – Medical.

17.04.573    Swimming pool.

17.04.576    Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores.

17.04.579    Toe of slope.

17.04.582    Top of slope.

17.04.585    Townhouse.

17.04.587    Trade school.

17.04.588    Trading area.

17.04.591    Trailer park or mobile home park.

17.04.594    Trailer, residential.

17.04.597    Trailer space.

17.04.600    Transient.

17.04.601    Transportation demand management.

17.04.603    Truck and/or trailer sales lot.

17.04.606    Use.

17.04.609    Used.

17.04.610    Vanpool.

17.04.612    Variance.

17.04.613    Vehicle.

17.04.614    Very low income.

17.04.615    Visual obstruction.

17.04.618    Wall.

17.04.619    Warehouse.

17.04.621    Yard.

17.04.624    Yard, front.

17.04.627    Yard, rear.

17.04.630    Yard, side.

17.04.633    Zone.

17.04.636    Zone, change of.

17.04.639    Zone reclassification.

Article II. Standards

17.04.642    Planting maintenance.

Article I. Definitions


17.04.003 Definitions generally.

For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this title, words, phrases and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them and shall be interpreted to have the standards and include the parts, elements and the features set forth in this chapter. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; words in the plural number include the singular. “Shall” is mandatory, “may” is permissive. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.006 Abut.

“Abut” means contiguous to; for example, two adjoining lots with a common property line are considered to be abutting. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.009 Access and/or accessway.

“Access” and/or “accessway” means the place, means or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property and/or use as required by this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.012 Accessory building.

“Accessory building” means a building, part of building, structure which is subordinate to and the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, structure or use on the same lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.013 Accessory dwelling unit.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means an attached or detached secondary residential dwelling unit with complete independent living facilities for one or more persons subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.69 CMC. An “accessory dwelling unit” shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. An “accessory dwelling unit” includes an efficiency unit, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, and a manufactured home, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18007. (Ord. 19-07 § 4, 2019.)


17.04.015 Accessory living quarters.

“Accessory living quarters” means the same as “guest house,” CMC 17.04.291. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.016 Accessory use.

“Accessory use” means a use incidental, appropriate, subordinate, and devoted exclusively to the main use of the lot or building. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.021 Adjacent.

“Adjacent” means near, close, contiguous or abutting; for example, an industrial zone across a street or highway from a residential zone shall be considered as “adjacent.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.024 Adjoining.

“Adjoining” means across from street, highway, alley, railroad, drainage channel or directly abutting. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.025 Adult-oriented businesses.

“Adult-oriented businesses” means any one of the following:

A. “Adult arcade,” as used in this title, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

B. “Adult bookstore,” as used in this title, is an establishment that has 30 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

C. “Adult cabaret,” as used in this title, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear seminude; and/or (3) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

D. “Adult hotel/motel,” as used in this title, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

E. “Adult motion picture theater,” as used in this title, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

F. “Adult theater,” as used in this title, means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

G. “Modeling studio,” as used in this title, means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities. (Ord. 97-1813 § 5, 1997.)


17.04.027 Advertising structure.

“Advertising structure” means a sign soliciting public support or directing public attention to the sale, lease, hiring or use of any objects, products or services which are not produced, sold, or otherwise available on the premises where such sign is erected and maintained. “Advertising structure” also means a sign upon which a visual message is delivered to members of the general public concerning candidates for public offices and other matters relating to elections as well as public service announcements. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.030 Advisory agency.

“Advisory agency” means the planning commission which is herein designated as the advisory agency to the city council on all matters related to the zoning and use of land and structures. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.033 Airport.

“Airport” means any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.036 Aisle.

“Aisle” means an accessway to required vehicular parking spaces within a private, public or semipublic parking lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.039 Alley.

“Alley” means a public or private way at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.042 Altered.

“Altered” means the same as “structural alterations.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.043 Alternative transportation.

“Alternative transportation” means modes of transportation other than the single-passenger motor vehicle, such as carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.045 Amendment.

“Amendment” means an addition, deletion or a change in the wording, context or substance of this title or the zoning map made a part of this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.046 Ancillary use. 

“Ancillary use” means the same as “accessory use,” CMC 17.04.016. (Ord. 19-04 § 4, 2019.)


17.04.048 Animal hospital.

“Animal hospital” means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be only incidental to such hospital use. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.051 Antique shop.

“Antique shop” means a place where articles, merchandise and furniture are sold which are over 50 years old, or are sold for a higher price than originally purchased. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.054 Apartment.

“Apartment” means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.057 Apartment hotel.

“Apartment hotel” means a building or portion thereof containing a combination of at least six apartments and hotel units at a ratio of three hotel units for each apartment unit within a single structure. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.060 Apartment house.

“Apartment house” means a building or portion thereof designed or used for three or more dwelling units, or a combination of three or more dwelling units, and not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.063 Assessor.

“Assessor” means the county assessor. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.064 Assisted living facility. 

“Assisted living facility” means a residential building, complex, or buildings that provide housing and limited personal and health care services for its residents, and is designed for individuals who need some assistance with daily activities but do not require nursing home care. Assisted living facilities may include a kitchen, private bathroom, and living area within individual rooms. (Ord. 19-04 § 5, 2019.)


17.04.066 Auto court.

“Auto court” means the same as “motel,” CMC 17.04.420. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.069 Automobile and trailer sales lot.

“Automobile and trailer sales lot” means an open area used for the display, sales and/or rental of new or used automobiles and trailer coaches, but where no repair, repainting or remodeling is done. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.070 Automobile impound.

“Automobile impound” means a business operated in conjunction with automobile towing, which offers the temporary storage of operable and inoperable vehicles. Automobile impound does not include stacking, dismantling, long-term storage, crushing or dumping of vehicles or trailers or the sale of parts thereof. (Ord. 91-1730 § 1(A), 1991.)


17.04.072 Automobile repair garage.

“Automobile repair garage” means a building enclosed on not less than three sides by walls, except when fronting on a dedicated street or alley the building shall be enclosed on all sides by walls and/or doors, and used for the servicing of motor vehicles, including tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage of automobiles and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, engine overhauling and automobile upholstering. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.075 Automobile service station.

“Automobile service station” means a business which offers for sale gasoline from pumps, tires, tubes, batteries and lubricants, and which may offer, in addition, such related services as battery charging, tube and tire repairs, nonmechanical auto washing, lubrication services, minor motor tune-ups, brake services, wheel alignment, and where otherwise permitted in the zone where located the rental of trailers, cars or trucks from the premises where parking stalls are provided for the storage of such vehicles. The storage of merchandise for such sales and for the performance of such services is included. This definition does not include major motor tune-ups, automobile repairs, body and fender work, overhauls, painting, upholstery work, auto glass work, welding, tire recapping or auto dismantling; nor the sale of trailers, cars, trucks and boats stored upon the premises. (Ord. 1574 § 1, 1984; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.076 Automobile towing.

“Automobile towing” means a business which offers the service of towing vehicles and storage of not more than two inoperable vehicles on the premises for periods of up to 72 hours per vehicle. (Ord. 91-1730 § 1(B), 1991.)


17.04.078 Automobile wrecking.

“Automobile wrecking” means the wrecking or dismantling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage of, sale of or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts. Except as part of the operation of an automobile impound yard, the presence of three or more inoperable vehicles or parts thereof for periods in excess of 30 days shall be deemed to be de facto automobile wrecking for purpose of zoning ordinance enforcement regardless of the zone district in which such activity occurs. This definition does not apply to the incidental storage of inoperative or disabled vehicles which are undergoing timely and bona fide repair in connection with the legal operation of an automobile repair garage or automobile body and fender repair shop. (Ord. 91-1730 § 1(C), 1991; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.081 Average angle setback.

“Average angle setback” means the relationship between the height of a building and its distance from a given property line as determined by a given angle measured from a given point or line. The average angle setback shall be determined in the following manner:

	Actual angle setback of building	X	The length of building of the setback	=	Average angle setback

	Lot Frontage

(1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.084 Bachelor apartment.

“Bachelor apartment” means a one-room apartment designed, used or intended to be used, rented or hired out as living accommodations for one person, consisting of living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities. With the exception of sanitary facilities, all amenities are provided in a single room. (Ord. 04-1901 § 1, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.087 Basement.

“Basement” means a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half of its height, measuring from its floor to its ceiling, below the average adjoining grade. If the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above grade at any point, such basement shall be considered a story. A basement shall not be occupied for sleeping purposes. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.090 Billboard.

“Billboard” means any sign or advertising structure used as an outdoor display for advertising which does not pertain to the business or activity on the premises where the sign or advertising structure is located, but shall not include official notices, etc., listed as excluded under “Advertising structure,” CMC 17.04.027. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.093 Billiard parlor.

“Billiard parlor” means any public place maintaining as an ancillary or primary use two or more tables upon which billiards, pool, snooker or similar game is played with ball and cue and for which a fee is charged. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.096 Block frontage.

“Block frontage” means all property fronting on one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and right-of-way, waterway, end of a cul-de-sac, or city boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block frontage on the side of the street that it intercepts. Where the city boundary intersects or intercepts a street in a block as described herein, the block shall be considered to end at the city boundary. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.099 Boarding and/or rooming house.

“Boarding and/or rooming house” means a building containing a single dwelling unit and with not more than five guest rooms where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation, not including rest homes or homes for the aged. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.100 Bona fide eating establishment.

“Bona fide eating establishment” means an establishment engaged in the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises, and alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and where at least 20 percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, equipped and used exclusively for the storage and preparation of food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption, and where at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, equipped and used exclusively for seating of patrons for the purpose of serving meals. “Meals” shall mean the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day. “Patrons” shall mean persons who come to a bona fide public eating place for the purpose of actually ordering and obtaining a meal therein. No more than 30 percent of the gross floor area exclusive of conference or banquet rooms shall be dedicated to a bar or the storage of alcoholic beverages; however, in no case shall the gross floor area exceed 2,000 square feet. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 1987.)


17.04.102 Breezeway.

“Breezeway” means a roofed passageway, open on at least one side, where the roof is in keeping with the design and construction of the main building. The breezeway shall be considered an inner court created by a roof structure connecting two buildings. The space between buildings connected by a breezeway shall be not less than six feet in length, as required in Distance between buildings, CMC 17.26.160. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.105 Building.

“Building” means any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. No building shall be located within any future widening of an existing right-of-way set forth on the general plan of the city. “Building,” as used in this title, includes “structure.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.108 Building, height of.

“Height of building” means the vertical distance measured from the adjoining curb level to the highest point of the building, exclusive of chimneys and ventilators and other exceptions to building height permitted in the zones; provided, however, that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.111 Building line.

“Building line” means a line on private property, established by ordinance, which regulates the location of buildings and/or structures as they relate to rights-of-way of alleys, streets, highways, railways and drainage channels. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.114 Building, main.

“Main building” means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot, as provided by this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.117 Building setback line.

“Building setback line” means the minimum distance, as prescribed by this title, between the property line of a lot or parcel of land and any point on a building or structure related thereto, exclusive of those architectural features permitted to extend into such required yards or open spaces. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.120 Building site.

“Building site” means the ground area of a building together with all the open space required by this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.123 Bungalow court.

“Bungalow court” means a group of two or more detached buildings used or intended to be used as one-family or two-family (duplex) dwellings, located on a single lot, together with all of the open spaces required by this title, but not including tourist courts, motor courts or motels. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.126 Business.

“Business” means the same as “Commerce,” CMC 17.04.153. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.129 Cabana.

“Cabana” means a detached structure used as a bathhouse or related to a residential trailer. The structure shall not be used for sleeping purposes. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.130 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

“California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)” is a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the state of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.132 Carnival.

“Carnival” means an operation within a common perimeter of rides, entertainment, food service and games of skill. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.133 Carpool.

“Carpool” means a group of two to six persons who regularly commute together to and from work in an automobile. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.135 Carport.

“Carport” means a permanent roofed structure with not less than three enclosed sides, used for automobile shelter and automobile storage. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.138 Centerline.

“Centerline” means the same as “Street centerline,” CMC 17.04.552. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.141 Chapel.

“Chapel” means a permanently located building used for public or private purposes, including prayer, worship, weddings or special services. Such building shall be fully enclosed with walls (including windows and doors) and shall conform to applicable legal requirements affecting design and construction. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.143 Chief planning official.

“Chief planning official” means the director of community development or his designee, who is responsible for the administration and supervision of the planning division of the community development department for the city of Covina. References in this title to planning director, city planner or planning official shall be deemed to refer to the chief planning official. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 1988.)


17.04.144 Church.

“Church” means a permanently located building commonly used for religious worship. Such building shall be fully enclosed with walls (including windows and doors), having a roof (canvas or fabric excluded) and shall conform to applicable legal requirements affecting design and construction. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.147 Clinic.

“Clinic” means a place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.150 Club.

“Club” means an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for social purposes, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.153 Commerce.

“Commerce” means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition (other than that included in “industry” as defined in CMC 17.04.324) of any article, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit, including in addition, operation of automobile or trailer parks, tourist courts and motels, public garages, office buildings, offices of doctors and other professionals, outdoor advertising signs and structures, public stables, recreational and amusement enterprises conducted for profit (excluding temporary carnivals when engaged in civic, religious, educational, fraternal or charitable endeavor only), shops for sale of personal services, places where commodities or services are sold or are offered for sale, either by direct handling of merchandise or by agreements to furnish them, but not including dumps and junkyards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.156 Commission or planning commission.

“Commission” or “planning commission” means the planning commission of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.158 Community apartments.

“Community apartments” means any apartment house where an undivided interest in the title to the real property, such as tenancy in common, is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of a separate apartment unit. (Ord. 1445 § 1, 1980.)


17.04.158.5 Community gardens.

“Community gardens” means a light garden area consisting of small plots for use by private individuals for recreational gardening. (Ord. 1711 § 1, 1990.)


17.04.159 Compatible use.

“Compatible use” means a use that, by its manner of operation, is suitable in the district in which it may be nonconforming. The use of land and/or buildings shall be in harmony with the uses on abutting properties in the same district. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.162 Condominium.

“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residence. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.163 Congestion management program (CMP) network.

“Congestion management program (CMP) network” is a system of highways and roadways within the county of Los Angeles that includes all state highways and principal arterials and has been designated under the county’s congestion management program for the purpose of monitoring traffic congestion. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.165 Contiguous.

“Contiguous” means the same as “abut,” CMC 17.04.006. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.168 Convalescent home.

“Convalescent home” means the same as “rest home,” CMC 17.04.486. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.171 Corner cutback.

“Corner cutback” means the reserved open space for maintenance of adequate and safe visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all intersections of streets, alleys and/or private driveways, as provided in the zones. The space shall be kept free of buildings, structures and landscaping, which would constitute a visual obstruction. In no case shall landscaping and/or structures permitted in the required corner cutback area exceed three feet in height, measured from the established street grade. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.172 Cottage food business.

“Cottage food business” shall have the same meaning as “cottage food operation” set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 113758, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 17-17 § 6, 2017.)


17.04.174 Court.

“Court” means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with the building or buildings and bounded on two or more sides by such building and/or buildings. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.177 Court, apartment.

“Apartment court” means a group of dwellings, arranged about two or more sides of a court which opens into a dedicated street or public way. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)




17.04.180 Court, inner.

“Inner court” means a court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.183 Court, outer.

“Outer court” means a court enclosed on not more than three sides by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable with one side or end open to a street, driveway, alley or yard. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.186 Coverage.

“Coverage” means that portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, regardless of whether the building or structure is intended for human occupancy. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.187 Crankcase oil tanks.

“Crankcase oil tanks” means aboveground tanks having less than 500 gallons of capacity which are used for the temporary collection and storage of motor drain oil from engine crankcases. All such tanks shall be subject to site plan review and shall be screened from view to city approval in an attractive and architecturally compatible manner. (Ord. 1709 § 1, 1990.)


17.04.189 Dance hall.

“Dance hall” means the same as “public dancing place,” CMC 17.04.474. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.192 Day nursery.

“Day nursery” means any group of buildings, building or portion thereof used primarily for the daytime care of children. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.193 Developer.

“Developer” means the person who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of a development project that is subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.194 Development.

“Development” means the construction, remodeling, or expansion of buildings, structures, or parking lots intended for residence, commerce, trade, industry, or other purposes in appropriate locations. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.195 Development agreement.

“Development agreement” means an obligation entered into on the part of a developer and a jurisdiction as specified under Section 65864 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.196 Dormitory.

“Dormitory” means a guest room designed, intended for or occupied as sleeping quarters by more than two persons. Every 100 square feet of a total enclosed floor area in a dormitory shall be considered as a separate guest room for purposes of calculating off-street parking requirements. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.198 Drainage channel.

“Drainage channel” means any existing or proposed open ditch, open culvert or open channel, created, designed or constructed to transmit water for flood control or irrigation purposes, which existing or proposed ditch, culvert or channel is delineated on county flood control district plans or on drainage plans prepared by the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.199 Dripline.

“Dripline” means a vertical line extending from the outermost portion of a tree canopy to the ground. (Ord. 1568 § 1, 1984.)


17.04.201 Driveway.

“Driveway” means an accessway to a required off-street parking lot or facility and shall be paved with hard, durable asphaltic paving at least two and one-half inches thick after compaction, or with portland cement paving at least four inches thick at a width as hereinafter provided:

A. Driveways serving not more than four dwelling units shall be paved to a minimum width of not less than nine feet;

B. Driveways serving five or more dwelling units when accommodating one-way vehicular traffic shall be paved to a minimum width of not less than nine feet, and when accommodating two-way vehicular traffic shall be paved to a minimum width of 18 feet;

C. Driveways serving other than residential uses shall be paved to a minimum width of 15 feet to accommodate one-way vehicular traffic and a minimum of 25 feet when accommodating two-way vehicular traffic.

All driveways shall be encumbered to a height of not less than eight feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.204 Dump.

“Dump” means a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration, or by any other means of any garbage, trash, refuse or waste material. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.207 Duplex.

“Duplex” means the same as “two-family dwelling,” CMC 17.04.219. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.210 Dwelling.

“Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding or rooming houses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.213 Dwelling, multiple.

“Multiple dwelling” means a detached building designed and used for occupancy by two or more families, all living independently of each other and having separate kitchen facilities for each family. Notwithstanding the above, “multiple dwelling” shall not include the combination of a single-family dwelling and a second unit upon the same lot. (Ord. 04-1901 § 3, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.215 Dwelling, second unit.

Repealed by Ord. 19-07. (Ord. 04-1901 § 2, 2004.)


17.04.216 Dwelling, single-family.

“Single-family dwelling” means a detached building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of one family and having a kitchen facility for only one family. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.219 Dwelling, two-family.

“Two-family dwelling” means a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having separate kitchen facilities for each family. Notwithstanding the above, “two-family dwelling” shall not include the combination of a single-family dwelling and a second unit upon the same lot. (Ord. 04-1901 § 3, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.222 Dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit” means two or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment house or apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.225 Easement.

“Easement” means a space on a lot or parcel of land reserved for or used for public utilities or public uses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.228 Educational institution.

“Educational institution” means public, parochial and other nonprofit institutions conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary and collegiate levels, and including graduate schools, universities and nonprofit research institutions. Such institutions must either:

A. Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education; or

B. Confer degrees as a college or university of undergraduate or graduate standing; or

C. Conduct research.

This definition does not include schools, academies or institutions, incorporated or otherwise, which operate for a profit, nor does it include commercial or trade schools. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.230 Electrical or mechanical games.

“Electrical or mechanical games” means any pinball machine or similar device where any sum is charged by means of coin or slug in a slot or otherwise. (Ord. 1507 § 1, 1981.)


17.04.231 Employee parking area.

“Employee parking area” means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. For the purposes of CMC 17.64.210, employee parking amounts shall be considered to be as follows:

	Type of Use	Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

	Commercial	30%

	Office/professional	85%

	Industrial/manufacturing	90%

If a development project cannot be classified according to the type of use given above, the city will make a determination of the amount of employee parking to be assigned to the project. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.232 Erect.

“Erect” means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or fix, and also includes suspending of wall signs. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.234 Family.

“Family” means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group of not more than five persons, excluding servants, who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.237 Federal government.

“Federal government” means the government of the United States. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.240 Fence.

“Fence” means any structure forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that not less than 50 percent of the vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal plane, but which is impenetrable to persons and animals. This includes wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louver, stake and other similar materials. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.243 Flood control channel.

“Flood control channel” shall have the same meaning as “drainage channel.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.246 Floor area.

“Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building excluding areas used for accessory garage purposes and such basement and cellar areas as are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls including walls or other enclosures of enclosed porches. Whenever “floor area” is used in this title as a basis for required off-street parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated, the floor area applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional stories and/or basement of the structure. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.249 Floor space index.

“Floor space index” means the ratio of gross building floor area to total lot area expressed as a fraction. (Example: two square feet of gross floor area for each three square feet of total lot area would result in a “floor space index” of 2:3.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.252 Freeway.

“Freeway” means a freeway so indicated on the general plan or as designated by the State Division of Highways. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.255 Frontage.

“Frontage” means the line where a lot abuts a dedicated street or highway right-of-way line. Frontage is expressed in lineal feet and is measured along the right-of-way line. Where a future street or highway right-of-way line has been established on the general plan or other official plan, frontage shall be measured along that line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.258 Front wall.

“Front wall” means the wall of the building or structure nearest the street on which the building fronts, but excluding certain architectural features as cornices, canopies, eaves or embellishments. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.261 Garage, private.

“Private garage” means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling used for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, including carports. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.264 Garage, public.

“Public garage” means any garage other than a private garage. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.267 Garage, storage.

“Storage garage” means any premises used exclusively for the storage of vehicles. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.270 Gasoline service station.

“Gasoline service station” means the same as “automobile service station,” CMC 17.04.075. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.273 General plan.

“General plan” means the general plan for the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.276 Grade.

“Grade” means the gradient, the rate of incline or decline expressed as a percent. For example, a rise of 25 feet in a horizontal distance of 100 feet would be expressed as a grade of 25 percent. (See also Slope, CMC 17.04.527.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.279 Greenhouse.

“Greenhouse” means a building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glass-like or translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants, and shall be classified as a building in determining lot coverage. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.282 Ground sign.

“Ground sign” means a sign which is supported by one or more poles, uprights or braces, in or upon the ground, which are not a part of the building. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.285 Guest.

“Guest” means any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.288 Guest home.

“Guest home” means the same as “rest home,” CMC 17.04.486. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.291 Guest house (accessory living quarters).

“Guest house (accessory living quarters)” means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. A guest house shall be deemed to be an accessory building and subject to all the standards related to accessory buildings. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.294 Guest room.

“Guest room” means a room which is designed to be occupied by not more than four guests for sleeping purposes, but not including dormitories. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.297 Half story.

For a definition of “half story,” see CMC 17.04.546. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.299 Health spa.

“Health spa” means any use, whether primary or incidental to the main use, which offers health-related programs commercially on an individual or organized basis and provides physical therapy, use of gymnasium or exercise equipment, solariums, yoga, dance exercise, swimming or other similar health/recreational activities. (Ord. 1535 § 1, 1983.)


17.04.300 Hedge.

“Hedge” means a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.303 Height of building.

For a definition of “height of building,” see CMC 17.04.108. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.304 High density.

“High density” means a density equal to or greater than 120 percent of the maximum residential density allowed under the local general plan and zoning ordinance. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.306 Highway.

“Highway” means a major or secondary highway as delineated on the general plan. (See Street, CMC 17.04.549.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.308 Highway industrial zone.

“Highway industrial zone” means an area generally devoted to industrial activity and located along major and secondary highways. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1978.)


17.04.309 Highway right-of-way line.

“Highway right-of-way line” means either the existing right-of-way if the right-of-way conforms to the general plan or the future right-of-way line for a major or secondary highway or traffic collector street as located and dimensioned on the general plan and in Chapter 17.66 CMC. A yard abutting such a highway or street shall be measured from this future right-of-way line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.312 Hospital.

“Hospital” means any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured, or infirm persons and including sanitariums, alcoholic sanitariums, institutions for the cure of chronic drug addicts and mental patients. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.315 Hospital, animal.

For a definition of “animal hospital,” see CMC 17.04.048. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.318 Hotel.

“Hotel” means a building or portion thereof containing six or more hotel units and a restaurant. All hotel units shall have access from an interior corridor or hallway. A hotel may contain related service shops as permitted in the zone in which it is located, but the floor area reserved for permitted commercial purposes shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area excluding areas reserved for parking. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.321 Hotel unit.

“Hotel unit” means a unit in a hotel, motel or apartment hotel containing one or more rooms which provide no kitchen facilities and which is designed and utilized as a single unit to be rented to transients on a daily or weekly basis. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.322 Indoor radio controlled hobby track.

“Indoor radio controlled hobby track” means a land use in which, wholly within the confines of a single building, is located a recreational racing facility for miniature vehicles which are radio controlled and electrically powered. The wholesale and retail sales of vehicles, parts thereof and related equipment used in racing these vehicles is allowed on an ancillary basis. (Ord. 92-1735 § 1, 1992.)


17.04.323 Industrial park zone.

“Industrial park zone” means an area generally devoted to industrial activities and located in interior streets. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1978.)


17.04.324 Industry.

“Industry” means the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof, in such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof, and including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.325 In-home businesses.

“In-home businesses” means minor commercial activities that do not distract from the quiet and private characteristics of a residential neighborhood and are incidental to the residential use of a dwelling, including cottage food businesses (see CMC 17.04.172). (Ord. 17-17 § 7, 2017; Ord. 1664 § 1, 1988.)


17.04.327 Junk.

“Junk” means any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new, shall not be considered junk. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.330 Junkyard.

“Junkyard” means any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles or machinery, or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking, or for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.333 Kennel.

“Kennel” means any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or other animals, at least four months of age, are kept, boarded or trained. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.336 Kitchen.

“Kitchen” means any room intended or designed to be used or maintained for the cooking and/or preparation of food. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.339 Landscaped freeway.

“Landscaped freeway” means a section or sections of a freeway which is now, or thereafter may be, improved by the planting, of at least on one side, of the freeway right-of-way, of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers or other ornamental vegetation which shall require reasonable maintenance.

Planting for the purpose of soil erosion control, traffic safety requirements, reduction of fire hazards or traffic noise abatement shall not change the character of a freeway to a landscaped freeway. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.342 Landscape space.

“Landscape space” indicates the relationship of lot size to landscaping area, designated by a percentage of the parcel area. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.345 Landscaping.

“Landscaping” includes the original planting of suitable vegetation in conformity with the requirements of this title and the continued maintenance thereof. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.348 Land use zoning map.

“Land use zoning map” means the land use zoning map of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.349 Liquor.

“Liquor” means alcoholic beverages including but not limited to beer, wine and distilled spirits. (Ord. 1642 § 2, 1987.)


17.04.349.5 Liquor, off-sale establishments.

“Off-sale liquor establishments” means any retail facility which requires a Type 20 or Type 21 off-site retail license from the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control. (Ord. 93-1748 § 1, 1993.)


17.04.350 Liquor, on-sale establishments.

“On-sale liquor establishments” means a bar or cocktail lounge where the principal business is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises whether or not accompanied by the sale, dispensing or consumption of food.

A. The facility shall not exceed 2,000 square feet. (Ord. 1642 § 3, 1987.)


17.04.351 Loading space.

“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, which space shall abut a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress and egress. A loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length, and with 14 feet of vertical clearance. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.354 Lodging house.

“Lodging house” means the same as “boarding house,” CMC 17.04.099. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.357 Lot.

“Lot” means:

A. A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the county recorder; or

B. A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot split or subparceling map as filed in the office of the city clerk and abutting at least one public street; or

C. A parcel of real property containing not less lot area than required by the zone in which it is located, abutting at least one public street and held under separate ownership from adjacent property prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.360 Lot area.

“Lot area” means the total area, measured in a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot. Portions of a lot which have a slope of four to one (four feet horizontal to one foot vertical) or steeper shall not be included in the computation of lot area. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.363 Lot, corner.

“Corner lot” means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 120 degrees. If the angle is greater than 120 degrees it shall be considered an interior lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.366 Lot, cul-de-sac.

“Cul-de-sac lot” means a lot fronting on or with more than one-half of its lot width fronting on the turnaround end of the cul-de-sac street. All cul-de-sac lots shall have a front lot line of not less than 45 feet and a lot width at the front yard setback line of not less than the minimum lot width specified for that zone in which the cul-de-sac lot is located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.369 Lot depth.

“Lot depth” means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.372 Lot, interior.

“Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.375 Lot, key.

“Key lot” means any lot where the side lot line abuts the rear lot line of one or more other lots, and not separated by an alley. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.378 Lot line.

“Lot line” means any line bounding a lot as defined in CMC 17.04.357. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.381 Lot line, front.

On an interior lot, the “front lot line” is the property line abutting a street. On a corner or reversed corner lot, the “front lot line” is the shorter property line abutting a street. On a through lot or a lot with three or more sides abutting a street, the commission shall determine which property line shall be the front lot line for purposes of compliance with yard provisions of this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.384 Lot line, rear.

“Rear lot line” means a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than 10 feet. A lot which is bounded on all sides by streets may have no rear lot line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.387 Lot line, side.

“Side lot line” means any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line. On a lot with three or more sides abutting a street, all lot lines abutting a street, other than the front lot line, may be side lot lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.390 Lot of record.

“Lot of record” means a parcel of land as shown on the records of the county assessor. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.393 Lot, reduced area.

A lot, the area of which has been reduced by public acquisition of a portion thereof for street purposes, shall be deemed to have the area preexisting such acquisition. “Public acquisition,” as used herein, means acquisition pursuant to the power of eminent domain. (Ord. 1221 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.396 Lot, reversed corner.

“Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear, whether across an alley or not. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.399 Lot, substandard.

“Substandard lot” means a lot whose area, width or depth is less than that required in the zone in which it is located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.402 Lot, through.

“Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel dedicated streets, not including a corner or reversed corner lot. The commission shall determine which frontage or frontages shall be considered as the “lot front” or “lot frontages” for purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.405 Lot width.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.406 Low income.

“Low income” means an income equal to or less than 80 percent of the median income of Los Angeles County, with adjustments for family size. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.407 Manufactured housing.

“Manufactured housing” means a mobile home, as defined by and installed in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 18008 and 18551, respectively, and factory-built housing, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 19971. (Ord. 1503 § 1, 1981.)


17.04.408 Marquee.

“Marquee” means a permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public or private property. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.411 Marquee sign.

“Marquee sign” means a sign attached to or hanging from a marquee. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.414 Massage establishment.

“Massage establishment” shall have the meaning set forth in CMC 5.36.010(C). (Ord. 11-1997 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1386 § 3, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.414.5 Medical marijuana dispensary.

Repealed by Ord. 17-09. (Ord. 16-2054 § 4, 2016; Ord. 16-2053 § 4, 2016; Ord. 15-2042 §§ 3, 4, 5, 2015; Ord. 13-2025 § 2, 2013; Ord. 13-2022 § 3, 2013.)


17.04.414.7 Memory care facility, skilled nursing facility, and similar uses.

“Memory care facility, skilled nursing facility, and similar uses” means a residential complex or buildings that provide housing, supervision, personal and social services, memory care services, and/or health care services (skilled nursing and/or medical) through the end of life of its residents. “Memory care facility, skilled nursing facility, and similar uses” includes uses commonly referred to as continuing care communities and continuum of care complexes. (Ord. 19-04 § 6, 2019.)


17.04.415 Mixed use.

“Mixed use” means development that integrates compatible commercial or retail uses, or both, with residential uses, and that, because of its proximity to jobs, shopping, and residences, will minimize new trip generation. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.416 Mobile food facility.

“Mobile food facility” means any self-propelled, motorized device or vehicle by which any person or property may be propelled or moved upon a highway (excepting a device moved exclusively by human power), or which may be drawn or towed by a self-propelled, motorized vehicle, from which food or food products are sold, offered for sale, displayed, bartered, exchanged or otherwise given. (Ord. 14-2034 § 2, 2014.)


17.04.417 Mobile home.

“Mobile home” means the same as “residential trailer,” CMC 17.04.594. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.420 Motel.

“Motel” means a building or portions thereof containing six or more motel units, including groups designated as auto cabins, auto courts, motor courts, motor hotels and similar designations, which units are so arranged to have direct access from a yard or court with the required parking for each unit being located within 25 feet of the unit. A motel may include one apartment reserved for the owner/operator or manager. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)




17.04.423 Motel unit.

“Motel unit” means the same as “hotel unit,” CMC 17.04.321. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.425 Multi-tenant retail arcades.

“Multi-tenant retail arcades” means a land use in which, wholly within the confines of a single building, are located more than four vendors offering personal property for retail sale or trade who are separated from each other, if at all, by less than complete floor-to-ceiling walls, a solid ceiling, and a solid, lockable access door. This shall not include a temporary event held for the exclusive benefit of any nonprofit organization or organizations. “Vendor” means and includes any person, partnership, corporation, or organization who engages in selling, exchanging, or offering for sale as owner or consignee, personal property within a multi-tenant retail arcade. (Ord. 92-1736 § 2(A), 1992.)


17.04.426 Nonconforming building.

“Nonconforming building” means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use which does not conform to the uses permitted in the zone in which it is located, or which does not comply with one or more of the property development standards of the zone in which it is located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.429 Nonconforming use.

“Nonconforming use” means a use of a building or land existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which does not conform to the uses permitted in the zone in which it is located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.430 Notice of preparation.

“Notice of preparation” means the announcement, circulated to affected parties, of intent to prepare an environmental impact report for a particular development project or plan. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.432 Nursery school.

“Nursery school” means the same as “day nursery,” CMC 17.04.192. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.435 Nursing home.

“Nursing home” means the same as “hospital,” CMC 17.04.312. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.435.5 Oak tree.

“Oak tree” means valley oak, coast live oak, or any other tree of the Quercus genus, except scrub oak (Quercus demosa). (Ord. 1568 § 1, 1984.)


17.04.436 Occasional sale.

An “occasional sale” is the sale of tangible personal property in a residential zone or upon premises zoned for another use providing the actual and principal current use of such premises is for residential purposes when such sale is advertised by means of an advertisement in a newspaper or sign on such property, designating such sale as a “yard sale,” “patio sale,” “lot sale,” “garage sale,” or of words having similar import or meaning, or in the alternative when such advertisement or sign advertises the sale of four or more items upon such premises or where in fact four or more items are sold upon such residential property.

A. Occasional Sale Permit. A permit for conducting an occasional sale is a permit issued by the planning department of the city of Covina designating the address where such activity is conducted, the dates for which such permit is valid and the general type of property to be sold. No more than two permits shall be issued during any 12-month period. Permitted sales shall be limited to two consecutive days within a calendar week. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977.)


17.04.438 Outdoor advertising.

“Outdoor advertising” means the same as “advertising structure,” CMC 17.04.027. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.441 Parcel of land.

“Parcel of land” means the same as “lot,” CMC 17.04.357. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.444 Parking area, private.

“Private parking area” means an open area, other than a street, used for the parking of automotive vehicles and restricted from general public use. Such areas shall have frontage on or access to a dedicated street or alley. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.447 Parking area, public.

“Public parking area” means an area, other than a private parking area or street, used for the parking of vehicles and available for public or quasi-public use, either free or for remuneration. Such areas shall have frontage on or access to a dedicated street or alley. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.450 Parking space, automobile.

“Automobile parking space” means a space exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, loading areas, office or work areas within a building or open parking area for the parking of one automobile. A parking space shall be not less than nine feet in width, 19 feet in length and shall be accessible and usable for the parking of a motor vehicle. (See CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.453 Patio.

“Patio” means a roofed area permanently open on not less than three sides and used solely for outdoor living. The patio will be considered to be open when enclosed by screening or any structure forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that not less than 50 percent of the vertical surface is permanently open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal plane but which is impenetrable to persons and animals. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.456 Porte cochere.

“Porte cochere” means an accessory structure open on three sides and attached to the side or front of a building through which cars pass and is established for the convenient loading and unloading of passengers from an automobile. A porte cochere is not a carport or garage nor may it be used to satisfy off-street parking requirements. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.459 Poultry.

“Poultry” means one or more species of domestic fowl. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.460 Preferential parking.

“Preferential parking” means parking spaces reserved for carpool and vanpool vehicles, usually in a place more convenient to a work site than parking spaces for single occupant vehicles. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.462 Private dance.

“Private dance” means a dance which is limited to those persons individually invited and admitted, with or without charge, conducted by a club, society or association organized or incorporated for private, benevolent or charitable purposes, having a membership, and which holds meetings other than such dances at regular intervals, and when the proceeds, if any, of such dance are used for the purpose of such organization. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.465 Property line.

“Property line” means the same as “lot line,” CMC 17.04.378. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.466 Property owner.

“Property owner” means the individual, group, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which holds lawful title and legal right of possession to real property. For purposes of determining standing to file an application under this title for a conditional use permit or variance, “property owner” shall be deemed to include a lessee under a written lease with not less than one year’s term remaining. (Ord. 1657 § 1, 1987.)


17.04.468 Provision.

“Provision” includes all regulations and requirements referred to in the reference. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.471 Public dance.

“Public dance” means a dance open to the public, with or without charge. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.474 Public dancing place.

“Public dancing place” means a place where a public dance is held or conducted. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.475 Public storage facility.

“Public storage facility” means a place for storing personal goods and materials of private individuals and companies. The goods and materials thus stored are not intended for redistribution, resale or other commercial activity. No other activity other than the storage described above is intended for a public storage facility. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 1974.)


17.04.477 Quasi-public organization.

“Quasi-public organization” means any nongovernmental, nonprofit organization that is devoted to public service and welfare. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.480 Ramada.

“Ramada” means an arbor or pergola-like structure usually associated with a residential trailer. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.483 Residence.

“Residence” means a building used, designed or intended to be used as a home or dwelling place. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.486 Rest home.

“Rest home” means premises used for the housing of and caring for the ambulatory aged or infirm. There shall be only incidental convalescent care not involving either trained nurse or physician residing on the premises. There shall be no surgery, physical therapy or other similar activities such as are customarily provided in sanitariums and hospitals. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.489 Retail store.

“Retail store” means a business selling goods, wares or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.492 Room.

“Room” means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathrooms, closets, hallways and service porches. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.495 Rooming house.

For a definition of “rooming house,” see CMC 17.04.099. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.498 Sanitarium.

“Sanitarium” means a health station or retreat or other place where patients are housed and where medical or surgical treatment is given. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.501 Schools, elementary, intermediate, junior high and high.

“Elementary, intermediate, junior high and high schools” means an institution of learning which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State. (See Educational institution, CMC 17.04.228.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.504 Schools, private.

“Private schools” means certified or licensed schools offering instruction in vocational studies and social, vocation and rehabilitation training. (Ord. 1535 § 2, 1983; Ord. 1384 § 1, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.507 Service bay.

“Service bay” means an enclosed area capable of holding one vehicle for greasing, tire repair, washing, lubrication or minor mechanical repairs. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.510 Service stations.

“Service stations” mean the same as “automobile service stations,” CMC 17.04.075. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.513 Setback line, front yard.

“Front yard setback line” means the line which defines the depth of the required front yard. The setback line is parallel with the street line or, when established by general plan, with the highway right-of-way line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the front yard in the zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.516 Setback line, rear yard or side yard.

“Rear yard or side yard setback line” means the line which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard. The setback line is parallel with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in the zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.518 Shared-space commercial establishment.

“Shared-space commercial establishment” means a comprehensive commercial development incorporating retail food uses (including prepared retail food service), general retail merchandise, administrative office and technology space, or personal services (such as hair salons, barbers, and similar activities, but not including personal massage), where the uses are situated in a single building or in multiple small structures within a single development parcel, but utilize common space for restrooms, storage, dining, common work stations, utilities, and/or similar infrastructure. “Shared-space commercial establishment” shall not include “multi-tenant retail arcades,” CMC 17.04.425. (Ord. 19-01 § 4, 2019.)


17.04.519 Sign.

“Sign” means any device for visual communication, other than an outdoor advertising structure, including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia, which is used to advertise or promote the interest of any person, business, group or enterprise, relating to goods, services, products and the like produced or available on the premises on which the sign is located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.522 Sign area.

“Sign area” means the field of the sign, not including structural supports and not including the face of the building, except that portion which forms the field. On a projecting or freestanding sign, only one face shall be counted in computing sign area. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.525 Site plan.

“Site plan” means a plan showing the proposed arrangements of buildings and facilities on the land as set forth in Chapter 17.64 CMC and in other ordinances of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.527 Slope.

“Slope” means a natural or artificial incline, as a hillside or terrace. Slope is usually expressed as a ratio. For example, a horizontal distance of 100 feet with a rise of 50 feet would be expressed as a 2:1 slope (see also Grade, CMC 17.04.276, Top of slope, CMC 17.04.582 and Toe of slope, CMC 17.04.579.) (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.528 South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

“South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)” is the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to bring the South Coast Air Basin into compliance with federal and state air quality standards. The South Coast Air Basin comprises the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.529 Specified anatomical areas.

As used herein, “specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human (1) genitals or pubic region; (2) buttocks; and (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of areola;

B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

C. Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (A)(1) or (2) of this section. (Ord. 97-1813 § 5, 1997.)


17.04.530 Specified sexual activities.

As used herein, “specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

B. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

C. Masturbation, actual or simulated;

D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. (Ord. 97-1813 § 5, 1997.)


17.04.531 Stable, private.

“Private stable” means a detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.534 Stable, public.

“Public stable” means a stable other than a private stable. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.537 Stacked.

“Stacked” means a pile of objects placed in an orderly manner, one above the other. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.539 Stock cooperatives.

“Stock cooperatives” means a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. (Ord. 1445 § 1, 1980.)


17.04.540 Stored.

“Stored” means the placing of one or more objects for the purpose of storage. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.543 Story.

“Story” means a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. (See Basement, CMC 17.04.087.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.546 Story, half.

“Half story” means a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which are not more than three feet above the floor of such story. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.549 Street.

“Street” means a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this title. “Street” includes all major and secondary highways, freeways, traffic collector streets and local streets. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.552 Street centerline.

“Street centerline” means the centerline of a street or right-of-way as established by official surveys. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.555 Street line.

“Street line” means the boundary line between street and abutting property. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.558 Street, local.

“Local street” means any street, dedicated, deeded or condemned as such, serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown as a major or secondary highway or traffic collector street on the general plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.561 Street, side.

“Side street” means that street bounding a corner or reversed corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.564 Structural alterations.

“Structural alterations” mean any change in the supporting members of a building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, roof trusses, foundations, piles or retaining walls or similar components. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.567 Structure.

“Structure” means anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner, which requires a building permit and which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on the ground, excepting outdoor areas such as patios, paved areas, walks, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreation areas. This includes billboards and outdoor advertising structures. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.570 Supermarket.

“Supermarket” means a market having 10,000 or more square feet of floor area devoted principally to the sale of food. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.572 Surgery or surgical center – Medical.

“Surgery or surgical center – medical” means a medical facility where specialty medical and surgical procedures are performed by qualified medical professionals, but where there is no overnight accommodation of the patient. (Ord. 19-01 § 5, 2019.)


17.04.573 Swimming pool.

“Swimming pool” means a tank or pool created by artificial means designed for the purpose of containing an outside body of water and offering the possibility of use for swimming, bathing and/or total bodily immersion by any person, any portion of which tank or pool exceeds 36 inches in depth and which pool or tank is not portable in design or construction. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.576 Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores.

“Thrift shop, secondhand and used merchandise stores” means a business involved in the sale of used goods and merchandise, where the sale of such used goods and merchandise comprises 25 percent or more of the total monthly sales volume. Thrift shop, secondhand and used merchandise stores may be nonprofit or for-profit organizations. Nonprofit thrift shop, secondhand and used merchandise stores are usually charities themselves, and receive donations and sell them directly to consumers. For-profit thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores typically purchase donations from charitable organizations, yard sales, overstock stores, as well as accepting donations, and sell them to consumers. Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores generally appeal to bargain hunters, consumers in need of inexpensive merchandise or consumers who are environmentally conscious in recycling and not wasting. Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores do not include bookstores; junk dealers, junkyards or automobile wrecking; the sale of antiques; the sale of cars and other used vehicles; consignment stores; or pawn shops. Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores do not include the sale of used items when the volume of such products offered for sale on the premises is less than 25 percent of the total monthly volume offered for sale (example DVD sales). The establishment of this use, “thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores” shall be subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.62 CMC within C-3, C-3A and C-4 commercial zones. The conditional use permit shall address the specific operational standards including, but not limited to, hours of operations, donations hours and designated area for collection of donation items, outdoor display of merchandise, and minimum building requirements. (Ord. 18-05 § 5, 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 5, 2017; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.579 Toe of slope.

“Toe of slope” means that point or line of initial break where the terrain changes to an upward direction. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.582 Top of slope.

“Top of slope” means that point or line of initial break where the terrain changes to a downward direction. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.585 Townhouse.

“Townhouse” means the same as “condominium,” CMC 17.04.162. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.587 Trade school.

“Trade school” means a public or private school offering instruction in the technical, commercial and/or trade skills, such as real estate, business and secretarial, electronics, automotive and aircraft, medical and dental, and similar commercial establishments. (Ord. 1535 § 3, 1983.)


17.04.588 Trading area.

“Trading area” means the area served by an existing commercial development or to be served by the proposed commercial development and from which the development draws its support. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.591 Trailer park or mobile home park.

“Trailer park” or “mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where space is rented or held for rent to two or more owners or users of residential trailers or mobile homes. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.594 Trailer, residential.

“Residential trailer” means a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfare in accordance with the provisions of the State Vehicle Code and to be used for human habitation. No trailer shall be used as a place of human habitation except in regularly established trailer parks. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.597 Trailer space.

“Trailer space” means a plot of ground within any trailer park designed for the accommodation of one residential trailer and related facilities. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.600 Transient.

“Transient” means a person who receives dwelling accommodations for a price, with or without meals, for a period of not more than 180 consecutive days. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.601 Transportation demand management.

“Transportation demand management” means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services, and policies. Transportation demand management addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling, vanpooling, bicycling, use of public transit, and walking; and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (such as telecommuting or compressed work weeks). (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.603 Truck and/or trailer sales lot.

“Truck and/or trailer sales lot” means an open area where trucks and/or trailers are sold, leased or rented and where no repairs, repainting or remodeling is done. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.606 Use.

“Use” means the purpose for which land and/or building is erected, arranged, designed or intended, or for which land and/or building is or may be occupied or maintained. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.609 Used.

“Used” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,” “occupied or intended to be occupied for.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)




17.04.610 Vanpool.

“Vanpool” means a group of seven to 15 persons who regularly use a van for commuting together to and from work. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.612 Variance.

“Variance” means a permit for deviation from the provisions established in the zone in which the property is located, granted by the commission pursuant to Chapter 17.78 CMC, and intended to permit the fair use of property in cases where the strict enforcements of the law would, because of exceptional conditions on the land, such as the location, size, shape or slope of the lot, work an unnecessary hardship on the subject property which would not apply to other properties in the same zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.613 Vehicle.

“Vehicle” means a motorized form of transportation, such as an automobile, van, bus, truck, or motorcycle. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.614 Very low income.

“Very low income” means an income equal to or less than 50 percent of the median income of Los Angeles County, with adjustments for family size. (Ord. 93-1750 § 2, 1993.)


17.04.615 Visual obstruction.

“Visual obstruction” means fencing, hedges, trees, shrubs and walls or any combination thereof which materially limits the visibility of persons at intersecting or intercepting streets and alleys. (See also Corner cutback, CMC 17.04.171.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.618 Wall.

“Wall” means any structure or device forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that 50 percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal plane. This includes concrete, concrete block, wood or other materials that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. Walls shall be constructed to conform to the standards of the building code of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.619 Warehouse.

“Warehouse” means a building to store wares or goods before distribution for resale. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 1974.)


17.04.621 Yard.

“Yard” means any open landscaped space, other than a court, about which buildings are grouped and which are maintained as an area clear of structures, appurtenances, projection, motor vehicles, trailers and vehicular paving, except when permitted for aesthetic considerations. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.624 Yard, front.

“Front yard” means a space between the front yard setback line and the front lot line or future highway right-of-way line, and extending the full width of the lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.627 Yard, rear.

“Rear yard” means a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.630 Yard, side.

“Side yard” means a space extending from the front yard setback line, or from the front lot line where no front yard is required by this title, to the rear yard setback line or rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.633 Zone.

“Zone” means a land area shown or described in the land use zoning map and as set forth and described in this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.636 Zone, change of.

“Change of zone” means the legislative act of removing one or more parcels of land from one zone and placing them in another zone on the land use zoning map. (See CMC 17.80.080 through 17.80.150.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


17.04.639 Zone reclassification.

“Zone reclassification” means the same as “change of zone,” CMC 17.04.636. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)

Article II. Standards


17.04.642 Planting maintenance.

A. Generally. In a space between a fence or wall and a property line or right-of-way line, the planting shall be regulated so as to maintain the required open areas in the fence structure in order to preserve passage of light and air and permit necessary visibility.

B. Retail and Office Complexes. Retail and office complexes that are divided into two or more tenant spaces shall average at least 1,000 square feet of building area per tenant or business space with no tenant or business space less than 400 square feet in area. (Ord. 92-1736 § 2(B), 1992; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.30.)


Chapter 17.06 ZONES AND MAP

Sections:

17.06.010    Designation of zones.

17.06.020    Zoning map – Generally.

17.06.030    Zoning map – Zone boundary designations.

17.06.040    Zoning map – Where filed.

17.06.050    Zoning map – Amendments.

17.06.060    Zoning map – Revision.

17.06.070    Zoning annexed areas or prezoning areas to be annexed.


17.06.010 Designation of zones.

For the purposes related to the orderly development of the city and in order to carry out the provisions of this title, the city is divided into the following zones:

	Symbol	Zone Name

	A-1	Agricultural and residential zone (single-family)

	A-2	Agricultural and residential zone (single-family)

	E-1/2 estate	Residential zone (single-family estate)

	E-1 estate	Residential zone (single-family estate)

	E-2-1/2 estate	Residential zone (single-family estate)

	E-5 estate	Residential zone (single-family estate)

	R-1-20,000	Residential zone (single-family) 20,000 square feet minimum lot area

	R-1-10,000	Residential zone (single-family) 10,000 square feet minimum lot area

	R-1-8500	Residential zone (single-family) 8,500 square feet minimum lot area

	R-1-7500	Residential zone (single-family) 7,500 square feet minimum lot area

	RD-3000	Residential zone (multiple-family) 3,000 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit

	RD-2000	Residential zone (multiple-family) 2,000 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit

	RD-1500	Residential zone (multiple-family) 1,500 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit

	RD-1250	Residential zone (multiple-family) 1,250 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit

	R-TP	Residential zone (trailer and mobile home parks)

	R-R	Residential recreation zone

	C-P	Commercial, administrative and professional office zone

	C-1	Commercial zone (neighborhood stores)

	C-2	Commercial zone (neighborhood shopping center)

	C-3	Commercial zone (central business)

	C-3A	Commercial zone (regional or community shopping centers)

	C-4	Commercial zone (highway)

	C-5	Commercial zone (specified highway)

	C-R	Commercial zone (recreation)

	M-1	Light manufacturing zone

(1964 Code Appx. A § 0.60.)


17.06.020 Zoning map – Generally.

The boundaries of the various zones are shown upon a map attached hereto and made a part of this title, being designated as the “official zoning map,” and the map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if the matters and information set forth by the map were all duly described herein. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.70.)


17.06.030 Zoning map – Zone boundary designations.

A. Where indicated zone boundaries are approximately street, alley or lot lines, the lines are determined to be the boundaries of the zone. Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the “official zoning map.” In the absence of a dimension, the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the map.

B. A street, alley, railroad or railway right-of-way, watercourse, drainage channel or body of water included on the zoning map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zone of adjoining property on either side thereof; and where such street, alley, watercourse, drainage channel or body of water serves as a boundary between two or more different zones, the centerline, or midway line, of such right-of-way, watercourse, channel or body of water extending to the general direction of the long dimension thereof shall be considered the boundary between zones.

C. In the event that a vacated street, alley, right-of-way or easement was the boundary between two zones, the new zone boundaries shall be at the new property line or at a line established at or within 50 feet of the centerline of the street, alley, right-of-way or easement that has been vacated.

D. Where uncertainties exist, the commission shall, by written decision, determine the location of the zone boundary. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.70.)


17.06.040 Zoning map – Where filed.

The original of the official zoning map shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy of the map shall also be filed with the planning, engineering and building departments. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.70.)


17.06.050 Zoning map – Amendments.

All amendments and changes shall be recorded by the city clerk within 48 hours after such amendments or changes become effective. These data shall at that time be filed with the planning director. A new amended official zoning map shall be prepared by the planning department at the end of each fiscal year upon which is shown all changes and amendments enacted during the previous period of time. The zoning map shall thereafter be filed with the city clerk, and planning, engineering and building departments. (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.70.)


17.06.060 Zoning map – Revision.

The council may from time to time order the revision of the official zoning map by the planning department so as to include all changes to date and to replace the original or amended official zoning map which is part of this title. No changes shall be made upon such revised map that have not been made through regular zone change procedure. (See CMC 17.80.080 through 17.80.150.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 0.70.)


17.06.070 Zoning annexed areas or prezoning areas to be annexed.

The planning commission shall, when directed by the council, recommend zoning, as part of the annexation procedure, for an area to be annexed, pursuant to which the council may, in accordance with the recommendations of the planning commission, or as such recommendations may be amended by the council, provide by ordinance, adopted concurrently with or in advance of, the ordinance of annexation, appropriate zoning or prezoning as such zoning classification may be defined herein. Proposed changes of zone affecting territory to be annexed to the city may be initiated and hearings may be held thereon prior to the effective date of annexation when so authorized by the council. (Ord. 1342 § 1, 1976; 1964 Code Appx. A § 0.80.)


Chapter 17.08 A-1 AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.08.010    Intent.

17.08.020    Permitted uses.

17.08.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.08.040    Prohibited uses.

17.08.050    Property development standards generally.

17.08.060    Lot area.

17.08.070    Lot dimensions.

17.08.080    Population density.

17.08.090    Building height – Generally.

17.08.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.08.110    Yards – Generally.

17.08.120    Front yard.

17.08.130    Side yard.

17.08.140    Rear yard.

17.08.150    Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards.

17.08.160    Distance between buildings.

17.08.170    Fences, hedges and walls.

17.08.180    Off-street parking.

17.08.190    Access.

17.08.200    Signs.

17.08.210    Underground utilities.

17.08.220    Site plan review.


17.08.010 Intent.

The A-1 zone is intended for agricultural purposes as herein permitted, with appropriate single-family dwellings at a minimum lot area of two acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.00.)


17.08.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.08.050 through 17.08.210:

A. Farms or ranches for orchards, tree crops, field crops, row crops, truck gardening, berry and bush crops, flower gardening, production and wholesale nurseries, aviaries and mushroom farms;

B. Single-family dwellings;

C. Accessory dwelling units, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.69 CMC.

D. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of not more than three of any of the animals listed below nor more than nine total of any combination of the following animals:

1. Domesticated parrot,

2. Domesticated parakeet,

3. Domesticated rabbits and hares of the family Leporidai,

4. White or albino rats or mice,

5. Golden hamsters of the species Mesocrietus auratus,

6. Guinea pigs of the species Cavia porcellus,

7. Canis familiaris (domestic dogs),

8. Felis catus (domestic cats),

9. Goats,

10. Sheep,

11. Ducks,

12. Geese,

13. Turkeys,

14. Chickens,

15. Pigeons,

16. Doves,

17. Local frogs,

18. Turtles and toads,

19. Tropical fish normally found in a pet store (no limit),

Such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

E. The keeping of horses or bovine animals and Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs, provided:

1. There shall be not more than two horses or bovine animals for each acre of lot area, and

2. There shall not be more than one Vietnamese pot-bellied pig per lot or parcel, and

3. Such animals are maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

F. Accessory buildings and uses, including private garage, accessory living quarters, recreation room, private stable, greenhouse, lathhouse, barn, corral, pen, coop or other similar structure, and a building or room for packing products produced or raised on the same premises, subject to all provisions regarding location;

G. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a church or school;

H. Sale of field and row crops grown on the premises;

I. Occasional sale. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 6, 7, 2019; Ord. 92-1739 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 1, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1182 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 1.01.)


17.08.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Farms or ranches for the grazing, breeding, raising, or boarding of horses or cattle, including riding stables or academies; provided, that the minimum lot size for such use shall be five acres;

B. Animal hospitals;

C. Churches;

D. Country clubs and golf courses and related driving range, tennis and swimming clubs;

E. Day nurseries and nursery schools;

F. Educational institutions;

G. Electric distribution and public utility substations;

H. Lodges and meeting halls;

I. Public riding stable and academy;

J. Rest homes;

K. Sanitariums and hospitals;

L. Private dance, when conducted in conjunction with country clubs, tennis and swimming clubs and lodges. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.02.)


17.08.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the A-1 zone, unless otherwise set forth in CMC 17.08.020 and 17.08.030:

A. Multiple dwellings;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Hog ranches;

E. Commercial or industrial poultry or rabbit slaughtering or processing plants. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 8, 9, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 4, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 1.03.)


17.08.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.08.060 through 17.08.210 shall apply to all land and buildings in the A-1 zone, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (Ord. 1251 § 2, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.060 Lot area.

Each lot, farm, ranch, orchard or other parcel of land shall have a minimum area of two acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards:

A. Each lot shall have a minimum width of 300 feet;

B. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 300 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.080 Population density.

There shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that one accessory dwelling unit may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 10, 2019;1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 35 feet or two and one-half stories, whichever is less. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.110 Yards – Generally.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.110, shall apply. The special provisions in CMC 17.08.020(D)(2) shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.120 Front yard.

Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet extending across the full width of the lot except for special conditions provided for below. The required front yard shall not be used for storage of trailers, boats or house trailers, or for storage of any materials. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.130 Side yard.

Each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than 20 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.140 Rear yard.

Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.150 Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.150, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.160 Distance between buildings.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160, shall apply, and special provisions in CMC 17.08.020(D)(2) shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.170 Fences, hedges and walls.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.170 through 17.26.210, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.180 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.190 Access.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.230 through 17.26.250, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.200 Signs.

A. The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.260 through 17.26.290, shall apply.

B. In addition, signs advertising agricultural products produced and sold on the premises shall be permitted, provided:

1. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in area;

2. There shall be not more than one such sign per 300 feet of frontage on a dedicated street. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.04.)


17.08.210 Underground utilities.

Utility lines including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be placed underground in accordance with CMC 17.64.120, unless special permission to construct said lines above the ground is granted. (Ord. 1251 § 3, 1974.)


17.08.220 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 7, 1988.)


Chapter 17.10 A-2 AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.10.010    Intent.

17.10.020    Permitted uses.

17.10.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.10.040    Prohibited uses.

17.10.050    Property development standards generally.

17.10.060    Site plan review.


17.10.010 Intent.

The A-2 zone is intended for agricultural purposes, including poultry and rabbit raising, with appropriate single-family dwellings at a minimum lot area of two acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.10.)


17.10.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards of the A-1 zone, CMC 17.08.050 through 17.08.210, except as specifically provided in subsection (B) of this section:

A. All uses permitted in the A-1 zone, CMC 17.08.020(A) through (I);

B. Commercial poultry and rabbit raising, provided that:

1. No killing or dressing shall be permitted other than of the poultry or rabbits raised on the premises and that such killing or dressing shall be done in an accessory building designed specifically for said purpose,

2. No poultry houses and/or runs or rabbit hutches shall be located less than 100 feet from the boundary with any adjacent residential or A-1 zone. (Ord. 19-07 § 11, 2019; Ord. 1251 § 4, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 1.11.)


17.10.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The uses which may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit in the A-1 zone, CMC 17.08.030, may be so permitted in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 1.12.)


17.10.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the A-2 zone, unless otherwise set forth in CMC 17.08.020, 17.08.030 and 17.10.020:

A. Multiple dwellings;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Hog ranches. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 12, 13, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 5, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 1.13.)


17.10.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the A-1 zone, CMC 17.08.050 through 17.08.210, shall apply to all land and buildings in the A-2 zone, except that any lot held under separate ownership, or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. The special provisions of CMC 17.10.020(B)(2) shall apply. (Ord. 1251 § 5, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 1.14.)


17.10.060 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 8, 1988.)


Chapter 17.12 E-1/2 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE)

Sections:

17.12.010    Intent.

17.12.020    Permitted uses.

17.12.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.12.040    Prohibited uses.

17.12.050    Property development standards generally.

17.12.060    Lot area.

17.12.070    Lot dimensions.

17.12.080    Population density.

17.12.090    Building height – Generally.

17.12.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.12.110    Yards – Generally.

17.12.120    Site plan review.


17.12.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family homes on large estate-type homesites, with a minimum lot area of one-half acre and not more than one dwelling unit permitted on any lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.00.)


17.12.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.12.050 through 17.12.110 and to those of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160 through 17.26.300:

A. Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling per lot, except that an accessory dwelling unit permitted under this chapter shall not count toward the one dwelling per lot limitation;

B. Accessory buildings and uses, including accessory living quarters for caretaker and servants, recreation room, private stable, greenhouse, lathhouse and tree or ground crops;

C. In connection with the property, the keeping of horses upon the following conditions:

1. The lot area is not less than one-half acre,

2. There shall be not more than one horse for each member of the family; however, not more than four horses shall be kept on any one lot,

3. All such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

D. Guest house, subject to the regulations in CMC 17.04.291;

E. In connection with the residential use of the property, the keeping of poultry and rabbits for noncommercial purposes is permitted; however, not more than six of each shall be kept on any one lot, and facilities for the housing or keeping of such shall not be closer than 35 feet to any dwelling or other building used for human habitation, or closer than 50 feet to any lot line abutting a street;

F. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of not more than three of any of the animals listed below nor more than nine total of any combination of the following animals:

1. Domesticated parrot,

2. Domesticated parakeet,

3. White or albino rats or mice,

4. Golden hamsters of the species Mesocrietus auratus,

5. Guinea pigs of the species Cavia porcellus,

6. Canis familiaris (domestic dogs),

7. Felis catus (domestic cats),

8. Horses,

9. Cattle,

10. Goats,

11. Sheep,

12. Ducks,

13. Geese,

14. Turkeys,

15. Pigeons,

16. Doves,

17. Local frogs,

18. Turtles and toads,

19. Tropical fish normally found in a pet store (no limit),

20. Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs (not more than one per lot or parcel),

Such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

G. Occasional sale;

H. In-home business permitted in accordance with CMC 17.26.035 of the R-1-7500 residential zone;

I. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 14, 15, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 6, 2004; Ord. 92-1739 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1664 § 3, 1988; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 2, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 6, 1974; Ord. 1182 §§ 2, 3, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.01.)


17.12.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The uses permitted, subject to conditional use permit in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.030, may be so permitted in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.02.)


17.12.040 Prohibited uses.

A. The uses expressly prohibited in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.040, shall be so prohibited in this zone.

B. The raising or keeping of pigs, hogs, goats, fowl and livestock, other than provided for in CMC 17.12.020, shall be prohibited. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.03.)


17.12.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160 through 17.26.300, shall apply to all land and buildings in the E-1/2 estate zone. In addition, the property development standards contained in CMC 17.12.060 through 17.12.110 shall apply, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (Ord. 1251 § 7, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of one-half acre. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot depth” and “lot width,” CMC 17.04.369 and 17.04.405, respectively:

A. Width.

1. All lots shall have a minimum width of 100 feet.

2. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front building setback limit.

B. All lots shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of one-half acre of lot area for each dwelling unit and there shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that a second dwelling unit may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 16, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 6, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.090 Building height – Generally.

There shall be a minimum of one-half acre of lot area for each dwelling unit and there shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that an accessory dwelling unit may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.110 Yards – Generally.

The yard provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.110 through 17.26.150, shall apply, except that each lot shall have:

A. A front yard of not less than 40 feet;

B. A side yard on each side of not less than 15 feet;

C. A rear yard of not less than 25 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.04.)


17.12.120 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 9, 1988.)


Chapter 17.14 E-1 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE)

Sections:

17.14.010    Intent.

17.14.020    Permitted uses.

17.14.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.14.040    Prohibited uses.

17.14.050    Property development standards generally.

17.14.060    Lot area.

17.14.070    Lot dimensions.

17.14.071    Maximum land coverage.

17.14.075    Additions to existing buildings.

17.14.080    Population density.

17.14.090    Accessory building height.

17.14.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.14.105    Floor area of accessory building.

17.14.110    Yards – Generally.

17.14.120    Front yard.

17.14.130    Side yard.

17.14.140    Rear yard.

17.14.150    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.14.160    Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

17.14.170    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.14.180    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.14.190    Off-street parking.

17.14.200    Vehicular access.

17.14.210    Signs – Generally.

17.14.220    Nameplates.

17.14.230    “For Rent,” “For Sale” and similar signs.

17.14.240    Subdivision signs.

17.14.250    Underground utilities.

17.14.260    Site plan review.


17.14.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family homes of large estate-type homesites, with a minimum lot area of not less than one acre. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.10.)


17.14.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.14.050 through 17.14.250:

A. Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling per lot, except that an accessory dwelling unit permitted under this chapter shall not count toward the one dwelling per lot limitation;

B. Accessory buildings and uses, including accessory living quarters for caretaker and servants, recreation room, private stable, barn, greenhouse, lathhouse and tree or ground crops;

C. In connection with the residential use of the property, the keeping of certain animals and poultry for noncommercial purposes and solely for the enjoyment of the owners or occupants of the land is permitted subject to the following conditions:

1. The lot area is not less than one acre,

2. There shall not be more than five animals consisting of cattle, horses, sheep and/or domesticated dogs or cats, for each acre of land,

3. There shall not be more than 10 fowl consisting of chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl, pigeons, ducks, pheasant or geese for each acre of land,

4. There shall not be more than one Vietnamese pot-bellied pig per lot or parcel,

5. There shall be not more than three of any of the animals listed below nor more than nine total of any combination of the following animals:

a. Domesticated parrot,

b. Domesticated parakeet,

c. Domesticated rabbits and hares of the family Leporidai,

d. White or albino rats or mice,

e. Golden hamsters of the species Mesocrietus auratus,

f. Guinea pigs of the species Cavia porcellus,

g. Goats,

h. Doves,

i. Local frogs,

j. Turtles and toads,

k. Tropical fish normally found in a pet store (no limit);

6. All such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

D. Guest house, subject to the regulations in CMC 17.04.291;

E. Occasional sale;

F. In-home business permitted in accordance with CMC 17.26.035 of the R-1-7500 residential zone;

G. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC.

(Ord. 19-07 §§ 17, 18, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 7, 2004; Ord. 92-1739 § 3, 1992; Ord. 1664 § 4, 1988; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 3, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 8, 1974; Ord. 1182 §§ 4, 5, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.11.)


17.14.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC;

A. Churches;

B. Country clubs and golf courses and related driving range;

C. Educational institution;

D. Electric distribution and public utility substations. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.12.)


17.14.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the E-1 estate residential zone:

A. Multiple dwellings;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Trailer parks;

E. The raising or keeping of animals, poultry or reptiles, either wild or domesticated, other than provided for in CMC 17.14.020. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.13.)


17.14.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.14.060 through 17.14.250 shall apply to all land and buildings in the E-1 estate residential zone; except, that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.060 Lot area.

Each lot area shall have a minimum area of one acre. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot depth” and “lot width,” CMC 17.04.369 and 17.04.405, respectively:

A. Width.

1. All lots shall have a minimum width of 100 feet.

2. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front building setback limit.

B. All lots shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.071 Maximum land coverage.

The maximum land coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 35 percent of the total land or parcel area. (Ord. 93-1749 § 1, 1993.)


17.14.075 Additions to existing buildings.

The exterior and roof of all enclosed room additions to existing buildings shall be the same as or similar to the architecture and materials of the existing building. Reasonable variations in design shall be permitted upon approval of the planning director. (Ord. 1315 § 2, 1975.)


17.14.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of one acre per lot area for each dwelling unit and there shall be no more than one single-family dwelling unit on any one lot except as otherwise provided in CMC 17.14.020(A); and provided, however, that one accessory dwelling unit may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 19, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 7, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.090 Accessory building height.

No main building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. Accessory buildings shall not have a height greater than one story or 15 feet. (Ord. 93-1749 § 2, 1993; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

A. Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this section and CMC 17.14.090 when approved by the commission; provided, that the same shall be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. No penthouse or roof structures or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional living or floor space.

B. On lots located on slopes downhill from street grade and having a 25 percent or greater grade measured in the general direction of the side lot lines, an additional story may be constructed on the main building; provided, that the ceiling of the lowest story shall be not more than two feet above the street level measured at the center of the lot frontage. (Ord. 11-1996 § 3, 2011; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.105 Floor area of accessory building.

The maximum ground floor area of accessory structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. (Ord. 93-1749 § 3, 1993.)


17.14.110 Yards – Generally.

A. Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

B. A swimming pool shall not be located in any required front yard, nor shall it be located closer than five feet from any side or rear property line. It shall be entirely enclosed as required in CMC 17.14.160.

C. No residential building shall be erected within 100 feet of the right-of-way of any railroad line or freeway.

D. Buildings used for a church, school, institution or other similar use shall observe the provisions of the zone for front yards and for side yards abutting a street. Required yards may be used only for access purposes.

E. All utilities, equipment, machinery and satellite and disc antennas, located in yards, shall be screened at ground level from adjacent properties behind enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the adjacent building, or shall be screened by landscaping or fencing. Satellite and disc antennas with a diameter greater than two feet shall not be permitted on the roof of any structure. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 1985; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.120 Front yard.

A. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 60 feet extending across the full width of the lot, except for special conditions provided for in subsections (B) and (C) of this section. The required front yard shall not be used for the storage of trailers, boats or house trailers or for the storage of any materials.

B. Where lots comprising 50 percent or more of the block frontage are developed with a front yard either greater or lesser in depth than that prescribed in this section, the average of such existing front yards shall establish the front yard for the remaining lots in the block frontage; however, a front yard determined in this way shall not be less than 40 nor more than 80 feet. Existing front yards of more than 80 feet shall be counted as 80 feet in calculating the average.

C. On key lots the minimum front yard shall be the same as the front yard for the adjoining interior lot. When the front yard on the adjoining interior lot is less than prescribed by this title, the key lot front yard may be the same; however, in no case shall the key lot front yard be less than 40 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.130 Side yard.

A. Each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than 30 feet, except as provided for below.

B. In hillside areas where all the following conditions occur: the difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more, and the grade of the slope between the top and the toe of the slope is four feet horizontal to one foot vertical or greater, the minimum distance from the toe or top of the slope to a main building shall be not less than five feet. On the lower lot, this distance shall be increased one foot for every additional one foot of height of slope above six feet.

C. On corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this title, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 60 feet. No accessory buildings shall be located in the required side yard abutting the street.

D. On a reversed corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 60 feet. No accessory buildings shall be located in the required side yard.

E. When siding on an existing alley, a main building shall be located not less than 30 feet from the lot line adjacent to the alley.

F. No building including accessory buildings shall be located in any required side yard. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.140 Rear yard.

A. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 30 feet, except for special conditions provided for below.

B. In hillside areas where the following conditions occur: where the difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more, and where the grade of the slope between the top and the toe of the slope is four feet horizontal to one vertical or greater, the minimum distance from the toe or top of the slope to any main building on the lot shall be not less than regular rear yard required in the zone. The slope area shall not be considered as part of the required rear yard.

C. When a lot abuts two or more streets, the yard serving as a rear yard shall be not less than 60 feet.

D. No building, including accessory buildings, shall be located in any required rear yard. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.150 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation, or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.160 Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by buildings or by fences or walls not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. The fence or wall shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors, the latching device being located not less than four feet 10 inches above the ground. All fencing must be in place and approved before water is run into the pool. All lighting of pool area shall be so hooded that the light does not shine towards abutting properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.170 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and/or private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established herein. In hillside areas, corner cutback treatment shall include such grading as may be necessary to provide for reasonable intersection visibility.

A. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersecting and intercepting streets and/or alleys. The cutback line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall have a tangent of not less than 17 feet, measured from the point of the intersecting lines.

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall have a tangent of not less than 17 feet, measured from the point of the intersecting lines.

C. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.180 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not greater than six feet in height shall be permitted on or within all rear and side property lines on interior lots, and corner lots when abutting a street, on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines. (See subsection (B) of this section for reference to reverse corner lots.)

B. On a reverse corner lot, fences, hedges, walls or retaining walls not greater than six feet in height may be located in the required side yard not closer than 60 feet to the side property line abutting a street, on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines.

C. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not over three feet in height shall be permitted in any required front, side or rear yards abutting a street. In required corner cutback areas, only openwork fences not more than three feet in height shall be permitted. Walls, hedges and other visual obstructions are prohibited.

D. To enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, fences over six feet in height shall be permitted; provided, that portion of the fence or structure which is higher than six feet shall be composed of wire mesh or other materials whose vertical surface is not more than 10 percent solid. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.190 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.200 Vehicular access.

A. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property requiring off-street parking.

B. Vehicular access to lots fronting on a major or secondary highway shall be by way of an alley or service road. When unimproved lots of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title cannot secure access by way of an alley or service road, there shall be a paved turning area on the lot to permit motor vehicles to head into the street. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.210 Signs – Generally.

CMC 17.14.210 through 17.14.240 shall include as part of their provisions those portions of existing codes and ordinances which relate to the erection and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising structures as are not in conflict herewith. Signs and other commercial advertising shall be permitted in this zone only as provided in CMC 17.14.220 through 17.14.240. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.220 Nameplates.

Nameplates shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A. Nameplates shall not exceed one square foot in area and there shall be not more than one nameplate per dwelling unit;

B. Nameplates shall display only the following:

1. Name of the premises upon which it is displayed, and/or

2. Name of the owner or lessees of the premises, and/or

3. Address of the premises. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.230 “For Rent,” “For Sale” and similar signs.

“For Rent,” “For Sale” and signs of similar type shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A. Not more than two such signs shall be permitted on any lot or parcel;

B. No such sign shall exceed four square feet in area;

C. The sign shall be posted on the subject lot by the owner or his authorized agent. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.240 Subdivision signs.

The following signs advertising structures shall be permitted:

A. Temporary real estate signs and advertising real property which has been subdivided for purposes of sale or lease shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:

1. Such signs shall be located on the premises within the boundaries of the subdivision which they advertise,

2. Such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area,

3. There shall be not more than two such signs per 300 feet of frontage,

4. Before any sign or advertising structure shall be erected, a permit therefor shall have been issued by the building department for a six-month period,

5. The sign shall remain only as long as some portion of the property advertised for sale remains unsold, or for a period of six months, whichever period is shorter. No such sign shall remain longer than six months unless the permit therefor has been renewed by the building department;

B. Small signs are permitted within the tract; provided there shall be no more than one such sign for each three lots. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in area;

C. Signs are permitted on the same lot with a model home; provided they not exceed three in number and four square feet each in area. The signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the initial sale of the lot and/or home. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.14.)


17.14.250 Underground utilities.

Utility lines including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be placed underground in accordance with CMC 17.64.030(E), unless special permission to construct said lines above the ground is granted. (Ord. 1251 § 9, 1974)


17.14.260 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 10, 1988.)


Chapter 17.16 E-2-1/2 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE)

Sections:

17.16.010    Intent.

17.16.020    Permitted uses.

17.16.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.16.040    Prohibited uses.

17.16.050    Property development standards generally.

17.16.060    Lot area.

17.16.070    Site plan review.


17.16.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family homes on large estate-type homesites, with a minimum lot area of not less than two and one-half acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.20.)


17.16.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the uses permitted in the E-1 zone, CMC 17.14.020, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in the E-1 zone, CMC 17.14.060 through 17.14.250, except as noted in CMC 17.16.050 and 17.16.060. (Ord. 1251 § 10, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.21.)


17.16.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit, as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Churches;

B. Country clubs and golf courses and related driving range;

C. Educational institution;

D. Electric distribution and public utility substation. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.22.)


17.16.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the E-2-1/2 estate residential zone:

A. Multiple dwellings;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Trailer parks;

E. The raising or keeping of animals, poultry or reptiles, either wild or domesticated, other than provided for in CMC 17.16.020. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.23.)


17.16.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the E-1 zone, CMC 17.14.050 through 17.14.250, shall apply to all land and buildings in the E-2-1/2 zone, except for the provisions of CMC 17.16.060. (Ord. 1251 § 11, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.24.)


17.16.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of two and one-half acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.24.)


17.16.070 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 11, 1988.)


Chapter 17.18 E-5 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE)

Sections:

17.18.010    Intent.

17.18.020    Permitted uses.

17.18.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.18.040    Prohibited uses.

17.18.050    Property development standards generally.

17.18.060    Lot area.

17.18.070    Site plan review.


17.18.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family homes on large estate-type homesites, with a minimum lot area of not less than five acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.30.)


17.18.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the uses permitted in the E-1 zone, CMC 17.14.020, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in the E-1 zone, CMC 17.14.050 through 17.14.250, except as noted in CMC 17.18.050 and 17.18.060. (Ord. 1251 § 12, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.31.)


17.18.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit, as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Churches;

B. Country clubs and golf courses and related driving range;

C. Educational institution;

D. Electric distribution and public utility substation. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.32.)


17.18.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the E-5 estate residential zone:

A. Multiple dwellings;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Trailer parks;

E. The raising or keeping of pigs, hogs, goats and livestock other than provided for in CMC 17.16.020. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.33.)


17.18.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the E-1 zone, CMC 17.14.050 through 17.14.250, shall apply to all land and buildings in the E-5 zone, except for the provisions of CMC 17.18.060. (Ord. 1251 § 13, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 2.34.)


17.18.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of not less than five acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 2.34.)


17.18.070 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 12, 1988.)


Chapter 17.20 R-1-20,000 RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.20.010    Intent.

17.20.020    Permitted uses.

17.20.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.20.040    Prohibited uses.

17.20.050    Property development standards generally.

17.20.060    Lot area.

17.20.070    Lot dimensions.

17.20.080    Population density.

17.20.090    Building height – Generally.

17.20.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.20.110    Yards – Generally.

17.20.120    Site plan review.


17.20.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family homes on large estate-type homesites, not more than one dwelling unit permitted on any lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.00.)


17.20.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.20.050 through 17.20.110 and to those of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160 through 17.26.300:

A. Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling per lot, except that an accessory dwelling unit permitted under this chapter shall not count toward the one dwelling per lot limitation;

B. Guest house, subject to the regulations in CMC 17.04.291;

C. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a church or school;

D. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of not more than three of any of the animals listed below nor more than nine total of any combination of the following animals:

1. Domesticated parrot,

2. Domesticated parakeet,

3. Domesticated rabbits and hares of the family Leporidai,

4. White or albino rats or mice,

5. Golden hamsters of the species Mesocrietus auratus,

6. Guinea pigs of the species Cavia porcellus,

7. Canis familiaris (domestic dogs),

8. Felis catus (domestic cats),

9. Ducks,

10. Geese,

11. Turkeys,

12. Chickens,

13. Pigeons,

14. Doves,

15. Local frogs,

16. Turtles and toads,

17. Tropical fish normally found in a pet store (no limit),

Such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

E. Occasional sale;

F. In-home business permitted in accordance with CMC 17.26.035 of the R-1-7500 residential zone;

G. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 20, 21, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 8, 2004; Ord. 1664 § 5, 1988; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 4, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 14, 1974; Ord. 1182 § 6, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.01.)


17.20.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

A. The uses permitted subject to conditional use permit in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.030, may be so permitted in this zone.

B. Caretakers’ residences and servants’ quarters shall also be permitted. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.02.)


17.20.040 Prohibited uses.

The uses expressly prohibited in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.040, shall be prohibited in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.03.)


17.20.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160 through 17.26.300, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1-20,000 zone. In addition, the property development standards contained in CMC 17.20.060 through 17.20.110 shall apply, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (Ord. 1251 § 15, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot depth” and “lot width,” CMC 17.04.369 and 17.04.405, respectively:

A. Width.

1. Interior lots shall have a minimum width of 100 feet,

2. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 102.5 feet,

3. Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of 105 feet,

4. Lots siding on freeways, public schools, recreation areas or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of 125 feet,

5. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 100 at the front building setback line;

B. All lots shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit and there shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that one accessory dwelling unit authorized by this title may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 22, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 8, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.110 Yards – Generally.

The yard provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.110 through 17.26.150, shall apply, except that each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than 10 feet. Other side yard provisions in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.130(B) through (G), shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.04.)


17.20.120 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 13, 1988.)


Chapter 17.22 R-1-10,000 RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.22.010    Intent.

17.22.020    Permitted uses.

17.22.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.22.040    Prohibited uses.

17.22.050    Property development standards generally.

17.22.060    Lot area.

17.22.070    Lot dimensions.

17.22.080    Population density.

17.22.090    Building height – Generally.

17.22.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.22.110    Yards – Generally.

17.22.120    Site plan review.


17.22.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family homes on large homesites, not more than one dwelling unit permitted on any lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.10.)


17.22.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.22.050 through 17.22.110 and to those of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160 through 17.26.300:

A. Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling per lot, except that an accessory dwelling unit permitted under this chapter shall not count toward the one dwelling per lot limitation;

B. Guest house, subject to the regulations of CMC 17.04.291;

C. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a church or school;

D. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of such animals as permitted in the R-1-20,000 residential zone in accordance with CMC 17.20.020(D);

E. Occasional sale;

F. In-home business permitted in accordance with CMC 17.26.035 of the R-1-7500 residential zone;

G. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 23, 24, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 9, 2004; Ord. 1664 § 6, 1988; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 5, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 16, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.11.)


17.22.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The uses permitted subject to conditional use permit in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.030, may be so permitted in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.12.)


17.22.040 Prohibited uses.

The uses expressly prohibited in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.040, shall be prohibited in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.13.)


17.22.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.160 through 17.26.300, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1-10,000 zone. In addition, the property development standards contained in CMC 17.22.060 through 17.22.110 shall apply, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (Ord. 1251 § 17, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. For method of measurement, see definition of “lot area,” CMC 17.04.360. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot depth” and “lot width,” CMC 17.04.369 and 17.04.405, respectively:

A. Width.

1. Interior lots shall have a minimum width of 80 feet.

2. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 82.5 feet.

3. Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of 85 feet.

4. Lots siding on freeways, public schools or recreation areas, or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of 105 feet.

5. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 80 feet at the front building setback line.

B. Depth.

1. Lots facing on local street shall have a minimum depth of 110 feet.

2. Lots facing or backing on major or secondary highways shall have a minimum depth of 120 feet.

3. Lots backing on a freeway, public school or recreation area, or railroad right-of-way shall have a minimum depth of 125 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit; and provided, however, that there shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that one accessory dwelling unit authorized by this title may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 25, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 9, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.110 Yards – Generally.

The yard provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.110 through 17.26.150, shall apply, except that each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than 10 feet. Other side yard provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.130(B) through (G), shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.14.)


17.22.120 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 14, 1988.)


Chapter 17.24 R-1-8500 RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.24.010    Intent.

17.24.020    Permitted uses.

17.24.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.24.040    Prohibited uses.

17.24.050    Property development standards generally.

17.24.060    Lot area.

17.24.070    Lot dimensions.

17.24.080    Population density.

17.24.090    Site plan review.


17.24.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family residential homes, not more than one dwelling unit permitted on any lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.20.)


17.24.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.24.050 through 17.24.080 and to those of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.090 through 17.26.300:

A. Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling per lot, except that an accessory dwelling unit permitted under this chapter shall not count toward the one dwelling per lot limitation;

B. Guest house, subject to the regulations of CMC 17.04.291;

C. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a church or school;

D. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of such animals as permitted in the R-1-20,000 residential zone in accordance with CMC 17.20.020(D);

E. Occasional sale;

F. In-home business permitted in accordance with CMC 17.26.035 of the R-1-7500 residential zone;

G. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 26, 27, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 10, 2004; Ord. 1664 § 7, 1988; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 5, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 18, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.21.)


17.24.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The uses permitted subject to conditional use permit in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.030, may be so permitted in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.22.)


17.24.040 Prohibited uses.

The uses expressly prohibited in the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.040, shall be prohibited in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.23.)


17.24.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.060 through 17.26.300, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1-8500 zone. In addition, the property development standards contained in CMC 17.24.060 through 17.24.080 shall apply, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (Ord. 1251 § 19, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.24.)


17.24.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of 8,500 square feet. For method of measurement, see definition of “lot area,” CMC 17.04.360. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.24.)


17.24.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot depth” and “lot width,” CMC 17.04.369 and 17.04.405, respectively:

A. Width.

1. Interior lots shall have a minimum width of 70 feet.

2. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 77.5 feet.

3. Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of 85 feet.

4. Lots siding on freeways, public schools or recreation areas, or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of 95 feet.

5. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 70 feet at the front building setback line.

B. Depth.

1. Lots facing on local streets shall have a minimum depth of 105 feet.

2. Lots facing or backing on major or secondary highways shall have a minimum depth of 115 feet.

3. Lots backing on a freeway, railroad right-of-way, public school or recreation area shall have a minimum depth of 125 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.24.)


17.24.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of 8,500 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit and there shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that one accessory dwelling unit authorized by this title may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 28, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 10, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.24.)


17.24.090 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 15, 1988.)


Chapter 17.26 R-1-7500 RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SINGLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.26.010    Intent.

17.26.020    Permitted uses.

17.26.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.26.035    In-home business license.

17.26.040    Prohibited uses.

17.26.050    Property development standards generally.

17.26.060    Lot area.

17.26.065    Reserved.

17.26.070    Lot dimensions.

17.26.071    Maximum land coverage.

17.26.075    Additions to existing buildings.

17.26.080    Population density.

17.26.090    Accessory building height.

17.26.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.26.105    Floor area of single-family dwellings.

17.26.106    Floor area of accessory building.

17.26.110    Yards – Generally.

17.26.120    Front yard.

17.26.130    Side yard.

17.26.140    Rear yard.

17.26.150    Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards.

17.26.160    Distance between buildings.

17.26.165    Walls abutting rail line – Height and vegetation requirements.

17.26.170    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.26.180    Fences and walls – Hillside lots.

17.26.190    Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

17.26.200    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.26.210    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.26.220    Off-street parking.

17.26.230    Vehicular access.

17.26.240    Pedestrian access.

17.26.250    Fire safety access.

17.26.260    Signs – Generally.

17.26.270    Nameplates.

17.26.280    “For Rent,” “For Sale” and similar signs.

17.26.285    Signs for conditionally allowed uses.

17.26.290    Subdivision signs.

17.26.300    Underground utilities.

17.26.310    Site plan and architectural review.


17.26.010 Intent.

This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family residential homes, not more than one dwelling unit permitted on any lot. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.30.)


17.26.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.26.050 through 17.26.300:

A. Single-family dwelling, including site-built homes and manufactured housing not more than one dwelling per lot, except that an accessory dwelling unit permitted under this chapter shall not count toward the one dwelling per lot limitation;

B. Guest house, subject to the regulations of CMC 17.04.291;

C. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a church or school;

D. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of such animals as permitted in the R-1-20,000 residential zone in accordance with CMC 17.20.020(D);

E. Occasional sale;

F. In-home business permitted in accordance with CMC 17.26.035;

G. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC. (Ord. 19-07 §§ 29, 30, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 11, 2004; Ord. 1664 § 8, 1988; Ord. 1503 § 2, 1981; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 5, 1976; Ord. 1251 § 20, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.31.)


17.26.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Churches;

B. Country clubs and golf courses and related driving range;

C. Educational institutions;

D. Electric distribution and public utility substations;

E. Day care nurseries as an appurtenant use in conjunction with churches;

F. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a country club;

G. In connection with the residential use of the property, the keeping of horses, cattle, Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs, etc., provided that:

1. The property contains a minimum lot area of one-half acre where abutting property is zoned so as to provide for the keeping of horses or cattle as a permitted use, or a minimum lot area of one acre where the zoning of abutting property does not allow for the keeping of horses and cattle as a permitted use,

2. No more than two such animals shall be kept; provided, however, that for properties larger than the minimum required area, the planning commission may determine the number of such animals which may be kept,

3. All such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7. (Ord. 93-1758 § 1, 1993; Ord. 92-1739 § 4, 1992; Ord. 1452 §§ 1, 2, 1980; Ord. 1309 § 1, 1975; Ord. 1182 § 7, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.32.)


17.26.035 In-home business license.

An in-home business as defined in CMC 17.04.325 may be conducted from a residence subject to the following conditions:

A. No customers or clients or prospective customers or clients shall visit the site to conduct or consider business;

B. No sales, delivery or storage of merchandise shall be permitted at the residence except for limited storage of arts and crafts products made at the house;

C. The business shall not interfere with the use of the garage for parking purposes;

D. No commercial or identifying signs shall be used. The residential address shall not be used for advertising purposes or on any business stationery, fliers, cards or handouts;

E. In no way shall the appearance of the structure or the activity therein be altered or conducted such that the structure can be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential purpose;

F. The business shall not cause environmental disturbances such as noise, odors, glare, smoke, temperature changes, electrical interference, and ground water pollution;

G. No mechanical equipment shall be used, except that which is normal and customary for housekeeping purposes. Equipment so used shall be limited to a maximum of 1.0 horsepower motors and operated on normal household electrical currents;

H. No persons other than residents of the immediate household may be employed or engaged in the conduct of the business;

I. The following uses are expressly prohibited for consideration as an in-home business: vehicular repair, firearms or weapon sales and the manufacturing of substances or products;

J. To exempt arts and crafts and similar hobby work from the prohibition against manufacturing listed in subsection (I) of this section;

K. Arts and crafts production meeting the following criteria shall be exempt from subsection (I) of this section:

1. Limit gross sales to a maximum of $20,000 per year,

2. Prohibit activities which can be heard on adjacent properties between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., and on Sundays. Activities must comply with standard noise regulations between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,

3. Prohibit activities and storage which are visible from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way;

L. Only those in-home businesses that are found by the chief planning official or his designee to meet these standards and to be compatible with residential uses shall be permitted;

M. When the application for an in-home business license is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid for purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it;

N. The in-home business license, once approved, shall be valid until December 31st of that year. Thereafter the applicant shall apply for a renewal which, if approved, shall be valid until December 31st of the following year. Only one in-home license shall be permitted per household.

O. Cottage food businesses are allowed to operate as in-home businesses subject to compliance with the California Department of Public Health and the following requirements:

1. All cottage food businesses shall be limited to producing and selling the non-potentially-hazardous foods as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 114365.5(a), as may be amended from time to time.

2. Any foods not covered under Health and Safety Code Section 114365.5(a), including pre-packaged foods as well as hot beverages (cocoa, coffee, cider, and tea), are prohibited from being sold by cottage food businesses.

3. The sale of food by cottage food businesses from residential properties shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

4. Cottage food businesses shall obtain all necessary health permits from the county of Los Angeles department of public health (environmental health), prior to issuance of an in-home business license. (Ord. 17-17 § 8, 2017; Ord. 98-1830 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1707 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1664 § 2, 1988.)


17.26.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-1-7500 zone unless otherwise set forth in CMC 17.26.030:

A. Multiple dwellings;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Trailer parks;

E. The raising or keeping of animals, poultry or reptiles, either wild or domesticated, other than provided for in CMC 17.26.020. (Ord. 1325 § 6, 1976; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.33.)


17.26.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.26.060 through 17.26.300 shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1-7500 zone, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (Ord. 1251 § 21, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of 7,500 square feet. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot area,” CMC 17.04.360. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.065 Reserved.

(Ord. 19-07 § 31, 2019.)


17.26.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now held under separate ownership or which are of record may not be reduced below these standards. For method of measurement, see definitions of “lot depth” and “lot width,” CMC 17.04.369 and 17.04.405, respectively:

A. Width.

1. Interior lots shall have a minimum width of 60 feet.

2. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 67.5 feet.

3. Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of 75 feet.

4. Lots siding on freeways, public schools or recreation areas, or railroad rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of 85 feet.

5. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front of the building setback line.

B. Depth.

1. Lots facing on local streets shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet.

2. Lots facing or backing on major or secondary highways shall have a minimum depth of 110 feet.

3. Lots backing on a freeway, railroad right-of-way, public school or recreation area shall have a minimum depth of 125 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.071 Maximum land coverage.

The maximum land coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 35 percent of the total land or parcel area. (Ord. 93-1749 § 6, 1993.)


17.26.075 Additions to existing buildings.

The exterior and roof of all enclosed room additions to existing buildings shall be the same as or similar to the architecture and materials of the existing building. Reasonable variations in design shall be permitted upon approval of the planning director. (Ord. 1315 § 1, 1975.)


17.26.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of 7,500 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit and there shall be no more than one dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that one accessory dwelling unit authorized by this title may be located upon the same lot as the primary dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 19-07 § 32, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 11, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.090 Accessory building height.

No main building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. Accessory buildings shall not have a height greater than one story or 15 feet. (Ord. 93-1749 § 4, 1993; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

A. Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed when approved by the commission; provided, that the same shall be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. No penthouse or roof structures or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional living or floor space.

B. On lots located on slopes downhill from street grade and having a 25 percent or greater grade measured in the general direction of the side lot lines, an additional story may be constructed on the main building; provided, that the ceiling of the lowest story shall be not more than two feet above the curb level measured at the center of the lot frontage.

C. All roof equipment and machinery shall be entirely screened from view with a screening device utilizing materials which are compatible to the materials used on the building. (Ord. 11-1996 § 4, 2011; Ord. 1543 § 1, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.105 Floor area of single-family dwellings.

The minimum ground floor area of single-family dwellings, including site-built homes and manufactured housing, exclusive of open porches, garages, carports, balconies, patios and terraces, shall be not less than 1,100 square feet. (Ord. 1503 § 3, 1981.)


17.26.106 Floor area of accessory building.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the maximum ground floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed 50 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. (Ord. 04-1901 § 11, 2004; Ord. 93-1749 § 5, 1993.)


17.26.110 Yards – Generally.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way. Front and side yards, as referred to in this section, are the open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the main building facing the street projected to the side lines of the lot. For the purpose of this section, “main building” shall not include a detached or attached garage.

A. A swimming pool shall not be located in any required front yard, nor shall it be located closer than five feet from any side or rear property line. It shall be entirely enclosed as required in CMC 17.26.190.

B. No residential building shall be erected within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any railroad line or freeway.

C. Buildings used for a church, school, institution or other similar use shall observe the provisions of the zone for front yards and for side yards abutting a street. The buildings shall be removed at least 20 feet from all other property lines. Required yards may be used only for parking or access purposes.

D. Required yards shall be landscaped, except for the paved access to the garage, parking areas and the residential building. The amount of paved access and parking areas in the required front yard shall not exceed 50 percent of the total required front yard area. All motor vehicles, trailers, boats, house trailers, motor homes or campers on residential property shall be parked in paved access, garage or paved parking areas.

E. Neither the required front yard nor side yards abutting a street shall be used for the purpose of storing trailers, boats, house trailers, motor homes, campers, camper bodies, or motor vehicles or for the storage of any matter, materials, refuse bins or equipment except in the following cases:

1. The parking of a vehicle or storage of equipment and material in said front yard area to be used in actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such lot, not exceeding 60 days in any 12-month period;

2. Where the vehicles or materials stored are completely screened from visibility from the abutting street and the manner of screening is in accordance with the provisions of this title.

F. “Storage,” as referred to in this section, means the placing or parking of materials or vehicles for a period in excess of 72 continuous hours.

G. All utilities, equipment, machinery and satellite and disc antennas, located in yards, shall be screened at ground level from adjacent properties behind enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the adjacent building, or shall be screened by landscaping or fencing. Satellite and disc antennas with a diameter greater than two feet shall not be permitted on the roof of any structure. (Ord. 1594 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1543 § 2, 1983; Ord. 1426 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.120 Front yard.

A. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet extending across the full width of the lot, except for special conditions provided for in subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. The required front yard shall not be used for the storage of trailers, boats or house trailers or for the storage of any materials.

B. Where lots comprising 50 percent or more of the block frontage are developed with a front yard either greater or lesser in depth than that prescribed herein, the average of such existing front yards shall establish the front yard for the remaining lots in the block frontage; however, a front yard determined in this way shall not be less than 15 nor more than 40 feet. Existing front yards of more than 40 feet shall be counted as 40 feet in calculating the average.

C. On key lots the minimum front yard shall be the same as the front yard for the adjoining interior lot. When the front yard on the adjoining interior lot is less than prescribed by this title, the key lot front yard may be the same; however, in no case shall the key lot front yard be less than 15 feet.

D. Where the entire block frontage is designed and developed as a unit, the front yard requirements may be varied by not more than five feet in either direction; provided, that the average front yard for the entire frontage is not less than that required in the zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.130 Side yard.

(See also Fire safety access, CMC 17.26.250.)

A. Each lot shall have a side yard on each side of not less than five feet, except as provided for below.

B. In hillside areas where all the following conditions occur:

1. The difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more; and

2. The grade of the slope between the top and the toe of the slope is four feet horizontal to one foot vertical or greater, the minimum distance from the toe or top of the slope to a main building shall not be less than five feet. On the lower lot, this distance shall be increased one foot for every additional one foot of height of slope above six feet.

C. On corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this title, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 12.5 feet in width. No accessory buildings shall be located in the required side yard abutting the street.

A private garage, whether attached or detached, having direct access from the side street shall be located not less than 25 feet from the side property line abutting the street.

D. On a reversed corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 15 feet in width. No accessory buildings shall be located in the required side yard.

A private garage, whether attached or detached, having direct access from the side street shall be located not less than 25 feet from the side property line abutting the street.

E. When siding on an existing alley, a main building shall be located not less than 30 feet from the opposite side of the alley.

F. Accessory Buildings in Side Yards.

1. Any accessory building located less than 75 feet from the front property line shall have the same minimum side yard as that required for the main building, regardless of whether or not the accessory building is attached to the main building.

2. An accessory building shall be located not less than three feet from a side property line when the building:

a. Is 75 feet or more from the front property line; and

b. Has openings into the three-foot space; and

c. Is of frame construction; and

d. Is not abutting an existing street or alley; and

e. Is not attached to a main building.

3. An accessory building having direct vehicular access from an alley shall be located not less than 25 feet from the opposite side of the alley.

G. All side yard requirements shall be increased two and one-half feet for each story or fraction thereof above the first story or for each 10 feet of building height above the first 15 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.140 Rear yard.

A. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet except for special conditions provided for below.

B. In hillside areas where the following conditions occur:

1. Where the difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more; and

2. Where the grade of the slope between the top and the toe of the slope is four horizontal to one vertical or greater, the minimum distance from the toe or top of the slope to any main building on the lot shall be not less than regular rear yard required in the zone. The slope area shall not be considered as part of the required rear yard.

C. Nonresidential accessory buildings may be permitted in a required rear yard as follows:

1. An accessory building shall be located not closer than three feet from a rear property line when the building:

a. Has openings into the three-foot space, and

b. Is of frame construction, and

c. Is not abutting an existing alley;

2. The building may be located on the rear property line, or shall not be less than three feet from the line, when:

a. The building has no openings on the side abutting the rear property line,

b. The building is constructed of one-hour fire resistant materials,

c. Provision is made for all roof drainage to be taken care of on the subject property;

3. An accessory building having direct vehicular access from an alley shall be located not less than 25 feet from the opposite side of the alley, but in no case less than five feet from the rear property line;

4. An accessory building attached to a main building and used for garage purposes shall be located not less than five feet from the rear lot line;

5. Buildings or structures in the rear yard shall be located not less than 25 feet from the side property line abutting the street, and not less than five feet from the rear property line on a reversed corner lot;

6. In the various R-1 zones, not more than 35 percent of any required rear yard may be covered by any type of accessory building;

7. Where any accessory building or structure occupies space in a required rear yard, the amount of space so occupied shall be provided elsewhere on the lot, exclusive of required yard areas. The replacement space shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet, and shall be so located that it is suitable for general use by the occupant of the premises. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.150 Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards.

A. Openwork fences, hedges, landscape architectural features, including patios, open-air grills and similar features, or guard railings for safety protection around depressed ramps, not more than three and one-half feet in height, may be located in any front, side or rear yard.

B. Fire escapes may extend or project into any yard not more than four feet.

C. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills and other similar architectural features may extend or project into a required front yard not more than four feet, and may extend into a required side yard or required rear yard not more than four inches for each one foot of the width of such required side yard or required rear yard; provided, however, that the projection shall be not closer than three feet from any side or rear property line.

D. Uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into any front yard a distance of not more than six feet, and such features shall not extend into a court more than 20 percent of the width of the court and in no case more than six feet, and may extend into any side or rear yard not more than three feet. An openwork railing may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place provided it does not exceed 30 inches in height.

E. A porte cochere may be placed over a driveway in a front or side yard subject to the provisions in subsection (G) of this section.

F. Open, unenclosed stairways or balconies not covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into a required front yard not more than 30 inches.

G. The eaves of all main buildings and of accessory buildings that are located less than 75 feet from the front property line may project into a required side yard a distance not greater than 20 inches, and in no case shall the eave be less than two feet six inches from the side property line.

H. The eaves of accessory buildings that are located more than 75 feet from the front property line may project into a side or rear yard but the eaves may not be closer than two feet from a side property line.

I. A patio may be placed in the required rear yard area when the patio:

1. Is located not closer than five feet from side and rear property lines;

2. Occupies not more than 35 percent of the required rear yard area. For maximum coverage of rear yard, see CMC 17.26.140(C)(6). (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.160 Distance between buildings.

A. Requirements for space between buildings shall be increased two and one-half feet for each story or fraction thereof above the first.

B. The minimum distance between accessory and main buildings shall be as follows:

1. Accessory buildings, except as provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section, shall be located not less than six feet from any main building. When attached by a breezeway roof, the intervening space shall be considered an inner court;

2. An accessory building which is used for garage purposes, and is located within the area defined by the projection of the side lines of any main building, and has vehicular access entirely or in part between it and any main building, shall be located not less than 25 feet from any main building.

C. The minimum distance between accessory buildings shall be not less than six feet unless the buildings have a common or party wall. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.165 Walls abutting rail line – Height and vegetation requirements.

A. Property owners abutting the proposed commuter rail line may construct block/sound attenuation walls of up to 10 feet in height along their property line and that of the rail line, and other similar locations as deemed necessary by the city planner.

B. Anyone constructing such a wall will be required to plant, irrigate and maintain fast-growing, drought-tolerant vines along the wall facing the rail line, to reduce the potential for graffiti. (Ord. 92-1740 § 1, 1992.)


17.26.170 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.180 Fences and walls – Hillside lots.

A fence or wall not less than five feet nor greater than six feet in height shall be constructed at the top of the slope on each lot where all of the following conditions apply:

A. Where the top of the slope is a property line between adjoining lots held under separate ownership;

B. Where the difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more; and

C. Where the slope between the property line and the toe of the slope is two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or greater. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.190 Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by buildings or by fences or walls not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. The fence or wall shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors, the latching device being located not less than four feet 10 inches above the ground. All fencing must be in place and approved before water is run into the pool. All lighting of pool area shall be so hooded that the light does not shine toward abutting properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.200 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and/or private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established herein. In hillside areas, corner cutback treatment shall include such grading as may be necessary to provide for reasonable intersection visibility:

A. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersecting and intercepting streets and/or alleys. The cutback line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the closest intersection of yard setback lines at the corner of the lot where visibility is required.

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way.

C. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.210 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not greater than six feet in height shall be permitted on or within all rear and side property lines on interior lots, and corner lots when abutting a street, on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines. (See subsection (B) of this section for reference to reverse corner lots.)

B. On a reverse corner lot, fences, hedges, walls or retaining walls not greater than six feet in height may be located in the required side yard not closer than 12.5 feet to the side property line abutting a street, on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines and on or to the front of all rear yard setback lines.

C. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not over three feet in height shall be permitted in any required front, side or rear yards abutting a street. In required corner cutback areas, only openwork fences not more than three feet in height shall be permitted. Walls, hedges and other visual obstructions are prohibited.

D. To enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, fences over six feet in height shall be permitted; provided, that portion of the fence or structure which is higher than six feet shall be composed of wire mesh or other material whose vertical surface is not more than 10 percent solid. Provision shall be made for fire safety access as required in CMC 17.26.250. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.220 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.230 Vehicular access.

A. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property requiring off-street parking.

B. Vehicular access to lots fronting on a major or secondary highway shall be by way of an alley or service road. When unimproved lots of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein cannot secure access by way of an alley or service road, there shall be a paved turning area on the lot to permit motor vehicles to head into the street. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.240 Pedestrian access.

There shall be a pedestrian access from a dedicated street to property used for residential purposes. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.250 Fire safety access.

An accessway not less than three feet in width shall be provided abutting each side lot line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.260 Signs – Generally.

CMC 17.26.260 through 17.26.290 shall include as part of their provisions those portions of existing codes and ordinances which relate to the erection and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising structures as are not in conflict herewith.

Signs and other commercial advertising shall be permitted in this zone only as provided in CMC 17.26.270 through 17.26.290. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.270 Nameplates.

Nameplates shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A. Nameplates shall not exceed one square foot in area and there shall be not more than one nameplate per dwelling unit;

B. Nameplates shall display only the following:

1. Name of the premises upon which it is displayed, and/or

2. Name of the owner or lessee of the premises, and/or

3. Address of the premises. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.280 “For Rent,” “For Sale” and similar signs.

“For Rent,” “For Sale” and signs of similar type shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A. Not more than two such signs shall be permitted on any lot or parcel;

B. No such sign shall exceed four square feet in area;

C. The sign shall be posted on the subject lot by the owner or his authorized agent. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.285 Signs for conditionally allowed uses.

Conditionally allowed uses such as churches and educational institutions may request site plan approval for such signage as may be reasonably necessary for the use. Any such signage shall comply with the following:

A. Each site shall be permitted to have one wall sign not to exceed five percent of the area of the first story height of the building or 50 square feet, whichever is greater, and one monument sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area and six feet in height.

B. In lieu of the signage provided in subsection (A) of this section, the chief planning official may approve one monument sign not to exceed 50 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

C. All signs shall be designed in harmony with the surrounding residential area.

D. Each use shall be permitted one pedestrian oriented information sign not to exceed 16 square feet in area.

E. Each use shall be permitted reasonable directional and traffic safety signs as determined necessary by the chief planning official.

F. That the design of all signs be submitted for site plan review and approval by the chief planning official. (Ord. 1710 § 1, 1990.)


17.26.290 Subdivision signs.

The following signs and advertising structures shall be permitted:

A. Temporary real estate signs advertising real property which has been subdivided for purposes of sale or lease shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:

1. Such signs shall be located on the premises within the boundaries of the subdivision which they advertise.

2. Such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area.

3. There shall be not more than two such signs per 300 feet of frontage.

4. Before any sign or advertising structure is erected, a permit therefor shall have been issued by the building department for a six-month period.

5. The sign shall remain only as long as some portion of the property advertised for sale remains unsold, or for a period of six months, whichever period is shorter. No such sign shall remain longer than six months unless the permit therefor has been renewed by the building department.

B. Small signs are permitted within the tract; provided, there shall be no more than one such sign for each three lots. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in area.

C. Signs are permitted on the same lot with a model home; provided, they not exceed three in number and four square feet each in area. The sign shall be removed within 48 hours after the initial sale of the lot and/or home. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.34.)


17.26.300 Underground utilities.

Utility lines including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be placed underground in accordance with CMC 17.64.030(E), unless special permission to construct said lines above the ground is granted. (Ord. 1251 § 22, 1974.)


17.26.310 Site plan and architectural review.

The following procedures shall apply to all development in the R-1-7500 zone:

A. The site plan provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply.

B. In order that the buildings, structures, signs and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and appearances in the area and not obnoxious, undesirable or of unsightly appearance, the applicant shall provide, in addition to the site plan review of Chapter 17.64 CMC, the following items for approval:

1. The total development plan showing all the dimensions and locations of proposed structures, buildings, streets, parking, yards, playgrounds, open spaces and other public and private facilities;

2. Architectural drawings or sketches showing the design and character of the proposed structures, uses and facilities and the physical relationship of all elements;

3. Lot dimensions;

4. All buildings and structures; location, floor plans (scale for typical unit design shall be one-fourth inch to one foot), elevations, size, height, proposed use;

5. The relation to the existing buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area;

6. Yards and space between buildings;

7. Walls and fences: location, height and materials;

8. The colors and materials on the exterior;

9. The type and pitch of roofs;

10. The size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings;

11. Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television masts;

12. And such other data as may be required to permit the planning director to make the required findings.

C. If he finds all of the following conditions to exist, the planning director shall approve the application as provided in Chapter 17.64 CMC, subject to such conditions as he may attach which are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, to secure a development which is in harmony with other developments in the area, to minimize all undesirable or unsightly appearance, and to provide an orderly and visually aesthetic development within the intent of this title:

1. That all provisions of applicable ordinances, including the ordinance codified in this title, are complied with;

2. That the following are arranged so that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected:

a. Building structures and improvements,

b. Setbacks,

c. Height of buildings,

d. Walls,

e. Landscaping;

3. That all yard areas required by this title, or found necessary for compatibility to the adjacent properties;

4. That the architectural character of the proposed structures is based upon the appropriate principles of harmony and proportion in the elements of the structure;

5. That the overall plan is in keeping with existing quality improvements in the area, and in harmony with the future development of the area, and in accord with the general plan;

6. That the development will not be detrimental to surrounding properties, nor diminish the value thereof.

If he finds any of the above not to be true, or not to exist, the planning director shall disapprove the application. (Ord. 1503 § 4, 1981.)


Chapter 17.28 RD RESIDENTIAL ZONE (MULTIPLE-FAMILY)

Sections:

17.28.010    Intent.

17.28.020    Permitted uses.

17.28.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.28.035    In-home business.

17.28.040    Prohibited uses.

17.28.050    Property development standards generally.

17.28.060    Lot area.

17.28.070    Lot dimensions.

17.28.075    Additions to existing buildings.

17.28.080    Population density.

17.28.090    Building height – Generally.

17.28.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.28.110    Yards – Generally.

17.28.120    Front yard.

17.28.130    Side yard.

17.28.140    Rear yard.

17.28.150    Distance between buildings – Generally.

17.28.160    Distance between partial parallel walls.

17.28.170    Fences and walls – Required buffer walls.

17.28.180    Fences and walls – Required parking area screening.

17.28.185    Walls abutting rail line – Height and vegetation requirements.

17.28.190    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.28.200    Fences and walls – Hillside lots.

17.28.210    Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

17.28.220    Fences and walls – Wall height measurement.

17.28.230    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.28.240    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.28.250    Fences and walls – Design.

17.28.260    Off-street parking – Space requirements.

17.28.270    Off-street parking – Covered spaces.

17.28.280    Off-street parking – Open spaces.

17.28.290    Off-street parking – General requirements.

17.28.300    Vehicular access.

17.28.310    Pedestrian access.

17.28.320    Fire safety access.

17.28.330    Signs – Generally.

17.28.340    Nameplates.

17.28.350    “For Rent,” “For Sale” and similar signs.

17.28.360    Subdivision and temporary apartment rental signs.

17.28.365    Signs for conditionally allowed uses.

17.28.370    Loading.

17.28.380    Floor area of dwelling unit.

17.28.390    Land coverage – Generally.

17.28.400    Land coverage – Exceptions.

17.28.410    Usable yard area.

17.28.420    Car care facilities.

17.28.430    Lighting.

17.28.440    Mechanical equipment.

17.28.450    Laundry facilities.

17.28.460    Landscaping.

17.28.470    Storage.

17.28.475    Variance for minor deviation – Additional authority.

17.28.480    Security.

17.28.490    Identification.

17.28.500    Utility services.

17.28.510    Architectural features.

17.28.512    Contractual agreements.

17.28.513    Conversions.

17.28.520    Conditions to use.

17.28.530    Site plan and architectural review.

17.28.540    Community impact requirement.


17.28.010 Intent.

A. This zone is intended to provide for the development of multiple-family residential structures such as apartments, condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments.

B. Condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments are privately owned homes. To provide these characteristics, certain amenities should be included in the unit development over and above a typical rental unit to assure a pride of ownership. Any apartment conversion should be upgraded to include the same amenities to assure the same pride of ownership. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; Ord. 1254 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.50.)


17.28.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards of CMC 17.28.050 through 17.28.510 and to the site plan and architectural review standards of CMC 17.28.530:

A. Single-family dwellings, including site-built homes and manufactured housing;

B. Two-family dwellings, including site-built units and manufactured housing;

C. Multiple dwellings, including apartment houses, condominiums and townhouses, site-built units and manufactured housing units included, of 22 units or less per acre;

D. Accessory buildings and uses, including private garage, private carports, recreation rooms, laundry facilities so long as the use is primarily for the tenants and owners of dwellings;

E. Private dance only when conducted in conjunction with a church, school, fraternity and sorority houses, lodges and meeting halls;

F. Boarding houses;

G. The keeping, for noncommercial purposes, of not more than three of any of the animals listed below nor more than nine total of any combination of the following animals:

1. Domesticated parrot,

2. Domesticated parakeet,

3. White or albino rats or mice,

4. Golden hamsters of the species Mesocrietus auratus,

5. Guinea pigs of the species Cavia porcellus,

6. Canis familiaris (domestic dogs),

7. Felis catus (domestic cats),

8. Local frogs,

9. Turtles and toads,

10. Tropical fish normally found in a pet store (no limit);

Such animals shall be maintained in accordance with CMC Title 7;

H. Occasional sale;

I. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.69 CMC, but only for lots containing an existing or proposed single-family dwelling. (Ord. 19-07 § 33, 2019; Ord. 04-1901 § 12, 2004; Ord. 1503 § 5, 1981; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325 § 7, 1976; Ord. 1254 §§ 2, 3, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.51.)


17.28.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted in the RD zone, subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Churches;

B. Multiple dwellings including apartment houses, condominiums and townhouses with a density greater than 22 units per acre (RD-2000);

C. Day nurseries and nursery schools;

D. Educational institutions;

E. Fraternity and sorority houses;

F. Group quarters;

G. Hospitals, rest homes and sanitariums;

H. Libraries;

I. Lodges and meeting halls;

J. Museums;

K. Public utility or public service buildings, structures and uses;

L. The keeping of horses in accordance with CMC 17.26.030(G). (Ord. 1254 § 4, 1974; Ord. 1182 § 8, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.52.)


17.28.035 In-home business.

In-home businesses shall be permitted as provided under CMC 17.26.035. (Ord. 98-1830 § 2, 1998.)


17.28.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the RD zone, except as otherwise permitted in CMC 17.28.020 and 17.28.030:

A. Commercial uses;

B. Industrial uses;

C. Trailer parks. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.53.)


17.28.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.28.060 through 17.28.510 shall apply to all land and buildings in the RD zone, except that any lot held under separate ownership or that was of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in area or dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.060 Lot area.

Each lot shall have a minimum area of 7,200 square feet, measured in a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot. Portion of a lot which has a slope of four to one (four feet horizontal to one foot vertical) or steeper shall not be included in the computation of lot area. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now existing may not be reduced below these standards:

A. Width.

1. Interior lots shall have a minimum width of 60 feet.

2. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 67.5 feet.

3. Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of 75 feet.

4. Lots siding on freeway, public schools or recreation areas, or railroad rights-of-way shall have minimum width of 85 feet.

5. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum of 45 feet at the front lot line and a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front building setback line.

B. Depth.

1. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 120 feet except as hereinafter provided.

2. Lots backing on a freeway, railroad right-of-way, public school or recreation area shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.075 Additions to existing buildings.

The exterior and roof of all enclosed room additions to existing buildings shall be the same as or similar to the architecture and materials of the existing building. Reasonable variations in design shall be permitted upon approval of the planning director. (Ord. 1315 § 3, 1975.)


17.28.080 Population density.

When property in zone RD is developed, the minimum required lot area per multiple-family dwelling unit shall be equal to the number used as a suffix to the zoning symbol “RD”; provided, however, that in no case shall the minimum required lot area be less than 1,250 square feet per dwelling unit.

Where there is located upon any RD zoned lot a single-family dwelling, there shall be no more than one single-family dwelling unit on any one lot; provided, however, that one second dwelling unit authorized by this title may be located upon the same lot as the primary single-family dwelling unit without exceeding the density limitations prescribed herein. (Ord. 04-1901 § 12, 2004; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure in the RD zone shall have a height greater than provided for in the following subsections. The use of the word “building” in the following subsections shall mean only those structures which are used as a residence:

A. The maximum building height shall be two stories or 35 feet except by conditional use permit.

B. Building heights of all multiple-family density developments abutting an R-1 zone shall be governed by the following requirements:

1. Building height along interior property lines shall be determined by permitting one foot of building height for each foot of building setback provided, except as otherwise described in CMC 17.28.130, whichever is greater.

2. Building height along all rear property lines shall be determined by permitting one foot of building height for each two feet of building setback provided, except as otherwise described in CMC 17.28.140, whichever is greater. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

A. No penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment; towers, steeples, radio and television masts or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this chapter.

B. On lots located on slopes downhill from street grade and having a 25 percent or greater grade measured in the general direction of the side lot lines, an additional story may be constructed on the main building; provided, that the ceiling of the lowest story shall be not more than two feet above the curb level measured at the center of the lot frontage.

C. All roof equipment and machinery shall be entirely screened from view with a screening device utilizing materials which are compatible to the materials used on buildings. (Ord. 1543 § 3, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.110 Yards – Generally.

A. Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

B. A swimming pool shall not be located in any required front yard, nor shall it be located closer than five feet from any side or rear property line. It shall be entirely enclosed as required in CMC 17.28.210.

C. No residential buildings shall be erected within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any railroad line or freeway.

D. All utilities, equipment, machinery and satellite and disc antennas, located in yards, shall be screened at ground level from adjacent properties behind enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the adjacent building, or shall be screened by landscaping or fencing. Satellite and disc antennas with a diameter greater than two feet shall not be permitted on the roof of any structure. (Ord. 1594 § 3, 1985; Ord. 1543 § 4, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.120 Front yard.

A. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet extending the full width of the lot.

B. For buildings greater than one story in height, the second floor and above shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from the front property line.

C. Where lots comprising 50 percent or more of the block frontage are developed with a front yard either greater or lesser in depth than that prescribed in this section, the average of such existing front yards shall establish the front yard for the remaining lots in the block frontage; however, a front yard determined in this way shall not be less than 15 nor more than 40 feet. Existing front yards of more than 40 feet shall be counted as 40 feet in calculating the average.

D. Where the entire block frontage is designed and developed as a unit, the front yard requirements may be varied by not more than five feet in either direction; provided, that the average front yard for the entire frontage is not less than that required in the zone.

E. On key lots, the minimum front yard shall be the same as the front yard for the adjoining interior lot. When the front yard on the adjoining interior lot is less than prescribed by the ordinance codified in this title, the key front yard may be the same; however, in no case shall the key lot front yard be less than 15 feet.

F. The required front yard shall not be used for the storage of trailers, boats, house trailers, motor homes, materials, nor shall it be used for parking of vehicles.

G. The required front yard shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows:

1. Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front yard as approved by the planning department;

2. Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into any front yard not more than six feet; provided, however, that an openwork railing not more than 42 inches in height may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place;

3. Fountains and sculptures as approved by the planning department, and plants.

H. No area designed for or used for outdoor recreation purposes shall be located between the front property line and the nearest dwelling unit. (Ord. 1679 § 16, 1988; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.130 Side yard.

A. There shall be a minimum side yard and setback along interior property lines of each side of a main building as provided for in the following table:

Side Yard and Setback (Feet) 

for Main Buildings 

	Length of Facing Wall	One Story	Two Story or Greater

	100 feet or under	5 feet	10 feet

	100 feet or over	10 feet	15 feet

B. A zero side yard may be permitted on one side where adjacent properties participate in an agreement approved by the city attorney and when the amount of yard normally required is required on the opposite side of the lot.

C. No mechanical equipment nor air conditioning equipment shall be in a required side yard within five feet of a property line.

D. There shall be a minimum side yard along the street side of a corner lot of not less than 12.5 feet in width. On a reversed corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 15 feet in width. No accessory buildings shall be located in the required side yard. The yard shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward except as provided for under the front yard requirements.

E. No accessory building shall be located at a distance less than 60 percent of the depth of the lot from the front property line or 30 feet, whichever is less. A private garage, whether attached or detached, having direct access from the side street shall be located not less than 25 feet from the side property line abutting the street. (Ord. 1679 § 17, 1988; Ord. 1267 § 2, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.140 Rear yard.

A. There shall be a minimum rear yard and setback of not less than 25 feet. Accessory buildings may be located in the required yard. The yard shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward except as provided for under the front yard requirements.

B. Nonresidential accessory buildings may be permitted in a required rear yard as follows:

1. Provisions to be made for all roof drainage to be taken care of on the subject property;

2. An accessory building having direct vehicular access from an alley shall be located not less than 25 feet from the opposite side of the alley, but in no case less than five feet from the rear property line;

3. An accessory building attached to a main building and used for garage purposes shall be located not less than five feet from the rear lot line;

4. Buildings or structures in the rear yard shall be located not less than 25 feet from the side property line abutting the street, and not less than five feet from the rear property line on a reversed corner lot.

C. On through lots, the planning commission will designate the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on the lots next adjoining. If such lots next adjoining are developed, the minimum rear yard area shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.150 Distance between buildings – Generally.

The minimum distance between buildings shall be the sum of the minimum yard requirement for each building as provided for in the following table:

	 	Minimum Yard Setback	Additional Yard Setback for Additional Height	Additional Yard Setback for Length of Building

	Any building wall containing windows opening into any habitable room (not including kitchen or bathroom)	6 feet	Plus: One foot per additional story in height above first floor	Plus: One foot per each 15 feet of length of facing wall

	Any building wall having no main entrance or windows opening into any habitable room	5 feet	1 foot	0 feet

(1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.160 Distance between partial parallel walls.

The distance between partial parallel walls facing each other for only a portion of their lengths (not exceeding 20 percent of the length of the existing facing wall) shall be equal to a distance equivalent to three-fourths of the sum of the yard depth requirements for both walls. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.170 Fences and walls – Required buffer walls.

A solid masonry wall six feet in height shall be provided between all multiple-family classified property and all abutting property classified for single-family residential uses; except that such walls on the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard of the abutting R classified property shall be three feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.180 Fences and walls – Required parking area screening.

When parking areas are developed abutting the required front yard setback or side yard setback adjacent to the street, a 42-inch-high solid masonry wall shall be installed between the subject parking areas and the front yard setback. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.185 Walls abutting rail line – Height and vegetation requirements.

A. Property owners abutting the proposed commuter rail line may construct block/sound attenuation walls of up to 10 feet in height along their property line and that of the rail line, and other similar locations as deemed necessary by the city planner.

B. Anyone constructing such a wall will be required to plant, irrigate and maintain fast-growing, drought-tolerant vines along the wall facing the rail line to reduce the potential for graffiti. (Ord. 92-1740 § 2, 1992.)


17.28.190 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall six feet in height with proper emergency access may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.200 Fences and walls – Hillside lots.

A fence or wall not less than five feet nor greater than six feet in height shall be constructed at the top of the slope on each lot where all of the following conditions apply:

A. Where the top of the slope is a property line between adjoining lots held under separate ownership;

B. Where the difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more; and

C. Where the slope between the property line and the toe of the slope is two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or greater. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.210 Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by a building wall with no openings, or by fences or walls not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. The fence or wall shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors, the latching device being located not less than four feet 10 inches above the ground. All fencing must be in place and approved before water is run into the pool. All lighting of pool area shall be so hooded that the light does not shine towards abutting properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.220 Fences and walls – Wall height measurement.

Wall height shall be measured from the higher finished grade. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.230 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and/or private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established herein. In hillside areas, corner cutback treatment shall include such grading as may be necessary to provide for reasonable intersection visibility:

A. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersecting and intercepting streets and/or alleys. The cutback line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the closest intersection or yard setback lines at the corner of the lot where visibility is required.

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way.

C. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.240 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not greater than six feet in height shall be permitted on or within all rear and side property lines on interior lots, and corner lots when abutting a street, on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines. (See subsection (B) of this section for reference to reverse corner lots.)

B. On a reverse corner lot, fences, hedges, walls or retaining walls not greater than six feet in height may be located in the required side property line abutting a street, on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines and on or to the front of all rear yard setback lines.

C. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not over three feet in height shall be permitted in any required front, side or rear yards abutting a street. In required corner cutback areas, only openwork fences not more than three feet in height shall be permitted. Walls, hedges and other visual obstructions are prohibited.

D. To enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, fences over six feet in height shall be permitted; provided, that portion of the fence or structure which is higher than six feet shall be composed of wire mesh or other material whose vertical surface is not more than 10 percent solid. Provision shall be made for fire safety access.

E. No barbed wire shall be used or maintained in or about the construction of a fence, wall or hedge along the front, side or rear lines of any lot, or within three feet of the lines, and no sharp wire or points shall project at the top of any fence or wall six feet or less in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.250 Fences and walls – Design.

All fences and walls shall be architecturally compatible in design and material to the main structures. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.260 Off-street parking – Space requirements.

At the time of the erection of any building and/or structure permitted by this chapter or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, second dwelling units or floor area, there shall be provided for such new construction or intensified use, enlargement or increased capacity and use of land, the following minimum off-street parking space with adequate provisions for safe ingress and egress, and the parking space or spaces shall thereafter be maintained in connection with such building or structure and use of land:

	Use	Minimum Required Parking Spaces Per Unit	Number of Garage Spaces to Be Required

	Single-family	2	2

	Second dwelling unit	1 for each bedroom	none

	Multiple-family:	 	 

	 	Bachelor unit	2	1

	 	One-bedroom unit	2	1

	 	Two-bedroom unit	2-1/2	2

	 	Three-bedroom unit 	3 plus 1/2 for each bedroom

in excess of 3	2

Administrative variance may be applied for. See CMC 17.78.160, Variances for minor deviations.

A. Fractional requirements of one-half or more shall be constructed as a whole number.

B. Guest parking spaces for five or more units per lot shall be provided at a rate of one space for every five units.

C. For other standards and requirements, refer to CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120.

D. All garage spaces shall be located within 50 feet of all condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartment units. (Ord. 04-1901 § 12, 2004; Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; Ord. 1254 § 5, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.270 Off-street parking – Covered spaces.

All covered parking spaces shall be in a garage and meet the following requirements:

A. Minimum inside dimension of a stall in a garage shall be not less than 10 feet by 20 feet unless subject stall is served by a fire safety access, then the inside dimension of a stall shall be not less than nine feet by 20 feet;

B. Not more than two stalls in a garage shall face onto a public street;

C. Recreational vehicle parking spaces for five units or more shall be provided at the rate of one space for every five units. (Ord. 1254 § 6, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.280 Off-street parking – Open spaces.

All open parking spaces shall meet the following requirements:

A. The minimum dimension of a standard parking stall shall be not less than nine feet by 19 feet.

B. Minimum standards for surfacing off-street parking areas for other than garages shall be as follows:

1. Base. Material shall be crushed rock or other approved durable road materials properly compacted to a three-inch minimum thickness;

2. Wearing Surface. Bituminous concrete or other approved material compacted to a minimum thickness of two inches. (Ord. 1643 § 1, 1987; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.290 Off-street parking – General requirements.

A. For basic requirements, see CMC 17.72.020.

B. All parking and driveway areas adjacent to landscaping shall have a six-inch continuous curb as approved by the planning department.

C. All drainage lines shall be provided with concrete drainage gutters.

D. All parking stalls shall be equally convenient to the dwelling unit it serves. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.300 Vehicular access.

A. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property requiring off-street parking.

B. Vehicular access to lots fronting on a major or secondary highway shall be by way of an alley or service road. When unimproved lots of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title cannot secure access by way of an alley or service road, there shall be a paved turning area on the lot to permit motor vehicles to head into the street.

C. All vehicular access drives shall be surfaced to the minimum standards for off-street parking spaces. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.310 Pedestrian access.

There shall be a pedestrian access from a dedicated street to property used for residential purposes. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.320 Fire safety access.

No portion of a building shall be further than 300 feet from a fire accessway. The fire accessway shall meet the following specifications:

A. Minimum width of accessway shall be 30 feet;

B. The accessway shall be surfaced to meet the minimum standards for off-street parking spaces;

C. The accessway shall be free from any overhead obstruction and shall be posted as a fire accessway with no parking permitted within 30 feet;

D. All points of the accessway shall be sufficient for the movement of a fire vehicle with a turning diameter of 90 feet;

E. No fire accessway shall be dead-end nor have less than two points of entry;

F. A fully dedicated and improved street or alley is acceptable as a fire accessway. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.330 Signs – Generally.

CMC 17.28.330 through 17.28.360 shall include as part of its provisions those portions of existing codes and ordinances which relate to the erection and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising structures as are not in conflict herewith.

Signs and other commercial advertising shall be permitted in this zone only as provided in CMC 17.28.340 through 17.28.360. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.340 Nameplates.

Nameplates shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A.1. Nameplates shall not exceed one square foot in area and there shall be not more than one nameplate per single-family dwelling unit:

2. Nameplates shall not exceed one square foot in area for each five dwelling units on a multiple-family development;

B. Nameplates shall display only the following:

1. Name of the premises upon which it is displayed, and/or

2. Name of the owner or lessee of the premises, and/or

3. Address of the premises;

C. Nameplates for a multiple-family dwelling shall be developed as individual letters or figures, free from any encompassing sign structure, constructed of a durable material and placed flat against the building. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.350 “For Rent,” “For Sale” and similar signs.

“For Rent,” “For Sale” and signs of similar type shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A. Not more than two such signs shall be permitted on any lot or parcel;

B. No such sign shall exceed four square feet in area;

C. The sign shall be posted on the subject lot by the owner or his authorized agent. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.360 Subdivision and temporary apartment rental signs.

The following signs and advertising structures shall be permitted:

A. Temporary real estate signs advertising real property which has been subdivided for purposes of sale or lease and/or apartment rental signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

1. Such signs shall be located on the premises within the boundaries of the subdivision or apartment development which they advertise,

2. Such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area,

3. There shall be no more than two such signs per 300 feet of frontage,

4. Before any signs or advertising structure shall be erected, a permit therefor shall have been issued by both the building and planning departments for a six-month period,

5. The signs shall remain only as long as one-third of the property advertised for sale remains unsold or unrented, or for a period of six months, whichever period is shorter. No such signs shall remain longer than six months unless the permit therefor has been renewed by the building department;

B. Small signs are only permitted within subdivisions provided there shall be no more than one such sign for each three lots. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in area;

C. Signs are permitted on the same lot with a model home in a subdivision provided they not exceed three in number and four square feet each in area. The sign shall be removed within 48 hours after the initial sale of the lot and/or home;

D. Banners, pennants and flags may be used; provided, that:

1. Such signs or devices shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days from the issuance of the occupancy permit,

2. Each such sign or device shall be first reviewed and approved by the planning department, and

3. Each such sign is maintained in good repair. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.365 Signs for conditionally allowed uses.

Conditionally allowed uses such as churches and educational institutions may request site plan approval for such signage as may be reasonably necessary for the use. Any such signage shall comply with the following:

A. Each site shall be permitted to have one wall sign not to exceed five percent of the area of the first story height of the building or 50 square feet, whichever is greater, and one monument sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area and six feet in height.

B. In lieu of the signage provided in subsection (A) of this section, the chief planning official may approve one monument sign not to exceed 50 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

C. All signs shall be designed in harmony with the surrounding residential area.

D. Each use shall be permitted one pedestrian oriented information sign not to exceed 16 square feet in area.

E. Each use shall be permitted reasonable directional and traffic safety signs as determined necessary by the chief planning official.

F. That the design of all signs be submitted for site plan review and approval by the chief planning official. (Ord. 18-05 § 9(a), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 9(a), 2017.)


17.28.370 Loading.

There are no requirements on this subject in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.380 Floor area of dwelling unit.

A. For single-family dwelling units, the minimum ground floor area exclusive of open porches or garages shall be not less than 1,000 square feet.

B. Minimum dwelling unit size other than single-family units allowed exclusive of garages, carports, balconies, patios, terraces and open porches shall be in accordance with the following table:

Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 

	Type Unit (A)	 Minimum Square Feet (B)	Minimum Square Feet Required for Additional Land Coverage (C)

	Bachelor unit	500	None allowed

	One bedroom	700	None allowed

	Two bedroom	1,000	1,100

	Over two bedrooms	1,000 + 150 for each additional bedroom over two	1,100 + 150 for each additional bedroom over two

(Ord. 1254 § 7, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.390 Land coverage – Generally.

Land coverage, except as provided for herein, shall not exceed that percent provided for in the following table, exclusive of porches, balconies, decks, patios or terraces.

Maximum Land Coverage 

	 	Land Area Per Unit

	Total Square Footage of Parcel Being Developed	More than 3,000	2,999 through 2,000	1,900 through 1,249	1,250

	Under 7,200 sq. ft.	35%	38%	40%	40%

	7,200 and over	35%	35%	38%	40%

(Ord. 1254 § 8, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.400 Land coverage – Exceptions.

A. The square footage of garages in excess of the minimum required by this chapter need not be considered a part of the land coverage on a parcel of land.

B. When property is developed with all dwelling units having a square footage greater than that provided under Column (C) of the table contained in CMC 17.28.380, the development may exceed the maximum percent of land coverage by not more than an additional two and five-tenths percent.

C. When property is developed with a portion of its ground floor square footage developed within a one-story building, the development may exceed the maximum land coverage by not more than provided for in the following table:

	Percentage of Ground Floor Square Footage Developed as One Story Building	Additional Land

Coverage Authorized

	20%	2.5%

	30%	5.0%

	40%	7.5%

	50%	10.0%

(1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.410 Usable yard area.

Four or less dwelling units in the RD zones shall be provided with a usable yard area as follows:

A. No parcel of land shall have less than 1,000 square feet of usable yard area;

B. The minimum required usable yard area shall be 75 square feet for each dwelling unit, either as a private usable open space or a combination of private and common open space and/or children’s recreation areas;

C. The required private usable yard area when located on open ground, utilized as patios, terraces, atriums or surfaces of courts, shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet and a minimum area of 96 square feet.

The required usable yard area when located on balconies, porches or decks shall have a minimum area of 70 square feet and a minimum dimension of seven feet;

D. The remaining required usable open space not provided as private usable open space shall be provided in the common usable open space not less than 400 square feet in area and having no dimension less than 15 feet. All common yard area to be conveniently located and readily accessible from all dwelling units, screened from adjacent streets and highways to be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs and other permanently maintained plant material excepting for swimming pools, game courts and other recreational facilities;

E. The usable yard area required by this section shall not be used for parking, driveways, automobile turning area or accessory buildings. Maximum gradient of usable yard area shall be five percent unless approved by the planning commission as an integral part of a landscaped scheme;

F. Five or more dwelling units such as but not limited to condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments shall contain minimum usable yard areas as follows:

1. All parcels of land shall contain at least 1,000 square feet or 15 percent of usable yard area, whichever is greater.

2. Minimum private usable yard area shall be 200 square feet with a minimum dimension of 12 feet. Balcony areas shall be at least 120 square feet with a minimum dimension of eight feet.

Such usable yard area shall not be located within a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street or in a required rear yard abutting a street. (Ord. 18-05 § 9(b), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 9(b), 2017; Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; Ord. 1254 § 9, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.420 Car care facilities.

All developments having more than 20 units shall provide car wash areas constructed with water, adequate drainage and electrical facilities. The number shall be determined by the planning department and may be a part of the required parking stalls. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.430 Lighting.

All lighting of the building, landscaped parking area or similar facilities shall be so hooded and erected so as to reflect away from adjoining properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.440 Mechanical equipment.

All mechanical equipment shall be screened behind a permanent structure and all rooftop mechanical equipment shall be placed behind a permanent parapet wall and be completely restricted from all view from ground surfaces or adjacent higher street elevations. Such screening shall be as high as the highest portion of equipment ducting and shall be permanently maintained from the ground. No mechanical equipment shall be permitted in the required side yard or front yard. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.450 Laundry facilities.

A. All outdoor clothes drying areas shall be screened from all sides by landscaped screen, fence or a wall not less than six feet in height.

B. All condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments shall have their own private laundry space contained within the unit. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; Ord. 1254 § 10, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.460 Landscaping.

All yard areas are to be entirely landscaped with ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials including, where an integral part of a landscaped scheme comprised primarily of plant materials, such items as fountains, ponds, sculptures and planters. Recreation facilities other than in a building may be permitted in areas not visible from a public right-of-way.

The planning director shall approve the size and plant material to be in harmony with the development and to be in scale with the structures. All trees and ground cover in the parkway shall be approved by the director of public works. All landscape areas shall be served by an irrigation system approved by the planning director. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.470 Storage.

A. Each development shall be provided with sufficient refuse and trash storage areas. All outdoor trash, garbage and refuse storage shall be screened on all sides from public view by a minimum six-foot-high concrete or solid masonry wall and the opening provided with a gate of a durable wood or approved material. Such areas shall be located as to be easily accessible for trash pickup. No bin shall be under an eave overhang. The owners of existing properties on which three or more dwelling units are located shall construct facilities in compliance with this section by August 1, 1996. The designated planning official shall prepare reasonable standards for the method of screening, design, capacity, and construction of such facilities.

B. A minimum 175 cubic feet of storage area shall be contained within the garages. The minimum dimensions of this storage shall be four feet. (Ord. 95-1797 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1254 § 11, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.475 Variance for minor deviation – Additional authority.

Pursuant to CMC 17.78.160 and in addition to the authority provided therein, the designated planning official may approve modifications to city standards in the RD residential zone not to exceed:

A. Applications to reduce the minimum size or dimensions for a garage by up to 15 percent when such garage results from the conversion of an existing carport.

B. Applications to allow walls in front or side yards up to five feet in height built of a mixture of decorative block or brick and ornamental wrought iron; provided, that the wall does not constitute a safety hazard and at least 80 percent of the vertical surface above three feet in height is kept open for visibility and the passage of light and air.

C. Applications to place trash enclosures in required yards provided such enclosures are not closer than three feet to another residential property line or less than 15 feet from the front property line.

D. Applications to vary any standard by not more than 20 percent or to eliminate required parking for the sole purpose of providing a trash enclosure for a pre-existing building as required in CMC 17.28.470. (Ord. 95-1797 § 2, 1995.)


17.28.480 Security.

A security system for each structure, parking area and grounds shall be provided as approved by the fire chief and police chief. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.490 Identification.

All developments of 12 units or greater shall have placed on-site a permanent plot plan convenient for emergency vehicles and visitors showing apartment numbers and location, except where units have separate house numbers visible from the street. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.500 Utility services.

A. All utility services shall be underground.

B. All utility laterals for condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments shall gain access to each unit from the common yard area. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.510 Architectural features.

A. All buildings including accessory buildings shall possess a continuous-slope roof element which may vary in design and application.

B. All buildings shall utilize wood, tile or masonry materials on the exterior walls. In the event that plaster or stucco walls are proposed, the same shall be used in combination with one or more of the above materials. Architectural design features shall be utilized around the total exterior of the structures.

C. The architectural character of the proposed structures shall be based upon the appropriate use of sound materials and upon the principles of harmony and proportion in the element of the structures.

D. Building length shall not exceed 160 feet. (Ord. 1303 § 1, 1975; Ord. 1254 § 12, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 3.54.)


17.28.512 Contractual agreements.

All condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments shall adopt homeowners’ association rules, which shall provide for and assure adequate maintenance of the entire development. Such rules shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, all necessary maintenance of condominiums or townhouses shall be performed by outside professional management organizations. The homeowners’ association rules shall provide for a periodic review of the performance of such outside organizations to assure that adequate and proper maintenance services are provided. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; Ord. 1254 § 13, 1974.)


17.28.513 Conversions.

All applications for conversions of apartments to condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments shall include an economic statement concerning the capability of development. The apartment conversion shall conform to all ordinances relating to condominiums, townhouses, stock cooperatives and community apartments. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 1980; Ord. 1254 § 13, 1974.)




17.28.520 Conditions to use.

The following standards shall apply to the use and structures in the RD zone:

A. All required fences and walls shall be maintained in proper repair at all times;

B. All swimming pools shall be maintained as required in CMC 17.28.050 through 17.28.510;

C. All corner cutback requirements shall be maintained. No plants or material shall be allowed to grow or be maintained in such a condition which would cause a visual obstruction in these areas;

D. All off-street parking areas and the access thereto shall be maintained in good repair and all striping shall be maintained in a clearly visible state;

E. All required safety devices and signs shall be maintained in proper repair at all times;

F. All trash, garbage and refuse storage shall be maintained as provided for in this chapter. The above shall not be deposited in any form or manner that may be transported by natural causes or force or in a manner which may cause fumes, dust or which contribute a fire hazard or are edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects. Such items shall be stored only in closed containers and properly screened;

G. All landscaping shall be maintained. Any plants which die shall be replaced by the same plant as originally called for or by an alternate approved as an amendment to the site plan and architectural review;

H. No changes shall be made in the architectural features or elements of the structure without an amendment to the site plan and architectural review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.55.)


17.28.530 Site plan and architectural review.

The following procedures shall apply to all development in the RD zone:

A. The site plan provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply;

B. In order that the buildings, structures, signs and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and appearances in the area and not obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly in appearance, the applicant shall provide in addition to the site plan review of Chapter 17.64 CMC, the following items for approval:

1. The total development plan showing all the dimensions and locations of proposed structures, buildings, streets, parking, yards, playgrounds, open spaces and other public and private facilities,

2. Architectural drawings or sketches showing the design and character of the proposed structures, uses and facilities and the physical relationship of all elements,

3. Lot dimensions,

4. All buildings and structures; location, floor plans (scale for typical unit design shall be one-quarter inch), elevations, size, height, proposed use,

5. The relation to the existing buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area,

6. Yards and space between buildings,

7. Walls and fences; location, height and materials,

8. Off-street parking; location, number of spaces and dimensions of parking area, internal circulation pattern,

9. Access; pedestrian, vehicular, service; points of ingress and egress; internal circulation,

10. Loading; location, dimension, number of spaces, internal circulation,

11. Lighting; location and general nature; hooding devices,

12. Street dedications and improvements, if required,

13. Landscaping; variety, size of plants and irrigation system,

14. Drainage pattern and structures,

15. Trash storage areas and related walls,

16. All public utilities installations including poles, transformers, vaults and meters,

17. The colors and materials on the exterior,

18. The type and pitch of roofs,

19. The size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings,

20. Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television masts,

21. All plans shall have the following calculations listed: Unit breakdown by type of unit, size in square feet of each typical type of unit and name, address and phone number of the individual preparing the plans,

22. And such other data as may be required to permit the planning director to make the required findings;

C. If he finds all of the following conditions to exist, the planning director shall approve the application as provided in Chapter 17.64 CMC, subject to such conditions as he may attach which are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, to secure a development which is in harmony with other developments in the area, to minimize all undesirable or unsightly appearance, and to provide an orderly and visually aesthetic development within the intent of this title:

1. That all provisions of applicable ordinances, including the ordinance codified in this title, are complied with,

2. That the following are arranged so that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected:

a. Building structures and improvements,

b. Vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation,

c. Setbacks,

d. Height of buildings,

e. Location of services,

f. Walls,

g. Landscaping,

h. Grading;

3. That all yard areas required by this title, or found necessary for compatibility to the adjacent properties, except that area approved for driveways, walkways and parking areas are to be fully landscaped with plant material and maintained in a manner consistent with the accepted standards of gardening for the plant material used,

4. That any signs requested, and the colors thereof, are tastefully incorporated within the overall design of the entire development and in compliance with all code requirements, so as to achieve a homogeneous development,

5. That landscaping is incorporated in such a way as to complement the overall development, to enhance visual interest and appeal, and to soften bolder architectural features,

6. That the architectural character of the proposed structures is based upon the appropriate use of sound materials and upon the principles of harmony and proportion in the elements of the structure,

7. That the overall plan is in keeping with existing quality improvements in the area, and in harmony with the future development of the area, and in accord with the general plan,

8. That the development will not be detrimental to surrounding properties, nor diminish the value thereof.

If he finds any of the above not to be true, or not to exist, the planning director shall disapprove the application. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.56.)


17.28.540 Community impact requirement.

The following requirements shall be made a part of the application. These requirements may be waived by the planning director unless otherwise required by the planning commission:

A. A cost-benefit feasibility study by an independent economic firm or city staff at no expense to the city. The subject form and report scope shall be approved by the planning director;

B. A school impact study by an independent firm or city or school district staff at no expense to the city, indicating the effect of the proposed development upon the public school system. The subject form and report scope shall be approved by the planning director;

C. A traffic impact study at no cost to the city. Such study shall include the impact of the proposed development on the surrounding area, the traffic potential to be generated by the development, the adequacy or inadequacy of existing streets and highways to safely carry the predicted traffic loads, necessary changes in the street system or design caused by the development, projected cost of such improvements not to be borne by the developer and such other information as may be required by the planning director in order to aid in making his decision. The form, content and scope of the study shall be approved by the planning director. (1964 Code Appx. A § 3.57.)


Chapter 17.30 R-TP RESIDENTIAL ZONE (TRAILER AND MOBILE HOME PARKS)

Sections:

17.30.010    Intent.

17.30.020    Permitted uses.

17.30.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.30.040    Prohibited uses.

17.30.050    Property development standards generally.

17.30.060    Trailer space area.

17.30.070    Trailer space dimensions.

17.30.075    Additions to existing buildings.

17.30.080    Population density.

17.30.090    Building height – Generally.

17.30.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.30.110    Yards – Generally.

17.30.120    Front yard.

17.30.130    Side yard.

17.30.140    Rear yard.

17.30.150    Distance between residential trailers.

17.30.160    Fences, hedges and walls.

17.30.170    Off-street parking.

17.30.180    Access.

17.30.190    Signs – Generally.

17.30.200    Permitted signs.

17.30.210    Signs – Standards.

17.30.220    Loading.

17.30.230    Size of new district.

17.30.240    Sewer connections.

17.30.250    Accessory structures.

17.30.260    Site plan review.


17.30.010 Intent.

This zone is created to provide the accommodation of residential trailers in planned, integrated trailers parks. (“Trailer” as used herein is deemed to refer to a residential trailer.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.00.)


17.30.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.30.050 through 17.30.230:

A. Residential trailers;

B. Incidental uses directly related to the needs of trailer park residents, including only the following:

1. Office,

2. Laundry and rest room facilities,

3. Recreation facilities,

4. Not more than two dwelling units per trailer park, for the owner, operator and/or one employee of the trailer park,

5. Sales of items related to maintenance and operation of trailers within the park; provided, there shall be no sign visible from a street advertising such sales. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.01.)


17.30.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Private dance. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.02.)


17.30.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-TP zone, except as otherwise provided in CMC 17.30.020:

A. Commercial uses;

B. Industrial uses;

C. Dwellings. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.03.)


17.30.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.30.060 through 17.30.230 shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-TP zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.060 Trailer space area.

Each trailer space shall have a minimum area of 1,500 square feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.070 Trailer space dimensions.

Each trailer space shall be not less than 30 feet in width. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.075 Additions to existing buildings.

The exterior and roof of all enclosed room additions to existing buildings shall be the same as or similar to the architecture and materials of the existing building. Reasonable variations in design shall be permitted upon approval of the planning director. (Ord. 1315 § 4, 1975.)


17.30.080 Population density.

There shall be a minimum of 2,400 square feet of trailer park area for each trailer space provided on the site. This space ratio shall include access, trailer parking, automobile parking, outbuilding space, and recreational areas. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.110 Yards – Generally.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.110, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.120 Front yard.

Each trailer park shall have a front yard of 25 feet abutting a dedicated street. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.130 Side yard.

A. There shall be a side yard of not less than five feet on each side of the trailer park not abutting a street. The side yard may be used for access or parking.

B. Where a trailer park sides on a street, there shall be a side yard abutting the street of not less than 15 feet; however, if the trailer park side is in the same block frontage with a residential or agricultural zone, the yard shall be the same as that required for the residential or agricultural zone. An alley shall be deemed to define a block frontage for purposes of this section. Side yards abutting streets shall be landscaped and maintained. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.140 Rear yard.

Each trailer park shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. The yard may be used for access or parking. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.150 Distance between residential trailers.

A. There shall be a space of not less than 10 feet in width between a trailer and any cabana, ramada or other similar permanent accessory structure related to another trailer.

B. There shall be a space not less than 20 feet in width between a trailer and any permitted building, except transformer or meter structures.

C. There shall be a space not less than 10 feet in width between a vehicular accessway and a trailer which sides on the accessway, and not less than two and one-half feet between such vehicular accessway and the end of the trailer or the end of the towing bar, whichever the case may be. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.160 Fences, hedges and walls.

A. The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.170 through 17.26.210, shall apply, except that for swimming pool areas the provisions of the RD-3000 zone shall apply.

B. In addition, where the R-TP zone abuts any residential or agricultural zone, a solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary. The wall shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in the required yard area abutting a street and shall comply with the corner cutback provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.200 and 17.26.210.

C. Where the R-TP zone abuts a street or alley, the planning director may, at the time of site plan review, require a wall or fence on the yard setback line when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.170 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.180 Access.

A. The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.230 through 17.26.250, shall apply.

B. There shall be an accessway of not less than 30 feet in width from the street or alley to each trailer space, the way to be for both pedestrian and vehicular access with not less than 25 feet reserved for vehicular access and not less than five feet reserved for pedestrian walkways. The five-foot pedestrian walkways may be provided by two-and-one-half-foot walkways on either side of the vehicular way. No parking shall be permitted in the required accessway.

C. There shall be a paved turning area in the trailer park to permit motor vehicles to head into a dedicated street or alley. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.190 Signs – Generally.

CMC 17.30.190 through 17.30.210 shall include as part of their provisions those portions of existing codes and ordinances which relate to the erection and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising structures as are not in conflict herewith.

Signs and other commercial advertising shall be permitted in this zone only as provided in CMC 17.30.200 and 17.30.210. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.200 Permitted signs.

The following signs shall be permitted, subject to the standards in CMC 17.30.210:

A. Identification signs which advertise the trailer park, provided they are located on the subject property. The signs shall not exceed one square foot of area for each lineal foot of frontage along the street from which there is access to the trailer park; provided, that signs for any one trailer park shall not exceed 100 square feet of sign area on any one frontage;

B. Directional signs related to the location of trailers and facilities on the premises, provided they are located on the subject property. The signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in area;

C. “For Rent,” “For Sale,” “Vacancy” and similar signs, provided they are posted on the subject lot or on a building thereon by the owner or his authorized agent. The signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and there shall be not more than one such sign for any one trailer park;

D. Nameplates, not exceeding one square foot in area. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.210 Signs – Standards.

The following standards and conditions shall apply to all signs:

A. Signs shall in no way endanger the health and safety by causing distraction to operators of motor vehicles on the streets and highways. Location, lighting and color of signs shall be such as to cause no confusion with public signs or traffic signals. No blinking, flashing or animated signs visible from any street or highway shall be permitted;

B. Signs shall not be located in any required yard area and shall not exceed the height provisions of this zone;

C. Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.220 Loading.

There are no requirements on this subject in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.230 Size of new district.

The minimum amount of land that may be zoned R-TP in any one location shall be two and one-half acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.04.)


17.30.240 Sewer connections.

A. Each trailer park shall be connected to a sanitary sewer when such facilities are deemed by the public works director to be available. Each trailer space shall have a connection to the sanitary sewer line.

B. Trailers that cannot be connected to a sanitary sewer line shall not be permitted. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.05.)


17.30.250 Accessory structures.

A. No accessory building shall be constructed as a permanent part of a trailer. Only cloth awning or similar temporary device may be attached to a trailer.

B. Cabanas, armadas and other similar permanent structures may be erected in conjunction with a trailer space; provided, that in no case may a cabana or ramada be closer than 10 feet to any trailer other than the one it is designed to serve, or to any other cabana or ramada. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.05.)


17.30.260 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 5.05.)


Chapter 17.32 R-R RESIDENTIAL RECREATION ZONE

Sections:

17.32.010    Intent.

17.32.020    Permitted uses.

17.32.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.32.040    Prohibited uses.

17.32.050    Property development standards generally.

17.32.060    Lot area.

17.32.070    Lot dimensions.

17.32.075    Additions to existing buildings.

17.32.080    Population density.

17.32.090    Building height – Generally.

17.32.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.32.110    Yards.

17.32.120    Distance between buildings.

17.32.130    Fences, hedges and walls.

17.32.140    Off-street parking.

17.32.150    Access.

17.32.160    Signs.

17.32.170    Loading.

17.32.180    Size of new zone.

17.32.190    Hours of operation.

17.32.200    Lighting.

17.32.210    Site plan review.


17.32.010 Intent.

The R-R residential recreation zone is for small neighborhood recreation centers, noncommercial in nature, which fit into the residential pattern. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.00.)


17.32.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and equally related to the neighborhood recreation function of this zone. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.32.050 through 17.32.180:

A. Clubhouse or cabana;

B. Lawn and court games;

C. Nursery school or child care center; provided it is operated in conjunction with the recreation facilities;

D. Picnic and barbecue facilities;

E. Playground;

F. Swimming pool, spray pool;

G. Tennis courts;

H. Vending machines for the sale of cigarettes, soft drinks and food. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.01.)


17.32.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC: 

A. Private dance. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.02.)


17.32.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-R residential recreation zone, except as otherwise permitted in CMC 17.32.020:

A. Residential uses;

B. Commercial uses;

C. Industrial uses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.03.)


17.32.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.32.060 through 17.32.180 shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-R zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions in the R-R zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.070 Lot dimensions.

There are no provisions on this subject in the R-R zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.075 Additions to existing buildings.

The exterior and roof of all enclosed room additions to existing buildings shall be the same as or similar to the architecture and materials of the existing building. Reasonable variations in design shall be permitted upon approval of the planning director. (Ord. 1315 § 5, 1975.)


17.32.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions in this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 35 feet or two and one-half stories, whichever is less. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.110 Yards.

Yard requirements are intended to assure the harmony of the R-R zone with the residential zones surrounding. Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

A. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained.

B. Corner lots shall have a side yard abutting the street of not less than 12.5 feet. The required yard shall be landscaped.

C. Reversed corner lots shall have a side yard abutting the street of not less than 15 feet. The yard shall be landscaped.

D. All required yards abutting streets shall be landscaped and maintained and a fence not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line.

E. When the R-R zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a yard of not less than 10 feet abutting the zone boundary. The required yard may be used for parking or access or for permitted outdoor uses. A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line. The wall shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street, and shall comply with corner cutback provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.200 and 17.26.210.

F. A swimming pool shall not be located in any required yard abutting a street, nor shall it be located closer than five feet from any side or rear property line not abutting a street. It shall be entirely enclosed as required in the RD-3000 zone.

G. All utilities, equipment, machinery and satellite and disc antennas, located in yards, shall be screened at ground level from adjacent properties behind enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the adjacent building, or shall be screened by landscaping or fencing. Satellite and disc antennas with a diameter greater than two feet shall not be permitted on the roof of any structure. (Ord. 1594 § 4, 1985; 1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.120 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject in the R-R zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.130 Fences, hedges and walls.

Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.32.110 in connection with yards. Except as herein provided, the provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.170 through 17.26.210, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.140 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.150 Access.

The provisions of the R-1-7500 zone, CMC 17.26.230 through 17.26.250, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.160 Signs.

Nameplates shall be permitted, provided they not exceed one square foot in area. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.170 Loading.

There are no provisions on this subject in the R-R zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.180 Size of new zone.

The minimum and maximum amounts of land that may be zoned R-R in any one location shall be:

A. Minimum area, one-half acre;

B. Maximum area, two acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.04.)


17.32.190 Hours of operation.

Operation or use shall begin not earlier than 7:00 a.m. and shall conclude not later than 10:00 p.m. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.05.)


17.32.200 Lighting.

Facilities may be lighted, provided lights are so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.05.)


17.32.210 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 6.05.)


Chapter 17.34 C-P COMMERCIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE

Sections:

17.34.010    Intent.

17.34.020    Permitted uses.

17.34.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.34.040    Prohibited uses.

17.34.050    Property development standards generally.

17.34.060    Lot area.

17.34.070    Lot dimensions.

17.34.080    Population density.

17.34.090    Building height – Generally.

17.34.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.34.110    Yards.

17.34.120    Distance between buildings.

17.34.130    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.34.140    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.34.150    Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

17.34.160    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.34.170    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.34.180    Off-street parking.

17.34.190    Access.

17.34.200    Signs – Generally.

17.34.210    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.34.220    Loading.

17.34.230    Site plan review.


17.34.010 Intent.

The C-P commercial, administrative and professional office zone is intended to provide for the development of an integrated office and professional zone wherein all of the related types of uses and facilities may be located. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.00.)


17.34.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following purposes, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. Uses shall be subject to the property development standards of CMC 17.34.050 through 17.34.220:

A. Office and service uses (which no chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are manufactured or sold):

1. Administrative and professional offices,

2. Ambulance service,

3. Dental clinic,

4. Emergency medical clinic,

5. General research, not involving manufacturing, fabrication or processing or sale of products listed in any commercial or manufacturing zone,

6. Hospitals,

7. Laboratories, biological, medical, dental and X-ray,

8. Dental and therapeutic clinics,

9. Medical office or medical clinics, which, notwithstanding the gross floor area requirements set forth in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, may include the following ancillary uses, provided such ancillary uses are located on the same lot and are related to the medical office or medical clinic use: cafes, pharmacies, flower shops, gift shops, farmers’ markets, and conference rooms, 

10. Notary public,

11. Optometrists,

12. Podiatrist,

13. Real estate appraiser,

14. Real estate broker,

15. Stock exchange and broker,

16. Surgery or surgical center – medical;

17. Tax consulting and accounting services;

B. Other:

1. Churches,

2. Libraries and reading rooms,

3. Museum,

4. Off-street parking facilities when operating in conjunction with a permitted use,

5. Private dance only when conducted in conjunction with a church or public school;

C. Related Uses, Including Limited Commercial. The following uses shall be permitted only when operated within a totally enclosed building having more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, when 90 percent of the gross floor area in a building having a gross floor area between 5,001 and 10,000 square feet is utilized for those uses permitted in subsections (A) and (B) of this section; when 80 percent of the gross floor area in a building having a gross floor area between 10,001 and 20,000 square feet is utilized for those uses permitted in subsections (A) and (B) of this section; or when 70 percent of a building having a gross floor area in excess of 20,001 square feet is utilized for those uses permitted in subsections (A) and (B):

1. Medical equipment and supplies,

2. Orthopedic equipment and supplies,

3. Pharmacy;

D. Commercial Uses. The following uses shall be permitted only when operated within a totally enclosed building having more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area, when 95 percent of the gross floor area in the building is utilized for those uses permitted in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section; or when 85 percent of the building having a gross floor area in excess of 25,001 square feet is utilized for those uses permitted in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section:

1. Barber and/or beauty shop;

2. Book and/or stationery shop;

3. Coffee shop;

4. Confectionery shop;

5. Employment agency;

6. Florist;

7. Gift shop;

8. Mimeographing;

9. Office supply store;

10. Restaurant, tearoom, cafe; provided no dancing or theatrical performances are permitted. (Ord. 19-04 § 7, 2019; Ord. 19-01 § 6 – 8, 2019; Ord. 14-2031 § 1, 2014; Ord. 14-2030 § 2, 2014; Ord. 11-1997 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1693 §§ 1, 2, 1989; Ord. 1671 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1535 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1180 §§ 1, 2, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.01.)


17.34.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Call office for delivery of laundry and/or dry cleaning;

B. Convalescent hospital, assisted living facility, memory care facility, skilled nursing care facility, and similar uses;

C. Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

D. Day nursery;

E. Educational or health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

F. Electrical distribution and public utility substation;

G. Hotel; or hotel with on-sale liquor as an ancillary use, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

H. Liquor, on-sale in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment;

I. Off-sale beer and wine in conjunction with a gift shop or delicatessen, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

J. Public parking lot. (Ord. 19-04 §§ 8, 9, 2019; Ord. 19-01 § 9, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 4, 2011; Ord. 01-1884 § 3, 2001; Ord. 1712 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1671 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1597 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1535 § 5, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.02.)


17.34.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-P zone, except as otherwise provided in CMC 17.34.020:

A. Residence;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Retail and commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.34.020 and 17.34.030;

E. Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages;

F. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use,

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes,

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings, including, but not limited to: city halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices,

c. Hospital and convalescent facilities,

d. Parks and playgrounds,

e. Senior, youth or similar centers;

G. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 10, 2019; Ord. 1438 § 1, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.03.)


17.34.050 Property development standards generally.

For residential uses the property development standards of the RD-1500 zone shall apply.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.34.060 through 17.34.220 shall apply to all nonresidential land and buildings in the C-P zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions in the C-P zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.070 Lot dimensions.

There are no provisions on this subject in the C-P zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for the C-P zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 50 feet except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church steeples, flagpoles, roof signs when permitted in the zone, chimneys, water tanks or similar structures, when approved by the commission, may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed; provided, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. No penthouse or roof structures, or other space above the height limit, shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. All roof equipment and machinery shall be entirely screened from view with a screening device utilizing materials which are compatible to the materials used on the building. (Ord. 11-1996 § 5, 2011; Ord. 1543 § 5, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.110 Yards.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

A. When the C-P zone fronts, sides or rears on a street, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 10 feet. The required yard shall be landscaped and maintained. If across a local street from a residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, a wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is no building on the line and where there is parking, loading or storage to the rear of the line.

B. When the C-P zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a yard of not less than 10 feet abutting the zone boundary, except where the C-P zone abuts a public park no yard shall be required. The required yard may be used for parking, loading, access or storage; provided, items are not stored higher than the required wall. A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line.

C. When the C-P zone fronts directly on a public park or fronts on a street which is a boundary with a public park, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 10 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. A wall of not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is loading or storage to the rear of the line.

D. A swimming pool shall not be located in any required yard abutting a street, and in no case shall it be located less than five feet from any side or rear property line not abutting a street. It shall be entirely enclosed as required in CMC 17.34.150.

E. All utility equipment and machinery located in yards shall be screened behind enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the adjacent building or shall be screened by landscaping. (Ord. 1543 § 6, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.120 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-P zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.130 Fences and walls – Required walls.

Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.34.110 in connection with yards when the zone adjoins a residential and/or agricultural zone. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street, in the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front yard required in the abutting residential or agricultural zone, and shall conform to corner cutback provisions, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.140 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.150 Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

Swimming pool areas shall be entirely enclosed by buildings or by fences or walls not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height around the deck area related to the pool. The fence or wall shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors, the latching device being located not less than four feet 10 inches above the ground. All fencing must be in place and approved before the water is run into the pool. All lighting of pool area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.160 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and/or private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established herein:

A. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersecting and intercepting streets and/or alleys. The cutback line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the closest intersection of yard setback lines at the corner of the lot where visibility is required;

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way;

C. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.170 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not greater than six feet in height shall be permitted on or within all property lines not abutting streets and on or to the rear of all yard setback lines of yards abutting streets.

B. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not over three feet in height shall be permitted in required yards abutting streets. In any required corner cutback area, only openwork fences shall be permitted. Walls, hedges and other visual obstructions are prohibited.

C. To enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, fences over six feet in height shall be permitted; provided, that portion of the fence which is higher than six feet shall be composed of wire mesh or other material whose vertical surface is not more than 10 percent solid. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.180 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.190 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.200 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.210 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A. Each business shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented sign per entrance, to be mounted flat against the building or suspended from an overhanging architectural feature which is an integral part of the building. Such sign may not exceed six square feet per face.

B. Each business shall be permitted one sign per occupancy frontage when mounted flat or against the building or one projecting sign not more than two feet in to the public right-of-way and not to project above the roofline of the building. The overall area devoted to signs may not exceed 10 percent of the area of the first story height of the building. Each side of the projecting sign shall be included in the maximum overall area allowed.

C. When the principal building rears onto a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed six percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

D. Each property with a building setback of at least 10 feet and having a lot frontage greater than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such sign shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 15 square feet per face nor an overall height of four feet.

E. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending into the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign.

F. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature and not painted, pasted, taped or affixed in any way to the window surface except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020. (Ord. 01-1879 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1392 § 2, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.220 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.04.)


17.34.230 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.05.)


Chapter 17.36 C-1 COMMERCIAL ZONE (NEIGHBORHOOD STORES)

Sections:

17.36.010    Intent.

17.36.020    Permitted uses.

17.36.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.36.040    Prohibited uses.

17.36.050    Property development standards generally.

17.36.060    Lot area.

17.36.070    Lot dimensions.

17.36.080    Population density.

17.36.090    Building height – Generally.

17.36.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.36.110    Yards.

17.36.120    Distance between buildings.

17.36.130    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.36.140    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.36.150    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

17.36.160    Off-street parking.

17.36.170    Access.

17.36.180    Signs – Generally.

17.36.190    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.36.200    Loading.

17.36.210    Size of new zone.

17.36.220    Site plan review.


17.36.010 Intent.

The C-1 zone is intended to be a very limited commercial area to serve the needs of the immediate neighborhood. This zone is not intended to expand into a larger scale shopping center.

The stores in this zone are intended to fit into the residential pattern without creating either architectural or traffic conflicts. The regulations contained in this chapter are intended to protect the residential environment. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.10.)


17.36.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.36.050 through 17.36.210. All uses and storage shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building:

A. Bakery sales;

B. Barber and/or beauty shop;

C. Call office for delivery of laundry or dry cleaning;

D. Delicatessen;

E. Drug store or pharmacy;

F. Electric distribution and public utility substations;

G. Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use, up to a maximum of three such games;

H. Florist;

I. Food stores, including poultry and eggs, bakery, ice cream and confectionery; provided all products shall be sold on the premises and provided there shall be no slaughtering, plucking or dressing of poultry on the premises;

J. Off-street parking facilities when operated in connection with a permitted use;

K. Public utility customer service office. (Ord. 19-01 § 11, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 5, 2011; Ord. 1507 § 2, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.11.)


17.36.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses shall be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

B. Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

C. Recycling collection facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.195. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 12, 13, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1647 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1507 § 3, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.12.)


17.36.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-1 zone:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Trailer parks;

D. Industrial uses;

E. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use;

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes,

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings, including, but not limited to: City Halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices,

c. Hospital and convalescent facilities,

d. Parks and playgrounds,

e. Senior, youth or similar centers;

F. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 14, 2019; Ord. 1438 § 2, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.13.)


17.36.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.36.060 through 17.36.210 shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-1 zone, except that any lot held under separate ownership or of record on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in dimensions may be used, subject to all other standards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions for the C-1 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now held under separate ownership or of record may not be reduced below these standards:

A. There are no lot width provisions.

B. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 20 feet or one story, whichever is less, except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.110 Yards.

Yard requirements are intended to assure the harmony of the C-1 zone with the residential zones surrounding. Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

A. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet.

B. Corner lots shall have a side yard abutting the street of not less than 12.5 feet.

C. Reversed corner lots shall have a side yard abutting the street of not less than 15 feet.

D. When the C-1 zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a yard of not less than 10 feet abutting the zone, except when such residential or agricultural zone properties are developed as a public park, no yard shall be required.

E. All required yards abutting streets shall be landscaped and maintained. If across a local street from a residential or agricultural zone, a wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is no building on the line and where there is parking or loading to the rear of the line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.120 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject in the C-1 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.130 Fences and walls – Required walls.

Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.36.110 in connection with yards when this zone adjoins a residential and/or agricultural zone. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street, in the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front yard required in the abutting residential or agricultural zone, and shall conform to corner cutback provisions in the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.140 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.150 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

For corner cutback and permitted fences, hedges and walls, the provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.160 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.170 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.180 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.190 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A. Each business shall be allowed one sign per occupancy frontage. The area devoted to signs may not exceed 10 percent of the area of the first story height of the building and each sign must be mounted flat against the building.

B. When the building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The overall area devoted to such sign shall not exceed six percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

C. Each property having a lot frontage greater than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such sign shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 20 square feet per face nor an overall height of six feet. (Ord. 1392 § 3, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.200 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.210 Size of new zone.

The minimum and maximum amounts of land that may be zoned C-1 shall be:

A. Minimum area, one-third acre;

B. Maximum area, one acre;

C. Minimum width, 100 feet;

D. Minimum depth, 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.14.)


17.36.220 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.15.)


Chapter 17.38 C-2 COMMERCIAL ZONE (NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER)

Sections:

17.38.010    Intent.

17.38.020    Permitted uses.

17.38.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.38.040    Prohibited uses.

17.38.050    Lot area.

17.38.060    Lot dimensions.

17.38.070    Population density.

17.38.080    Building height – Generally.

17.38.090    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.38.100    Yards.

17.38.110    Distance between buildings.

17.38.120    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.38.130    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.38.140    Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

17.38.150    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

17.38.160    Off-street parking.

17.38.170    Access.

17.38.180    Signs – Generally.

17.38.190    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.38.200    Loading.

17.38.210    Size of new district.

17.38.220    Site plan review.


17.38.010 Intent.

The C-2 zone is intended to serve as a shopping center. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.20.)


17.38.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged, only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.38.050 through 17.38.210.

A. Those uses permitted in the C-1 zone;

B. Retail stores, sales and services:

1. Antique home furnishings;

2. Art shop;

3. Auto parts sales, excluding body and fender work and painting and mechanical auto wash;

4. Automobile service stations, when operated in conjunction with an established neighborhood, community or regional shopping center, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.025 (CMC 17.38.100(A) shall not apply to automobile service stations);

5. Bakery; provided not more than five persons shall be employed and all products are sold on the premises;

6. Bakery sales;

7. Barber and/or beauty shop;

8. Bicycle shop;

9. Book and stationery store;

10. Call office for delivery of laundry or dry cleaning;

11. Carpet and rug sales, no cleaning;

12. Cleaners;

13. Clothing and wearing apparel;

14. Coffee shop;

15. Cosmetic shop;

16. Craft shop;

17. Delicatessen;

18. Discount house;

19. Drug store;

20. Electrical appliance supply and repair;

21. Fix-it shop;

22. Florist;

23. Food stores, including poultry and eggs, bakery, ice cream and confectionery; provided all products shall be sold on the premises, and provided there shall be no slaughtering, plucking or dressing of poultry on the premises;

24. Frozen food lockers;

25. Fruit store;

26. Furniture;

27. Furniture upholstery;

28. Furriers;

29. Gift shop;

30. Haberdashery;

31. Hardware;

32. Health food stores;

33. Hobby shop and supply;

34. Home furnishings;

35. Household appliances, supply, repair and service;

36. Ice cream parlor;

37. Jewelry sales and repair;

38. Laundromat;

39. Leather goods and luggage;

40. Linoleum stores;

41. Deleted;

42. Locksmith;

43. Luggage shop;

44. Mail order house;

45. Maternity shop;

46. Meat market;

47. Medical equipment and supplies;

48. Mimeographing and duplicating;

49. Music instruction;

50. Music shop;

51. Newsstand;

52. Novelty shop;

53. Nursery schools (see day nurseries);

54. Office furniture and machine sales and repair;

55. Orthopedic equipment and supplies;

56. Paint and wallpaper materials and supplies;

57. Pet shop and food stores;

58. Pharmacy;

59. Physicians’ equipment and supplies;

60. Photocopying;

61. Photographers’ studios;

62. Photography supplies;

63. Piano sales and service;

64. Picture framing;

65. Plant nursery, provided fertilizer be sold only in bags;

66. Public utility customer service office;

67. Public utility substations;

68. Radio, television and phonographic supplies, sales and service;

69. Redemption centers;

70. Restaurant, tearoom, cafe; providing no dancing or theatrical performance is permitted and no liquor or alcoholic beverages shall be sold or dispensed on the premises except as provided in CMC 17.38.030;

71. Sewing machine sales and service;

72. Shoe sales and repair;

73. Soda fountain;

74. Sporting goods and equipment sales and rentals;

75. Stationery stores;

76. Stenographers, public;

77. Supermarket;

78. Tailor;

79. Ticket agency;

80. Deleted;

81. Toy store;

82. Vacuum cleaner sales and service;

83. Variety store;

84. Wearing apparel;

85. Yarn shop;

C. Other:

1. Administrative or professional offices (any offices in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured or sold). Medical, dental and therapeutic offices for chiropractors, physical therapists and similar uses are also permitted; provided, that the sum total of such uses occupy no greater than 10 percent of the floor area of all buildings on the commercial site or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less, and no individual use occupies greater than 3,500 square feet of floor area;

2. Bank and financial institutions;

3. Bill paying office;

4. Community gardens;

5. Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

6. Crankcase oil tanks in conjunction with an automobile service station;

7. Day nurseries, when operated in conjunction with the operation of an integrated shopping facility;

8. Insurance brokers, adjusters and agents;

9. Libraries and reading rooms;

10. Notary public;

11. Nursery school (see day nurseries);

12. Offices (any offices in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured or sold);

13. Off-street parking;

14. Optometrists;

15. Parking lot, public;

16. Real estate brokers;

17. Stock exchange and brokers;

18. Tax consulting services. (Ord. 19-01 § 15, 2019; Ord. 15-2035 § 1, 2015; Ord. 14-2031 § 2, 2014; Ord. 14-2030 § 3, 2014; Ord. 11-1997 § 7, 2011; Ord. 93-1748 § 2, 1993; Ord. 1711 § 2, 1990; Ord. 1709 § 2, 1990; Ord. 1583 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1574 § 2, 1984; Ord. 1535 § 6, 1983; Ord. 1185 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.21.)


17.38.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

Automobile service stations, except as otherwise provided for in CMC 17.38.020(B), subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.025. CMC 17.38.100(A) shall not apply to automobile service stations;

Automobile towing in conjunction with a permitted service station;

Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

Drop-off bins and facilities;

Educational or health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

Liquor, off-sale, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

Liquor, on-sale, in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment;

Lodges and meeting halls;

Public dance, only when conducted in conjunction with a restaurant;

Recycling collection facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.195. (Ord. 19-01 § 16, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 8, 2011; Ord. 93-1748 § 3, 1993; Ord. 91-1730 § 1(D), 1991; Ord. 1647 § 2, 1987; Ord. 1642 § 4, 1987; Ord. 1574 § 3, 1984; Ord. 1535 § 7, 1983; Ord. 1507 § 4, 1981; Ord. 1166 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.22.)


17.38.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-2 zone:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Trailer parks;

D. Industrial uses;

E. Wholesaling and warehousing;

F. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use,

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes,

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings, including, but not limited to: city halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices,

c. Hospital and convalescent facilities,

d. Parks and playgrounds,

e. Senior, youth or similar centers;

G. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.38.020 and 17.38.030;

H. Multi-tenant retail arcades;

I. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 17, 2019; Ord. 92-1736 § 2(C), 1992; Ord. 1438 § 3, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.23.)


17.38.050 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions for the C-2 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.060 Lot dimensions.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-2 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.070 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.080 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 35 feet except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.090 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.100 Yards.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

A. When the C-2 zone fronts, sides or rears on a street which is a boundary with a residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 20 feet. The required yard shall be landscaped and maintained. If across a local street from a residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, a wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is no building on the line and where there is parking, loading or storage to the rear of the line.

B. When the C-2 zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a minimum building setback of 25 feet consisting of a 10-foot landscaped strip adjacent to the property line and a minimum 15-foot driveway for fire access. No entrances or exits from the rear of the building, except limited fire access, will be allowed. A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line.

C. When the C-2 zone sides or rears on an alley which is a boundary with a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a yard abutting the alley of not less than 70 feet, measured from the side of the alley opposite the subject property, except where the C-2 zone sides or rears on an alley which is a boundary with a public park, no yard shall be required. The required yard may be used for parking, loading, access or storage, provided items are not stored higher than six feet.

D. When the C-2 zone fronts directly on a public park or fronts on a street which is a boundary with a public park, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 20 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. A wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is loading or storage to the rear of the line. (Ord. 1497 § 1, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.110 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-2 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.120 Fences and walls – Required walls.

Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.38.100 in connection with yards when this zone adjoins a residential and/or agricultural zone. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street, in the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front yard required in the abutting residential or agricultural zone, and shall conform to corner cutback provisions in the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.130 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.140 Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

All outdoor storage areas abutting residentially zoned property shall be enclosed by a building wall or by a solid fence or wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.150 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

For corner cutback and permitted fences, hedges and walls, the provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.160 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.170 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.180 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.190 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A.1. Each shopping center containing two or more establishments and having a lot frontage in excess of 100 feet shall be permitted one freestanding sign per center. Such sign shall not be closer than 100 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed 75 square feet per face nor an overall height of 30 feet.

2. Each property containing less than two establishments and having a lot frontage less than 100 feet but more than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such sign shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 20 square feet per face nor an overall height of six feet.

B. Each business shall be permitted one building-face sign per occupancy frontage. The overall area devoted to signs may not exceed 15 percent of the area of the first story height of the building and each sign must be mounted flat against the building.

C. Each business shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented sign per entrance, to be mounted flat against the building or suspended from an overhanging architectural feature. Such sign may not exceed six square feet per face.

D. Each business shall be permitted one sign to the rear of its building when there exists a public entrance facing onto a public alley or parking lot which is served by those areas. The overall area devoted to such signs may not exceed 10 percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

E. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature, and not painted, pasted, taped nor affixed in any way to the window surface, except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020.

F. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending into the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign. (Ord. 1392 §§ 4, 5, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.200 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.210 Size of new district.

The minimum and maximum amount of land that may be zoned C-2 shall be:

A. Minimum area, four acres;

B. Maximum area, 10 acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.24.)


17.38.220 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.25.)


Chapter 17.40 C-3 COMMERCIAL ZONE (CENTRAL BUSINESS)

Sections:

17.40.010    Intent.

17.40.020    Permitted uses.

17.40.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.40.040    Prohibited uses.

17.40.050    Property development standards generally.

17.40.060    Lot area.

17.40.070    Lot dimensions.

17.40.080    Population density.

17.40.090    Building height – Generally.

17.40.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.40.110    Yards.

17.40.120    Distance between buildings.

17.40.130    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.40.140    Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

17.40.150    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

17.40.160    Off-street parking.

17.40.170    Access.

17.40.180    Signs – Generally.

17.40.190    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.40.200    Loading.

17.40.210    Site plan review.


17.40.010 Intent.

The C-3 zone is intended to serve as the central trading area of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.30.)


17.40.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and related to the functioning of a central business district. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.40.050 through 17.40.200:

A. Those uses permitted in the C-2 zone, except as otherwise provided in CMC 17.40.040;

B. Retail stores, sales and services:

Advertising agencies;

Aerial photograph and survey service;

Art gallery, show and studio;

Auto rental;

Awning sales;

Barber and/or beauty shop;

Blueprinting and photocopying;

Catering service, food;

Department store;

Employment agency;

Garage, public;

Garden supply and tools;

Gunsmith;

Playground equipment sales and service;

Plumbing supply, retail;

Restaurant;

Taxi;

Taxidermist;

Tire sales, no retreading or vulcanizing;

C. Other:

Apartment hotels;

Lodges and meeting halls;

Museums;

Printing and publishing;

Public and/or private dancing;

Telegraph office;

Theater, theatrical and motion picture. (Ord. 19-01 § 18, 2019; Ord. 18-05 § 6(a), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 6(a), 2017; Ord. 97-1813 § 6, 1997; Ord. 93-1748 § 4, 1993; Ord. 1678 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1549 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1535 §§ 8, 9, 1983; Ord. 1495 § 1(a), 1981; Ord. 1438 § 4, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.31.)


17.40.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

Auditorium;

Automobile towing in conjunction with a permitted service station;

Billiard parlor;

Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

Educational or health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

Hotels;

Liquor, off-sale, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

Liquor, on-sale, in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment;

Shared-space commercial establishment;

Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 19, 20, 2019; Ord. 18-05 § 6(a), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 6(a), 2017; Ord. 11-1997 § 9, 2011; Ord. 93-1748 § 5, 1993; Ord. 91-1730 § 1(E), 1991; Ord. 1678 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1642 § 5, 1987; Ord. 1535 § 10, 1983; Ord. 1507 § 5, 1981; Ord. 1495 § 1(b), 1981; Ord. 1438 § 5, 1979; Ord. 1386 § 4, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.32.)


17.40.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-3 zone:

A. Residential uses, except as otherwise provided herein;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Trailer parks;

D. Industrial uses;

E. Automobile service stations;

F. Wholesaling and warehousing;

G. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.40.020 and 17.40.030;

H. Multi-tenant retail arcades;

I. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 21, 2019; Ord. 97-1813 § 6, 1997; Ord. 92-1736 § 2(D), 1992; Ord. 1438 § 6, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.33.)


17.40.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.40.060 through 17.40.200 shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-3 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions for the C-3 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.070 Lot dimensions.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-3 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 75 feet except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.110 Yards.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

When the C-3 zone abuts residentially zoned properties there shall be a yard of not less than 25 feet abutting the zone boundary, except where the C-3 zone abuts a public park no yard shall be required. The required yard may be used for parking, loading, access or storage, provided items are not stored higher than the required wall. A solid masonry wall, not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height, shall be erected on the zone boundary line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.120 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-3 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.130 Fences and walls – Required walls.

Where the C-3 zone abuts a residential zone, a solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary, if there is no building on the line. Walls shall conform to corner cutback provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.140 Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

All outdoor storage areas abutting residentially zoned property shall be enclosed by a building wall or by a solid fence or wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.150 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

For corner cutback and permitted fences, hedges and walls, the provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.160 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.170 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.180 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.190 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A. Each business shall be allowed two signs per occupancy frontage when mounted flat against the building, or one projecting sign. The overall area devoted to signs may not exceed 15 percent of the area of the first story height of the building. Each side of a projecting sign shall be included in the maximum overall area allowed.

B. Each business shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented sign per entrance, to be mounted flat against the building or suspended from an overhanging architectural feature which is an integral part of the building. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet per face.

C. When the building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

D. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature and not painted, pasted, taped nor affixed in any way to the window surface, except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.200 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.34.)


17.40.210 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.35.)


Chapter 17.42 C-3A COMMERCIAL ZONE (REGIONAL OR COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER)

Sections:

17.42.010    Intent.

17.42.020    Permitted uses.

17.42.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.42.040    Prohibited uses.

17.42.050    Property development standards generally.

17.42.060    Building height – Generally.

17.42.070    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.42.080    Size of new zone.

17.42.090    Signs – Generally.

17.42.095    Additional standards for adult entertainment uses.

17.42.100    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.42.110    Site plan review.


17.42.010 Intent.

The C-3A zone is intended to provide for planned, unified shopping centers at community and regional levels.

A “community shopping center” is a trading center serving specialized needs of families in a community neighborhood area.

A “regional shopping center” is a trading center offering greater variety of general merchandise, apparel and home furnishings to families located in a larger area than is served by a neighborhood community shopping center. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.40.)


17.42.020 Permitted uses.

A. Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the uses permitted in the C-2 and C-3 zones, CMC 17.38.020 and 17.40.020, except as otherwise provided for in CMC 17.42.030, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and related to the function of either a community or regional shopping center, as the case may be. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in the C-2 zone, CMC 17.38.050 through 17.38.210, except as noted in CMC 17.42.050 through 17.42.100.

B. Additional permitted uses are as follows:

1. Fortune-telling;

2. Mobile food facilities located on the same site as permitted on-site beer tasting, on-site artisan distilled spirit tasting or on-site wine tasting, subject to an administrative conditional use permit as provided for in CMC 17.62.190(E). (Ord. 19-01 § 22, 2019; Ord. 1614 § 1, 1986; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.41.)


17.42.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

Automobile sales and services;

Automobile service station, except as otherwise provided for in CMC 17.42.020, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.025. CMC 17.38.100(A) shall not apply to automobile service stations;

Automobile towing in conjunction with a permitted service station;

Barber and/or beauty shop;

Billiard parlor;

Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses, subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

Drive-up facilities for permitted uses;

Drop-off bins and facilities;

Educational or health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

Hotels;

Liquor, off-sale, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

Liquor, on-sale, in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment;

Model homes;

Public and/or private dancing;

Shared-space commercial establishment;

Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores;

Truck rentals on minimum of two acres with maximum size truck of 24 feet with two axles, on-site enclosed repair facilities and subject to Chapter 17.64 CMC. (Ord. 19-01 § 23, 2019; Ord. 18-05 § 6(b), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 6(b), 2017; Ord. 11-1997 § 10, 2011; Ord. 98-1826 § 5, 1998; Ord. 97-1811 § 1, 1997; Ord. 93-1748 § 6, 1993; Ord. 91-1730 § 1(F), 1991; Ord. 1642 § 6, 1987; Ord. 1574 § 4, 1984; Ord. 1535 § 11, 1983; Ord. 1509 § 2, 1981; Ord. 1507 § 6, 1981; Ord. 1495 § 1(c), 1981; Ord. 1493 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1438 § 8, 1979; Ord. 1386 § 5, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.42.)


17.42.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-3A zone:

A. Residential uses, other than those specifically provided for in CMC 17.42.030;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure on any lot other than those specifically provided for in CMC 17.42.030;

C. Trailer parks;

D. Industrial uses;

E. Wholesaling and warehousing;

F. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.42.020 and 17.42.030;

G. Hotels (except by conditional use permit);

H. Multi-tenant retail arcades;

I. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 24, 2019; Ord. 92-1736 § 2(E), 1992; Ord. 1438 § 9, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.43.)


17.42.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards of the C-2 zone, CMC 17.38.050 through 17.38.210, shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-3A zone, except for the provisions of CMC 17.42.060 through 17.42.100. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.44.)


17.42.060 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 75 feet except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.44.)


17.42.070 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.44.)


17.42.080 Size of new zone.

The minimum and maximum amount of land that may be zoned C-3A in any location shall be:

A. For community shopping centers:

1. Minimum area, 10 acres;

2. Maximum area, 30 acres;

B. For regional shopping centers:

1. Minimum area, 30 acres;

2. Maximum area, no requirements;

C. The applicant may present economic data in support of the community or regional shopping center of the size he is proposing. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.44.)


17.42.090 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.44.)


17.42.095 Additional standards for adult entertainment uses.

Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade and adult motion picture theater:

A. Shall be specifically identified as an adult entertainment use by an appropriate sign specifying the words “Adult Entertainment”;

B. Shall not display or exhibit in a manner which exposes to public view from the sidewalk, street or highway any of the following:

1. Any statements or words describing “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”;

2. Any picture or illustration of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”;

C. Shall not employ or utilize loudspeakers or sound equipment that can be heard or discerned by the public from the sidewalk, street or highway. (Ord. 1438 § 10, 1979.)


17.42.100 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A.1. Each regional or community center, containing four or more establishments having a lot frontage in excess of 150 feet, shall be permitted one freestanding sign per center. Such sign shall not be located closer than 150 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed 100 square feet per face nor an overall height of 30 feet.

2. Each property having a lot frontage less than 150 feet but more than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such sign shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 20 square feet per face nor an overall height of six feet.

B. Each business shall be permitted one building face sign per occupancy frontage. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed 15 percent of the area of the first story height of the building, and each sign must be mounted flat against the building.

C. Each occupant shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented sign per entrance, to be flat against the building or suspended from an overhanging architectural feature which is an integral part of the building. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet per face.

D. When the building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

E. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature, and not painted, pasted, taped or affixed in any way to the window surface, except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020.

F. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending into the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign.

G. “Murals” are permitted in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone, as outlined in CMC 17.74.061.

H. “Painted signs” are permitted in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone, as outlined in CMC 17.74.062.

I. “Sidewalk signs” and “pennant/flags” are permitted in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone, as outlined in CMC 17.74.063. (Ord. 01-1879 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1392 §§ 6, 7, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.44.)


17.42.110 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.45.)


Chapter 17.44 C-4 COMMERCIAL ZONE (HIGHWAY)

Sections:

17.44.010    Intent.

17.44.020    Permitted uses.

17.44.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.44.040    Prohibited uses.

17.44.050    Property development standards generally.

17.44.060    Lot area.

17.44.070    Lot dimensions.

17.44.080    Population density.

17.44.090    Building height – Generally.

17.44.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.44.110    Yards.

17.44.120    Distance between buildings.

17.44.130    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.44.140    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.44.150    Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

17.44.160    Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

17.44.170    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

17.44.180    Off-street parking.

17.44.190    Access.

17.44.200    Signs – Generally.

17.44.210    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.44.220    Loading.

17.44.230    Site plan review.


17.44.010 Intent.

The C-4 zone is intended to provide for highway-related uses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.50.)


17.44.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged, only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.44.050 through 17.44.220.

Administrative or professional offices (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured or sold). Medical, dental and therapeutic offices for chiropractors, physical therapists and similar uses are also permitted; provided, that the sum total of such uses occupy no greater than 10 percent of the floor area of all buildings on the commercial site or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less, and no individual use occupies greater than 3,500 square feet of floor area;

Aerial photography and survey service;

Aircraft sales and service;

Ambulance service;

Animal hospital;

Antique home furnishings;

Art gallery, shop or studio;

Auto parts sales and incidental services;

Auto rental;

Auto repair garage;

Auto sales and service, excluding incidental body and fender work and painting and mechanical auto wash, except as provided for in CMC 17.44.030;

Auto top and glass shop;

Bakery; provided not more than five persons shall be employed and all products are sold on the premises;

Bakery sales;

Bank and financial institutions;

Barber and/or beauty shops;

Bicycle shop;

Bill paying office;

Blueprinting and photocopying;

Boat, trailer and motorcycle sales;

Book or stationery store;

Botanical gardens;

Bowling alley;

Call office for delivery of laundry or dry cleaning;

Carpet and rug sales, no cleaning;

Catering service, food;

Churches;

Cleaners, retail;

Clothing and wearing apparel;

Coffee shop;

Community gardens;

Confectionery shop;

Cosmetic shop;

Craft shop;

Crankcase oil tanks in conjunction with an automobile service station;

Day nurseries;

Delicatessen;

Department store;

Discount house;

Drive-in restaurant; providing no dancing or theatrical performance is permitted;

Drug store;

Electrical appliance supply and repair;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use, up to a maximum of three such games;

Electric distribution and public utility substations;

Employment agency;

Equipment rental;

Farm equipment (sales and repair);

Fix-it shop;

Florist;

Food stores;

Frozen food locker;

Fruit store;

Furniture, household and patio;

Furniture storage;

Furniture upholstery;

Furriers;

Garage (public);

Garden supply and tools;

General research, not involving manufacture, fabrication or processing, or sale of products listed in any other commercial or industrial zone;

Gift shop;

Golf driving range and/or golf pitch and putt course;

Gunsmith;

Haberdashery;

Hardware;

Health food stores;

Hobby shop and supply;

Home furnishings;

Hospitals;

Household appliances, supply, repair and service;

Ice cream parlor;

Insurance brokers, adjusters and agents;

Jewelry sales and repair;

Laboratories, biological, medical, dental and X-ray;

Landscape service;

Laundromat;

Law office;

Leather goods sales;

Libraries and reading rooms;

Linoleum stores;

Locksmith;

Luggage;

Lumber yard;

Mail-order house;

Masonry materials and supplies;

Maternity shop;

Meat market;

Medical equipment and supplies;

Mimeographing;

Miniature golf course;

Mobile food facilities located on the same site as permitted on-site beer tasting, on-site artisan distilled spirit tasting or on-site wine tasting, subject to an administrative conditional use permit as provided for in CMC 17.62.190(E);

Mobile home sales and service;

Mortuary;

Motels;

Motor hotel;

Motor scooter sales and service;

Museums;

Music instruction;

Music shop;

Newsstands;

Notary public;

Novelty shop;

Offices (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured or sold);

Office furniture and machines sales and repair;

Off-street parking;

Optometrists;

Orthopedic equipment and supplies;

Paint and wallpaper materials and supplies;

Parking lot (public);

Pawnshop;

Pet shop and food stores;

Pharmacy;

Phonographic supplies;

Photographers’ studios;

Photography supplies;

Physicians’ equipment and supplies;

Piano sales and service;

Picture framing;

Plant nursery;

Playground equipment sales and service;

Plumbing supply;

Printing and publishing;

Public utility customer service office;

Public utility substations;

Radio, television, phonograph supplies, sales and service;

Real estate brokers;

Redemption centers;

Restaurant; providing no dancing or theatrical performance is permitted except as provided in CMC 17.44.030;

Saddle sales and service;

Shoe sales and repair;

Skating rink;

Soda fountain;

Sporting goods and equipment sales and rentals;

Stationery stores;

Store fixtures sales;

Swimming pool sales and service;

Tailor;

Tax consulting services;

Taxi service;

Theater, drive-in;

Theater, theatrical and motion picture;

Ticket agency;

Tire sales;

Toy store;

Upholstery shop, automobile;

Vacuum cleaners sales and service;

Variety store;

Wearing apparel;

Yarn shop. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 25, 26, 2019; Ord. 15-2035 § 2, 2015; Ord. 14-2031 § 3, 2014; Ord. 14-2030 § 4, 2014; Ord. 11-1997 § 11, 2011; Ord. 97-1813 § 7, 1997; Ord. 93-1748 § 7, 1993; Ord. 1711 § 3, 1990; Ord. 1709 § 3, 1990; Ord. 1678 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1583 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1535 § 12, 1983; Ord. 1507 § 7, 1981; Ord. 1495 § 1(d), 1981; Ord. 1438 § 11, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.51.)


17.44.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

Auditoriums;

Automobile service station, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.025. CMC 17.44.110(A) shall not apply to automobile service stations;

Batting cage;

Billiard parlor;

Body and fender shop;

Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses, subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

Drive-up facilities for permitted uses;

Drop-off bins and facilities;

Educational and health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

Electrical and mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

Hotels;

Liquor, off-sale, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

Liquor, on-sale, in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment;

Lodges and meeting halls;

Massage establishments;

Mechanical auto wash;

Model homes;

Paint shop;

Public and/or private dancing;

Recycling collection facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.195;

Shared-space commercial establishment;

Storage and dispensing of liquefied petroleum gas in anticipation of retail services;

Thrift shops, secondhand and used merchandise stores;

Towing services;

Vocational colleges, barbers and beauty schools, modeling schools and medical training schools. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 27, 28, 2019; Ord. 18-05 § 6(c), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 6(c), 2017; Ord. 11-1997 § 12, 2011; Ord. 98-1826 § 6, 1998; Ord. 93-1748 § 8, 1993; Ord. 1678 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1647 § 3, 1987; Ord. 1642 § 7, 1987; Ord. 1596 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1593 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1581 § 1, 1984; Ord. 1574 § 5, 1984; Ord. 1535 § 13, 1983; Ord. 1509 § 3, 1981; Ord. 1507 § 8, 1981; Ord. 1495 § 1(e), 1981; Ord. 1438 § 12, 1979; Ord. 1386 § 6, 1978; Ord. 1274 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.52.)


17.44.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-4 zone:

A. Residential uses other than those specifically provided for in CMC 17.44.030;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure on any lot other than those specifically provided for in CMC 17.44.030;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Wholesaling and warehousing;

E. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.44.020 and 17.44.030;

F. Multi-tenant retail arcades. (Ord. 97-1813 § 8, 1997; Ord. 92-1736 § 2(F), 1992; Ord. 1438 § 13, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.53.)


17.44.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.44.060 through 17.44.220 shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-4 zone, except that any lot existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in dimensions may be subject to all other standards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions for the C-4 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now existing may not be reduced below these standards:

A. There are no lot width provisions;

B. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for the C-4 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.090 Building height – Generally.

Except by conditional use permit, no building or structure in this zone shall have a height greater than 50 feet, except when located closer than 50 feet to any abutting residential or agricultural zoned lands such building or structure shall not exceed 35 feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.110 Yards.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line, or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

A. When the C-4 zone fronts, sides or rears on a street, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 10 feet, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section. If across a local street from a residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, a wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is no building on the line and where there is parking, loading or storage to the rear of the line.



B. When the C-4 zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a minimum building setback of 25 feet consisting of a 10-foot landscaped strip adjacent to the property line and a minimum 15-foot driveway for fire access. No entrances or exits from the rear of the building, except limited fire access, will be allowed. A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line.

C. When the C-4 zone fronts directly on a public park or fronts on a street which is a boundary with a public park, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 20 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. A wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is loading or storage to the rear of the line.

D. A swimming pool shall not be located in any required yard abutting a street, and in no case shall it be located less than five feet from any side or rear property line not abutting a street. It shall be entirely enclosed as required in the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.150. (Ord. 1497 § 1, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.120 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-4 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.130 Fences and walls – Required walls.

Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.44.110 in connection with yards when this zone adjoins a residential or agricultural zone. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in the required yard abutting a street, in the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front yard required in the abutting residential or agricultural zone, and shall comply with corner cutback provisions in the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.140 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.150 Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

All outdoor storage areas abutting residentially zoned property shall be enclosed by a building wall or by a solid fence or wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.160 Fences and walls – Swimming pools.

Swimming pool areas shall be entirely enclosed by buildings or by fences or walls not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height around the deck area related to the pool. The fence or wall shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors, the latching device being located not less than four feet 10 inches above the ground. All fencing must be in place and approved before the water is run into the pool. All lighting of pool area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.170 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

For corner cutback and permitted fences, hedges and walls, the provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.180 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code. Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.190 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.200 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.210 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A.1. Each property having in excess of 100 feet of lot frontage shall be permitted one freestanding sign. Such sign shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same side of the street. Such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet per face nor an overall height of 30 feet.

2. Each property containing less than 100 feet of lot frontage but more than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such signs shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 20 square feet per face nor an overall height of six feet.

B. Each property having in excess of 300 feet of lot frontage shall be permitted one additional freestanding sign of the same size and height as subsection (A) of this section; or in the alternative may elect to increase the size of the freestanding sign allowed under subsection (A) of this section to a maximum 250 square feet per face.

C. Each business shall also be permitted two building face signs per occupancy frontage. The area devoted to such signs shall not exceed 15 percent of the first story height of the building. Such signs shall be mounted flat against the building.

D. When the same building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

E. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature and not painted, pasted, taped or affixed in any way to the window surface except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020.

F. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending into the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy is to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign. (Ord. 1681 § 1(a), 1988; Ord. 1392 §§ 8, 9, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.220 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.54.)


17.44.230 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.55.)


Chapter 17.46 C-5 COMMERCIAL ZONE (SPECIFIED HIGHWAY)

Sections:

17.46.010    Intent.

17.46.020    Permitted uses.

17.46.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.46.040    Prohibited uses.

17.46.050    Property development standards generally.

17.46.060    Lot area.

17.46.070    Lot dimensions.

17.46.080    Population density.

17.46.090    Building height – Generally.

17.46.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.46.110    Yards.

17.46.120    Distance between buildings.

17.46.130    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.46.140    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.46.150    Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

17.46.160    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

17.46.170    Off-street parking.

17.46.180    Access.

17.46.190    Signs – Generally.

17.46.200    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.46.210    Loading.

17.46.220    Site plan review.


17.46.010 Intent.

The C-5 zone is intended to provide for specified highway-related commercial uses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.60.)


17.46.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged, only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.46.050 through 17.46.210.

Administrative or professional offices (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured or sold). Medical, dental and therapeutic offices for chiropractors, physical therapists and similar uses are also permitted; provided, that the sum total of such uses occupy no greater than 10 percent of the floor area of all buildings on the commercial site or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less, and no individual use occupies greater than 3,500 square feet of floor area;

Animal hospital;

Antique home furnishings;

Auto parts sales;

Auto rental;

Auto repair garage;

Auto sales and service, excluding incidental body and fender work and painting and mechanical auto wash except as provided for in CMC 17.46.030;

Auto top and glass shop;

Bakery; provided not more than five persons shall be employed and all products are sold on the premises;

Bakery sales;

Barber and/or beauty shop;

Blueprinting and photocopying;

Carpet and rug cleaning, repair;

Churches;

Cleaners, retail;

Coffee shop;

Community gardens;

Confectionery shop;

Contractor, building, electrical, etc.;

Craft shop;

Crankcase oil tanks in conjunction with auto repair or service use;

Delicatessen;

Drive-in restaurant; providing no dancing or theatrical performances are permitted; and provided, that there shall be no sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises;

Electrical appliance supply and repair;

Electrical distribution and public utility substation;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use, up to a maximum of three such games;

Equipment rentals;

Farm equipment sales and repair;

Feed and fuel;

Fix-it shop;

Furniture cleaning;

Furniture, household and patio;

Furniture storage;

Furniture upholstery;

Garage, public;

Garden supply and tools;

General research, not involving manufacture, fabrication or processing or sales of products listed in any other commercial or industrial zone;

Gunsmith;

Hobby shop and supply;

Home furnishings;

Household appliances supply, repair and service;

Ice cream parlor;

Insurance brokers, adjusters and agents;

Landscape service;

Laundromat;

Locksmith;

Lumber yard;

Masonry materials and supplies;

Mimeographing;

Mobile food facilities located on the same site as permitted on-site beer tasting, on-site artisan distilled spirit tasting or on-site wine tasting, subject to an administrative conditional use permit as provided for in CMC 17.62.190(E);

Motor scooters sales and service;

Offices (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not manufactured or sold);

Off-street parking;

Parking lot, public;

Pet shop and food store;

Plant nursery;

Playground equipment sales and service;

Plumbing supply, retail;

Public utility substations;

Radio, television, phonograph supplies, sales and service;

Real estate brokers;

Restaurant, tearoom, cafe; providing no dancing or theatrical performances are permitted and providing that here shall be no sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises;

Saddle sales and repair;

Shoe sales and repair;

Soda fountain;

Sporting goods and equipment sales and rentals;

Stationery stores;

Store fixtures sales;

Swimming pool sales and service;

Tire sales;

Upholstery shop, automobile;

Vacuum cleaner sales and service. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 29, 30, 2019; Ord. 15-2035 § 3, 2015; Ord. 11-1997 § 13, 2011; Ord. 97-1813 § 8, 1997; Ord. 93-1748 § 9, 1993; Ord. 1711 § 4, 1990; Ord. 1709 § 4, 1990; Ord. 1535 § 14, 1983; Ord. 1507 § 9, 1981; Ord. 1438 § 15, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.61.)


17.46.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

Auditoriums;

Automobile service stations, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.025;

Automobile towing and impound;

Body and fender shop;

Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses, subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

Drive-up facility;

Drop-off bins, recycling and light processing facilities;

Education and health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

Indoor radio controlled hobby track;

Liquor, off-sale, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.026;

Liquor, on-sale establishments;

Lodges and meeting halls, subject to CMC 17.62.026 if also in conjunction with liquor, on-sale;

Massage establishment;

Mechanical car wash;

Recycling collection facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.195;

Shared-space commercial establishment;

Vocational colleges, barbers and beauty schools, modeling schools and medical training schools. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 31, 32, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 14, 2011; Ord. 01-1884 § 5, 2001; Ord. 98-1826 § 7, 1998; Ord. 93-1748 § 10, 1993; Ord. 92-1735 § 1, 1992; Ord. 91-1730 § 1(G), 1991; Ord. 1647 §§ 4, 8, 1987; Ord. 1642 § 8, 1987; Ord. 1574 § 6, 1984; Ord. 1535 § 15, 1983; Ord. 1509 § 4, 1981; Ord. 1507 § 10, 1981; Ord. 1446 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1438 § 16, 1979; Ord. 1386 § 7, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.62.)


17.46.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-5 zone:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure on any lot;

C. Industrial uses;



D. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.46.020 and 17.46.030;

E. Wholesaling and warehousing;

F. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use;

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes;

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings including, but not limited to: city halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices;

c. Hospitals and convalescent facilities;

d. Parks and playgrounds;

e. Senior, youth or similar centers. (Ord. 1438 § 17, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.63.)


17.46.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.46.060 through 17.46.210 shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-5 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions for the C-5 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.070 Lot dimensions.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-5 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for this zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than 35 feet, except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. § 7.64.)


17.46.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

The provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.100, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.110 Yards.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from the future right-of-way line as established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way.

A. When the C-5 zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a minimum building setback of 25 feet consisting of a 10-foot landscaped strip adjacent to the property line and a minimum 15-foot driveway for fire access. No entrances or exits from the rear of the building, except limited fire access, will be allowed. A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line.

B. When the C-5 zone fronts directly on a public park or fronts on a street which is a boundary with a public park, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 25 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. A wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is loading or storage to the rear of the line. (Ord. 1497 § 1, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.120 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject for the C-5 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.130 Fences and walls – Required walls.

Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.46.110 in connection with yards when this zone abuts a residential or agricultural zone. Walls shall conform to corner cutback provisions in the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.140 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.150 Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

All outdoor storage areas abutting residentially zoned property shall be enclosed by a building wall or by a solid fence or wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.160 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations and permitted structures.

For corner cutback and permitted fences, hedges and walls, the provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.160 and 17.34.170, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.170 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.180 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.190 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.200 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A.1. Each property having in excess of 100 feet of lot frontage shall be permitted one freestanding sign. Such sign shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same side of the street. Such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet per face nor an overall height of 30 feet.

2. Each property containing less than 100 feet of lot frontage but more than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such sign shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 20 square feet per face nor an overall height of six feet.

B. Each property having in excess of 300 feet of lot frontage shall be permitted one additional freestanding sign of the same size and height as subsection (A) of this section; or in the alternative may elect to increase the size of the freestanding sign allowed under subsection (A) of this section to a maximum 250 square feet per face.

C. Each business shall also be permitted two building face signs per occupancy frontage. The area devoted to such signs shall not exceed 15 percent of the first story height of the building. Such signs shall be mounted flat against the building.

D. When the same building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

E. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature and not painted, pasted, taped or affixed to any way to the window surface except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020.

F. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending into the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign. (Ord. 1681 § 1(b), 1988; Ord. 1392 §§ 10, 11, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.210 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.64.)


17.46.220 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 7.65.)


Chapter 17.48 C-R COMMERCIAL ZONE (RECREATION)

Sections:

17.48.010    Intent.

17.48.020    Permitted uses.

17.48.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.48.040    Prohibited uses.

17.48.050    Property development standards – Generally.

17.48.060    Property development standards – Designated.

17.48.070    Signs – Generally.

17.48.080    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.48.090    Swimming pools.

17.48.100    Size of new district.

17.48.110    Site plan review.


17.48.010 Intent.

The C-R commercial recreation zone is intended to group commercial recreation uses into a planned, integrated recreation center, including related service and commercial uses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.00.)


17.48.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in the C-2 zone, CMC 17.38.050 through 17.38.210:

A. Recreational Uses.

1. Archery range;

2. Batting cages;

3. Billiard parlor;

4. Bowling alleys;

5. Fishing and fly-casting ponds;

6. Golf driving range;

7. Golf pitch and putt courses;

8. Lawn and court games;

9. Miniature golf courses;

10. Nursery school or day nursery; provided it is operated in conjunction with the recreation facilities;

11. Picnic and barbecue facilities;

12. Playground;

13. Skating rinks;

14. Swim parks, natatoriums;

15. Tennis courts;

B. Related commercial uses including, but not limited to, the following, when operated in connection with those uses listed in subsection (A) of this section:

1. Barber and/or beauty shop;

2. Electric distribution and public utility substations;

3. Off-street parking lot;

4. Restaurants;

5. Sporting goods stores;

6. Sports equipment rental and incidental maintenance;

7. Vending machines for sales of cigarettes, soft drinks and food. (Ord. 19-01 § 33, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 15, 2011; Ord. 1535 §§ 16, 17, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.01.)


17.48.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Clubs and lodges;

B. Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

C. General commercial amusements;

D. Education or health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

E. Liquor, on-sale;

F. Private dance, only when conducted in conjunction with clubs and lodges;

G. Public riding stable and academy;

H. Recycling collection facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.195. (Ord. 19-01 §§ 34, 35, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 16, 2011; Ord. 1647 § 5, 1987; Ord. 1535 § 18, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.02.)


17.48.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-R zone:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential or nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Trailer parks;

D. Industrial uses;

E. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use;

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes,

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings, including, but not limited to: city halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices,

c. Hospitals and convalescent facilities,

d. Parks and playgrounds,

e. Senior, youth or similar centers;

F. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in CMC 17.48.020 and 17.48.030;

G. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 36, 2019; Ord. 1438 § 19, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.03.)


17.48.050 Property development standards – Generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.48.060 through 17.48.100 shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-R zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.04.)


17.48.060 Property development standards – Designated.

The property development standards of the C-2 zone, CMC 17.38.050 through 17.38.200, shall apply, with the exception of CMC 17.38.180 and 17.38.190, which shall read as set forth in CMC 17.48.070 and 17.48.080. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.04.)


17.48.070 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.04.)


17.48.080 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A. Each business shall be allowed one sign per occupancy frontage. The area devoted to such signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the first story height of the building, and each sign must be mounted flat against the building.

B. Each business in this zone shall be allowed one sign on the rear face of the building when there exists a public entrance facing onto a public alley or parking lot which is served by those areas. The overall area devoted to such sign shall not exceed six percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.04.)


17.48.090 Swimming pools.

For swimming pools, the provisions of the C-P zone, CMC 17.34.110(D) and 17.34.150, shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.04.)


17.48.100 Size of new district.

The minimum amount of land that may be zoned C-R in any one location shall be two acres. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.04.)


17.48.110 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.05.)


Chapter 17.50 TC-P TOWN CENTER MEDICAL AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE

Sections:

17.50.010    Creation – Intent.

17.50.020    Permitted uses.

17.50.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.50.040    Prohibited uses.

17.50.050    Property development standards generally.

17.50.060    Lot area.

17.50.070    Lot dimensions.

17.50.080    Population density.

17.50.090    Building height.

17.50.100    Yards – Structures less than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

17.50.110    Yards – Structures exceeding two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

17.50.120    Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards and setbacks.

17.50.130    Distance between buildings.

17.50.140    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.50.150    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.50.160    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.50.170    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.50.180    Fences and walls – Tennis courts.

17.50.190    Off-street parking.

17.50.200    Access.

17.50.210    Signs – Generally.

17.50.220    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.50.230    Loading.

17.50.240    Landscaping requirements.

17.50.250    Architectural standards.

17.50.260    Site plan review.


17.50.010 Creation – Intent.

There is created the TC-P zone.

The TC-P zone is intended to provide a central location for the development of integrated medical and professional facilities and uses. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.20.)


17.50.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered, converted, established or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and related to the functioning of the town center. All such uses shall be within an enclosed building unless specifically stated otherwise:

A. Medical Services and Uses.

1. Ambulance service,

2. General medical-related research and laboratories not involving manufacturing, fabrication or processing or sale of products listed in any commercial or manufacturing zone,

3. Hospitals with related service uses,

4. Medical, dental and therapeutic clinics and offices,

5. Medical, dental and therapeutic equipment sales, rentals and supplies not to exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area,

6. Optometrist, chiropractor and similar uses,

7. Orthopedic equipment sales, rentals and supplies not to exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area,

8. Pharmacy not to exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area;

B. Professional Services and Uses (where no chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are manufactured or sold). All such uses shall be within an enclosed building and shall not be developed as drive-up facilities unless specifically stated otherwise:

1. Administrative offices,

2. Architectural offices including landscape architecture, and similar design-orientated professions,

3. Accounting and bookkeeping offices,

4. Data processing and programming,

5. Employment agencies,

6. Engineering, surveying offices,

7. Financial institutions, including banks and financial consulting offices,

8. Insurance office,

9. Legal services,

10. Real estate sales offices or brokers,

11. Stock brokerage,

12. Tax consultant,

13. Any similar related use that by its operation is suitable in this district or zone and is in harmony with the uses on abutting properties in the same district or zone. (Ord. 1549 § 2, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.21.)


17.50.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit:

A. Buildings in excess of four stories;

B. Book shop;

C. Churches;

D. Confectionery store;

E. Conversions of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

F. Day care nurseries as an appurtenant use in conjunction with churches, provided such nurseries are operated on a nonprofit basis;

G. Educational institutions;

H. Florist and gift shops;

I. Libraries and reading rooms;

J. Museums;

K. Pharmacy in excess of 2,500 square feet of floor area;

L. Public utility facilities;

M. Off-sale of beer and wine in conjunction with a bona fide food store;

N. Public parking lot;

O. Residential uses excluding first two floors and in conjunction with a professional building complex;

P. Restaurant, tea room, cafe, when in conjunction with an office building complex, providing no dancing or theatrical performances are conducted. (Ord. 97-1814 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1597 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1469 §§ 1, 2, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.22.)


17.50.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the TC-P zone:

A. Residential uses, except as otherwise provided in this chapter;

B. Automobile service station;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Retail sales, except as provided in this chapter;

E. Trailer parks;

F. Wholesaling and warehousing;

G. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use;

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes,

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings, including, but not limited to: city halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices,

c. Hospital and convalescent facilities,

d. Parks and playgrounds,

e. Senior, youth or similar centers. (Ord. 1438 § 20, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.23.)


17.50.050 Property development standards generally.

The standards contained in CMC 17.50.060 through 17.50.250 shall apply to all buildings, structures and land uses for permitted uses in this zone. In addition, all buildings and structures in this zone shall be subject to review by the architectural board of review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.060 Lot area.

All buildings or structures proposed on any parcel in this zone shall be reviewed by the planning department in accordance with Chapter 17.64 CMC (Site Plan Review). The owner, builder or developer shall provide such data and information which will assist in the determination of the adequacy of the parcel’s size and dimension.

Where it is found by the planning department that the parcel is insufficient in size and dimension in accordance with Chapter 17.64 CMC, the owner, builder or developer will be advised and no building permit shall be issued if subject parcel is found to be inadequate. The lot will be sufficient if it can accommodate the minimum parking, open space, landscape and yard requirements for the size of the building proposed. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.070 Lot dimensions.

For provisions on this subject, see CMC 17.50.060. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for the TC-P district. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.090 Building height.

No building shall exceed a height of four stories except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.100 Yards – Structures less than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

When buildings or structures are less than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, the following method shall be used to determine yard setback requirements:

A. When the TC-P zone fronts, sides or rears on a street, there shall be a minimum yard area abutting the street equal to 20 percent of the lot depth multiplied by one-half the width of the lot frontage. While the setback line may vary, the minimum yard area required shall be maintained. The architectural board of review shall determine if the minimum width or depth of the yard satisfies the intent of this section. Parking areas or driveways shall not be considered as satisfying the yard requirements. Corner lots will be considered as having two street frontages and, subsequently, two yard areas;

B. When a building in the TC-P zone abuts a public alley or parking area and possesses a rear entry which faces the public alley and parking area, then a portion of the required front yard may be developed and maintained at the rear of the building;

C. When the TC-P zone abuts a residential zone it shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of the residential zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.110 Yards – Structures exceeding two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

When buildings or structures exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, the following method shall be used to determine the setback:

A. All structures shall observe an average angle setback of 50 degrees when abutting a public dedicated street, measured from the existing property line or the ultimate right-of-way line;

B. When the TC-P zone abuts residentially zoned property, all structures shall observe an average angle setback of 50 degrees measured from the property line separating the two zones;

C. When the TC-P zone abuts a public alley which is the boundary between the zone and any residential zone, all structures shall observe an average angle setback of 50 degrees measured from the opposite side of alley. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.120 Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards and setbacks.

A. Architectural projections such as sculptural detailing and modeling, arcades, cornices, cantilevered beams and similar features may encroach into the required yard area; however, they shall be subject to the review and approval of the architectural review board.

B. Safety, health, utility or communication equipment may encroach into the required yard when attached to the ground, provided this equipment is entirely screened with an ornamental masonry material, the same as, or equal to, that used on the main building. The equipment may project from a wall of the building or structure provided it shall also be screened with an ornamental material. If the equipment is designed in such a way as to complement the architecture of the building or structure, then it may be exposed subject to the review and approval of the architectural review board of the design and character of the equipment. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.130 Distance between buildings.

A minimum distance between buildings or structures on the same lot shall not be less than 10 feet. The architectural review board may modify this distance if it involves architectural features. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.140 Fences and walls – Required walls.

A six-foot wall measured from the highest finished grade is required when the property adjoins a residential or agricultural zone. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street, in the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front yard required in the abutting residential or agricultural zone, and shall conform to corner cutback provisions. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.150 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.160 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established herein:

A. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersecting and intercepting streets and alleys. The cutback line shall be a horizontal plane making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the closest intersection of yard setback lines at the corner of the lot where visibility is required.

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way.

C. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.170 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls, not greater than six feet in height, shall be permitted on or within all property lines not abutting streets and on or to the rear of all yard setback lines of yards abutting streets.

B. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not over three feet in height shall be permitted in required yards abutting streets. In any required corner cutback area, only openwork fences shall be permitted. Walls, hedges and other visual obstructions are prohibited. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.180 Fences and walls – Tennis courts.

To enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, fences over six feet in height shall be permitted; provided, that portion of the fence which is higher than six feet shall be composed of wire mesh or other material whose vertical surface is not more than 10 percent solid. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.190 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120, except for CMC 17.72.030, shall apply. (Ord. 1300 § 4, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.200 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.210 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.220 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A. Each business shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented sign per entrance, to be mounted flat against the building or suspended from an overhanging architectural feature which is an integral part of the building. Such sign may not exceed six square feet per face.

B. Each business shall be permitted one sign per occupancy frontage when mounted flat against the building, or one projecting sign not to project more than two feet into the public right-of-way and not to project above the roofline of the building. The overall area devoted to signs may not exceed 10 percent of the area of the first story height of the building. Each side of the projecting sign shall be included in the maximum overall area allowed.

C. When the principal building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed six percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

D. Each property with a building setback of at least 10 feet and having a lot frontage greater than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such signs shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 15 square feet per face nor an overall height of four feet.

E. “Murals” are permitted in the TC-P zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.061.

F. “Painted signs” are permitted in the TC-P zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.062.

G. “Sidewalk signs” and “pennant/flags” are permitted in the TC-P zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.063.

H. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature and not painted, pasted, taped or affixed in any way to the window surface except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020.

I. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending into the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over the public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign. (Ord. 01-1879 § 3, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000; Ord. 1392 § 12, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.230 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.240 Landscaping requirements.

Required landscape area shall be provided in accordance with the following:

A. Landscape space shall be determined by the floor area ratio selected by the property owner, builder or developer to determine the density of the parcel:

	Floor Area Ratio	Landscape Ratio

	1 or less	10% of building site

	Over 1	20% of building site

B. The minimum landscape ratio shall represent a percentage of the entire site to be landscaped. Approximately one-half of such required landscaping shall generally be distributed throughout the parking lot with the remainder being distributed around the building or other appropriate locations;

C. All required landscaping and landscape areas shall be enclosed with at least a minimum six-inch high by six-inch wide continuous concrete curb. The architectural board of review may require that the minimum curbing be constructed of such material or size and height as to enhance the style and character of the main building. If perpendicular to a parking space, then a continuous concrete curbing shall be located in such a way as to reduce the potential damage to a wall;

D. When parking stalls are adjacent to or nearly perpendicular to landscape areas, a continuous concrete curbing shall be located where wheel bumpers are located approximately 18 inches from the end of the parking stall;

E. When automobile or vehicle parking spaces, or driveways on private property, are adjacent to a public or pedestrian sidewalk, it shall be separated with a minimum five-foot-wide landscape area for the length of the parking adjacent to the sidewalk;

F. Trees in the parking lot shall be spaced at least one tree for every 1,500 square feet of parking area. The trees may be located in groupings or in regular intervals or in such a manner as to enhance the appearance of the parking lot;

G. One tree shall be required for each 600 square feet of required landscaping, adjacent to buildings; however, the trees may be located in groupings, regular intervals or in such manner as to enhance the architecture of the building;

H. All required landscaping areas in the parking lot or area shall not be less than 25 square feet in area or four feet in width, measured from the inside of the planter. When parking stalls are designed in such a way to create pockets of unusable parking space, then they shall be developed as landscape space, provided they are not less than 25 square feet in area. Unusable pockets less than 25 square feet in area need not be landscaped. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.250 Architectural standards.

A. Materials similar to those utilized on the main building shall also be utilized on: accessory uses; buildings; utility, safety, health and communication equipment enclosures; trash enclosures; stairwells; walls and similar appurtenances.

B. All roof equipment and machinery shall be entirely screened from view with a screening device utilizing materials which are compatible to materials used on the main building.

C. All pedestrian walkways adjacent to public sidewalks shall utilize a textured paving material compatible to materials used on the building. (Ord. 1679 § 18, 1988; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.24.)


17.50.260 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.25.)


Chapter 17.52 TC-C TOWN CENTER COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:

17.52.010    Creation – Intent.

17.52.020    Permitted uses.

17.52.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

17.52.040    Prohibited uses.

17.52.050    Property development standards generally.

17.52.060    Lot area.

17.52.070    Lot dimensions.

17.52.080    Population density.

17.52.090    Building height.

17.52.100    Yards – Structures less than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

17.52.110    Yards – Structures exceeding two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

17.52.120    Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards and setbacks.

17.52.130    Distance between buildings.

17.52.140    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.52.150    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.52.160    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.52.170    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.52.180    Fences and walls – Tennis courts.

17.52.190    Off-street parking.

17.52.200    Access.

17.52.210    Signs – Generally.

17.52.220    Allowable signs and special regulations.

17.52.230    Loading.

17.52.240    Landscaping requirements.

17.52.250    Architectural standards.

17.52.260    Underground utilities.

17.52.270    Site plan review.


17.52.010 Creation – Intent.

There is created the TC-C zone.

The TC-C zone is intended to serve as a general commercial trading area, emphasizing unique services and specialty shops which preserve the character of the town center and promote a pedestrian-oriented environment. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.30.)


17.52.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered, converted, established or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and related to the functioning of the town center. All such uses shall be within an enclosed building and shall not be developed as drive-up facilities unless specifically stated otherwise:

Audio and video equipment and supplies;

Antique shop;

Art gallery;

Art shop;

Baby shop;

Bakery;

Banks and financial institutions including drive-up facilities in conjunction with the main building;

Barber and/or beauty shop;

Book and stationery shops;

Clothing shop;

Coffee shop;

Cafe;

Cosmetic shop;

Crafts shop;

Confectionery store;

Cycle shop, excluding motorcycles;

Delicatessen;

Drug store;

Duplicating, printing and offset facilities not to exceed 2,000 square feet;

Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use, up to a maximum of three such games;

Florist;

Food market;

Gift shop;

Governmental facilities;

Gunsmith;

Hardware and paint supplies;

Hobby shop;

Home furnishing store;

Household appliances, sales and service;

Ice cream parlor and soda fountain;

Jewelry sales and service;

Leather goods store;

Music store;

Novelty shop;

Pet shop;

Photography equipment and supplies;

Picture framing;

Professional offices; provided they are located above the first floor;

Restaurant; providing no entertainment is permitted and no liquor or alcoholic beverages shall be sold or dispensed on the premises except as provided in CMC 17.52.030;

Shoe repair, sales;

Sporting goods;

Theater, theatrical and motion picture;

Ticket agency;

Toy store;

Travel agency;

Weaving and knitting shops;

Wine sales and tasting room; and

Similar related uses that by their operation are suitable in this district or zone and are in harmony with the uses on abutting properties in the same district or zone. (Ord. 19-01 § 37, 2019; Ord. 14-2031 § 4, 2014; Ord. 14-2030 § 5, 2014; Ord. 11-1997 § 17, 2011; Ord. 1708 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1535 § 19, 1983; Ord. 1507 § 11, 1981; Ord. 1451 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1270 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.31.)


17.52.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Auto sales, and repair incidental to auto sales;

B. Automobile repair when abutting existing automobile repair or sales facilities on two or more common property lines and not abutting any residential zoned property;

C. Liquor, on-sale establishments;

D. Billiard parlor;

E. Building in excess of four stories;

F. Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

G. Drive-up facilities;

H. Educational and health activities including private schools, trade schools and health spas;

I. Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use; more than three such games;

J. Outdoor cafe or sales;

K. Professional offices; provided main entrance to these offices does not front on a dedicated street;

L. Residential uses excluding first two floors in conjunction with a commercial development. (Ord. 19-01 § 38, 2019; Ord. 11-1997 § 18, 2011; Ord. 01-1884 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1708 § 2, 1990; Ord. 1658 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1647 § 6, 1987; Ord. 1642 § 9, 1987; Ord. 1597 § 3, 1985; Ord. 1535 § 20, 1983; Ord. 1507 § 12, 1981; Ord. 1449 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1270 § 2, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.32.)


17.52.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the TC-C zone:

A. Residential uses, except as otherwise provided in this chapter;

B. Trailer parks;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Automobile service station;

E. Wholesaling and warehousing;

F. Surplus sales or rummage shops;

G. Adult bookstore, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater and massage establishment:

1. Located within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential use;

2. Located within 500 feet of the property line of any of the following uses or facilities:

a. Church or other facility used primarily for worship or other religious purposes,

b. City, county, state, federal or other governmental public buildings, including, but not limited to: city halls, schools, libraries, police and fire stations and post offices,

c. Hospital and convalescent facilities,

d. Parks and playgrounds,

e. Senior, youth or similar centers;

H. Pawn shops;

I. Thrift shops;

J. Massage establishment. (Ord. 19-01 § 39, 2019; Ord. 1708 § 3, 1990; Ord. 1557 §§ 1, 2, 1984; Ord. 1438 § 21, 1979; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.33.)


17.52.050 Property development standards generally.

The standards contained in CMC 17.52.060 through 17.52.250 shall apply to all buildings, structures and land uses for permitted uses in this zone. In addition all buildings and structures in this zone shall be subject to review by the architectural board of review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.060 Lot area.

All buildings or structures proposed on any parcel in this zone shall be reviewed by the planning department in accordance with Chapter 17.64 CMC (Site Plan Review). The owner, builder or developer shall provide such data and information which will assist in the determination of the adequacy of the parcel’s size and dimension.

Where it is found by the planning department that the parcel is insufficient in size and dimension in accordance with Chapter 17.64 CMC, the owner, builder or developer will be advised and no building permit shall be issued if subject parcel is found to be inadequate. The lot will be sufficient if it can accommodate the minimum parking, open space, landscape and yard requirements for the size of the building proposed. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.070 Lot dimensions.

For provisions on this subject, see CMC 17.52.060. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for the TC-C zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.090 Building height.

No building shall exceed a height of four stories except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.100 Yards – Structures less than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

When buildings or structures are less than two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, the following method shall be used to determine the setback:

A. When the TC-C zone fronts, sides or rears on a street, there shall be a minimum yard abutting the street equal to 10 percent of the lot depth multiplied by one-half of the lot frontage. The setback may vary; however, the minimum yard area shall be maintained. The architectural board of review shall determine if the minimum width or depth of the yard satisfies the intent of this section. Parking areas or driveways shall not be considered as satisfying the yard requirements. Corner lots will be considered as having only one street frontage;

B. When a building in the TC-C zone abuts a public alley or parking area and possesses a rear entry which faces the public alley and parking area, a portion of the required front yard may be developed and maintained at the rear of the building;

C. When the TC-C zone abuts a residential zone, it shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of the residential zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.110 Yards – Structures exceeding two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.

When buildings or structures exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, the following method shall be used to determine the setback:

A. All structures shall observe an average angle setback of 50 degrees when abutting a local street, measured from the existing property line or the ultimate right-of-way line;

B. All structures shall observe an average angle setback of 60 degrees when abutting a major or secondary highway, measured from the existing property line or the future adopted alignment of the right-of-way line;

C. When the TC-C zone abuts residentially zoned property, all structures shall observe an average angle setback of 50 degrees measured from the property line separating the two zones;

D. When the TC-C zone abuts a public alley which is the boundary between the zone and any residential zone, all structures shall observe an average angle setback of 50 degrees measured from the opposite side of alley. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.120 Yards – Exceptions – Permitted projections into required yards and setbacks.

A. Architectural projections such as sculptural detailing and modeling, arcades, cornices, cantilevered beams and similar features may encroach into the required yard area, a distance subject to review and approval of the architectural board of review.

B. Safety, health, utility or communication equipment may encroach into the required yard when attached to the ground area provided this equipment is entirely screened with an ornamental masonry material, the same as or equal to that used on the building. The equipment may project from a wall of the building or structure provided it shall also be screened with an ornamental material. If the equipment is designed in such a way as to complement the architecture of the building or structure, then it may be exposed subject to the review and approval of the architectural board of review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.130 Distance between buildings.

A minimum distance between buildings or structures on the same lot shall not be less than 10 feet. The architectural board of review may modify this distance if it involves architectural features. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.140 Fences and walls – Required walls.

A six-foot wall measured from the highest finished grade is required when the property adjoins a residential or agricultural zone. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street, in the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front yard required in the abutting residential or agricultural zone, and shall conform to corner cutback provisions. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.150 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.160 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established herein:

A. There shall be a corner cutback area in all intersecting and intercepting streets and alleys. The cutback line shall be a horizontal plane making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the closest intersection of yard setback lines at the corner of the lot where visibility is required;

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane making an angle of 45 degrees with side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way;

C. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line that is not less than 17 feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.170 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls, not greater than six feet in height, shall be permitted on or within all property lines not abutting streets and on or to the rear of all yard setback lines of yards abutting streets.

B. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not over three feet in height shall be permitted in required yards abutting streets. In any required corner cutback area, only openwork fences shall be permitted. Walls, hedges and other visual obstructions are prohibited. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.180 Fences and walls – Tennis courts.

To enclose tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, fences over six feet in height shall be permitted; provided, that portion of the fence which is higher than six feet shall be composed of wire mesh or other material whose vertical surface is not more than 10 percent solid. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.190 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120, except for CMC 17.72.030, shall apply. (Ord. 1300 § 5, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.200 Access.

There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all standards and specifications of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.210 Signs – Generally.

The provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.220 Allowable signs and special regulations.

A. Each business shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented sign per entrance, to be mounted flat against the building or suspended from an overhanging architectural feature which is an integral part of the building. Such sign may not exceed six square feet per face.

B. Each business shall be allowed one sign per occupancy frontage when it is mounted flat against the building or one projecting sign not to project more than two feet into the public right-of-way and not to project above the roofline of the building. The overall area devoted to signs may not exceed 15 percent of the area of the first story height of the building. Each side of the projecting sign shall be included in the maximum overall area allowed.

C. When the principal building rears onto a public entrance directly serving those areas, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed six percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building.

D. Each business shall be permitted two window signs per occupancy. Such signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the window space in which they are displayed. Each sign shall be of a permanent nature and not painted, pasted, taped or affixed in any way to the window surface except as allowed by CMC 17.74.020.

E. Each property having a lot frontage greater than 45 feet shall be permitted one monument sign. Such sign shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other sign on the same side of the street and shall not exceed an area of 20 square feet per face nor an overall height of six feet.

F. Architectural projections and/or awnings attached to the building and extending to the public right-of-way will be allowed signing along the border trim. The maximum size of copy to be an eight-inch letter, but in no case can the copy exceed 40 percent of the border trim. Any border sign will be in place of the building face sign. Any border sign extending over public right-of-way perpendicular to the building face will be considered as a pedestrian sign.

G. Each property having a minimum of 150 feet of frontage and a building setback of at least 10 feet with a front yard area of at least 1,000 square feet abutting the street will be allowed one freestanding sign. The maximum height of the freestanding sign shall be 20 feet and the maximum area of the face of the sign shall be no larger than 75 square feet.

H. Roof signs lawfully in existence on December 5, 1995, that are located within 50 feet of the right-of-way for Citrus Avenue between Badillo Street and San Bernardino Road are not subject to the requirements of CMC 17.74.080(D) and may be modified via a copy change provided they are maintained in a sound and attractive condition free of visible deterioration. 

I. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, each property located within 300 feet of the Metrolink Station, located at 600 N. Citrus Avenue, shall be permitted one on-site freestanding sign, subject to approval of a sign permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74 CMC. For purposes of this subsection, the distance between the Metrolink Station and the subject property may be measured as a straight line from any portion of the Metrolink Station property’s boundary lines to any portion of the subject property’s boundary lines. In addition to the review criteria required pursuant to CMC 17.74.070, prior to approving a sign permit, planning staff must find as follows:

1. The on-site freestanding sign complies with the following standards:

a. Sign height: not greater than 30 feet in total height; and

b. Sign area: not greater than 75 square feet per sign face;

2. The property complies with the following standards:

a. Lot area: a minimum area of not less than 25,000 square feet;

b. Lot location: abutting Citrus Avenue; and

c. Off-street parking: a minimum of 30 off-street parking spaces provided;

3. The on-site freestanding sign is necessary to provide for on-site identification of the business on the property that would otherwise not be possible without the on-site freestanding sign;

4. The design of the on-site freestanding sign is architecturally compatible with the on-site building and adjoining properties; and

5. The on-site freestanding sign will not create a public traffic safety hazard. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018; Ord. 95-1799 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1392 §§ 13, 14, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.230 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.240 Landscaping requirements.

Required landscape area shall be provided in accordance with the following:

A. Landscape space shall be determined by the floor area ratio selected by the property owner, builder or developer to determine the density of the parcel.

	Floor Area Ratio	Landscape Ratio

	1 or less	5% of building site

	Over 1	15% of building site

B. The minimum landscape ratio shall represent a percentage of the entire site to be landscaped. Approximately one-half of such required landscaping shall generally be distributed throughout the parking lot with the remainder being distributed around the building or other appropriate location.

C. All required landscaping and landscape areas shall be enclosed with at least a minimum six-inch-high by six-inch-wide continuous concrete curb. The architectural board of review may require that the minimum curbing be constructed of such material or size and height as to enhance the style and character of the main building. If perpendicular to a parking space, then a continuous concrete curbing shall be located in such a way as to reduce the potential damage to a wall.

D. When parking stalls are adjacent to or nearly perpendicular to landscape areas, a continuous concrete curbing shall be located where wheel bumpers are located approximately 18 inches from the end of the parking stalls.

E. When automobile or vehicle parking spaces, or driveways on private property, are adjacent to a public or pedestrian sidewalk, it shall be separated with a minimum five-foot-wide landscape area for the length of the parking adjacent to the sidewalk.

F. Trees in the parking lot shall be spaced at least one tree for every 1,500 square feet of parking area. The trees may be located in groupings or in regular intervals or in such a manner as to enhance the appearance of the parking lot.

G. One tree shall be required for each 600 square feet of required landscaping, adjacent to buildings; however, the trees may be located in groupings, regular intervals, or in such manner as to enhance the architecture of the building.

H. All required landscaping areas in the parking lot or area shall not be less than 25 square feet in area or four feet in width, measured from the inside of the planter. When parking stalls are designed in such a way to create pockets of unusable parking space, then they shall be developed as landscape space, provided they are not less than 25 square feet in area. Unusable pockets less than 25 square feet in area need not be landscaped.

I. “Murals” are permitted in the TC-C zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.061.

J. “Painted signs” are permitted in the TC-C zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.062.

K. “Sidewalk signs” and “pennant/flags” are permitted in the TC-C zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.063. (Ord. 01-1879 § 4, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.250 Architectural standards.

A. Materials similar to those utilized on the main building shall also be utilized on: accessory uses; buildings; utility, safety, health and communication equipment enclosures; trash enclosures; stairwells; walls and similar appurtenances.

B. All roof equipment and machinery shall be entirely screened from view with a screening device utilizing materials which are compatible to materials used on the main building.

C. All pedestrian walkways adjacent to public sidewalks shall utilize a textured paving material compatible to materials used on the building. (Ord. 1679 § 19, 1988; 1964 Code Appx. A § 8.34.)


17.52.260 Underground utilities.

Utility lines including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be placed underground in accordance with CMC 17.64.030(E), unless special permission to construct said lines above the ground is granted. (Ord. 1251 § 23, 1974.)


17.52.270 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 20, 1988.)


Chapter 17.54 M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE

Sections:

17.54.010    Intent.

17.54.020    Permitted uses.

17.54.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

17.54.040    Prohibited uses.

17.54.050    Property development standards generally.

17.54.060    Lot area.

17.54.070    Lot dimensions.

17.54.080    Population density.

17.54.090    Building height – Generally.

17.54.100    Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

17.54.110    Yards – Generally.

17.54.120    Yards – Lots adjoining a commercial or manufacturing zone.

17.54.130    Yards – Lots adjoining a residential or agricultural zone.

17.54.140    Yards – Substandard depth lots existing and zoned M-1.

17.54.150    Distance between buildings.

17.54.160    Fences and walls – Required walls.

17.54.170    Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

17.54.180    Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

17.54.190    Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

17.54.200    Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

17.54.210    Off-street parking.

17.54.220    Access.

17.54.230    Signs – Generally.

17.54.240    Permitted signs.

17.54.250    Signs – Standards generally.

17.54.260    Signs – Safety standards.

17.54.270    Signs – Commercial uses.

17.54.280    Signs – Industrial park zones generally.

17.54.285    Allowable signs and special regulations – Highway industrial zones.

17.54.290    Signs – All industrial zones generally.

17.54.300    Overlay zones – Off-site signs.

17.54.310    Loading.

17.54.320    Site plan review.


17.54.010 Intent.

The M-1 light manufacturing zone is intended to provide for the development of industrial uses which include fabrication, manufacturing, assembly or processing of materials that are in already processed form. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.00.)


17.54.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in CMC 17.54.050 through 17.54.310:

A. Commercial:

1. Administration or sales offices directly related to the hereinafter permitted industrial uses, excluding, however, sales offices devoted exclusively to retail sales operation only, except as hereinafter provided;

2. Electrical or mechanical games as an ancillary use, up to a maximum of three such games;

3. Equipment rental;

4. Maintenance service;

5. Restaurant or cafeteria, excluding sale of intoxicating liquor;

6. Retail sales of only those products manufactured, processed or fabricated under the permitted industrial uses, as defined in subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section, upon the premises from which such retail sales are to be conducted, except for the specific retail sales operations hereinafter provided for;

B. Manufacturing:

1. Aircraft or missile factory;

2. Automotive:

a. Battery manufacture,

b. Painting,

c. Tire recapping, retreading, rebuilding,

d. Upholstery;

3. Boat building and repairs;

4. Bottling plant;

5. Brewery and/or winery;

6. Ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and fire in kilns using only electricity or gas;

7. Electrical and electronic items;

8. Electrical or neon sign manufacture and maintenance;

9. Garment manufacturing;

10. Ice cold storage plant;

11. Lumber yard including millwork;

12. Machinery and shop:

a. Blacksmith shop,

b. Cabinet or carpentry shop,

c. Machine shop,

d. Paint shop (excluding manufacturing),

e. Punch press,

f. Sheet metal shop,

g. Tinsmith,

h. Welding shop;

13. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products such as:

a. Bakery goods (including wholesaling and warehousing facilities, storage and distribution agencies),

b. Candy,

c. Cosmetics,

d. Dairy products,

e. Drugs,

f. Food products (excluding sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and rendering of fats and oils),

g. Fruit or vegetable packing,

h. Perfumes,

i. Toiletries;

14. Manufacturing, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:

a. Bone,

b. Canvas,

c. Cellophane,

d. Cloth,

e. Cork,

f. Feathers,

g. Felt,

h. Fiber,

i. Fur,

j. Glass,

k. Hair,

l. Horns,

m. Leather,

n. Metals,

o. Paints not employing a boiling process,

p. Paper,

q. Plaster,

r. Plastics or synthetics,

s. Precious or semiprecious stones or metals,

t. Shells,

u. Textiles,

v. Tobacco,

w. Wood,

x. Yarns;

15. Novelties manufacturing;

16. Repair garage;

17. Rubber and metal stamps;

18. Shoes;

19. Stone monument works;

20. Textiles; 

C. Processing:

1. Blueprinting and photocopying;

2. Carpet and rug cleaning plant;

3. Cleaning and dyeing plant;

4. Creamery;

5. Laboratory;

6. Laundry;

7. Tire retreading, recapping, rebuilding;

D. Fabrication:

1. Fabrication of products made from finished rubber;

2. Prefabricated houses;

E. Wholesaling and Warehousing: Wholesaling and warehousing facilities, storage and distribution agencies;

F. Storage Yard:

1. Building materials;

2. Bus storage and terminal;

3. Contractor’s storage yard;

4. Draying and freight yard;

5. Feed and fuel;

6. Lumber yard;

7. Machinery and equipment rental;

8. Trucking yard terminal;

G. Utilities: Electric distribution and public utility substations, electric and public utility transmission substations, public and private utility service yards;

H. Residential: Residential uses required for plant security personnel only;

I. Other:

1. Antenna systems, subject to the height limit expressed in CMC 17.54.090;

2. Advertising structure;

3. Printing and publishing;

4. Research and development;

5. Uses incidental and directly related to the services and operation of a permitted industrial use:

a. Infirmary or dispensary,

b. Recreation facilities for employees;

6. Crankcase oil tanks in conjunction with auto repair or service use. (Ord. 14-2034 § 3, 2014; Ord. 92-1738 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1709 § 5, 1990; Ord. 1596 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1593 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1509 § 5, 1981; Ord. 1507 § 13, 1981; Ord. 1284 § 1, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.01.)


17.54.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 17.62 CMC:

A. Animal hospital, shelter and kennel;

B. Automobile service stations, subject to the provisions of CMC 17.64.100 through 17.64.160; the provisions of CMC 17.54.120, 17.54.130(A) through (E), and 17.54.140 shall not apply to automobile service stations;

C. Automobile towing and impound;

D. Conversion of residential buildings to nonresidential uses subject to CMC 17.76.010 through 17.76.040;

E. Electrical or mechanical games as ancillary use; more than three;

F. Existing residential trailer parks and such incidental uses directly related to the needs of the trailer park residents as listed in CMC 17.30.020(B);

G. Gymnastic school and vocational and rehabilitation schools as related to the zone;

H. Indoor radio controlled hobby track;

I. Liquor, on-sale, only in conjunction with a restaurant or cafeteria;

J. Mechanical car wash;

K. Off-street parking facilities for nonindustrial uses;

L. The following uses, whether separate or incidental to a permitted industrial use:

1. Drop hammer,

2. Foundry,

3. Planing mill,

4. Poultry and rabbit slaughtering;

M. Public storage facilities subject to CMC 17.64.010 through 17.64.090;

N. Recycling collection facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 17.62.19;

O. Recycling processing facilities;

P. Storage and dispensing of liquefied petroleum gas in anticipation of retail sale;

Q. Baseball and softball schools;

R. Adult-oriented businesses;

S. On-site wine tasting in conjunction with a winery, as defined by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) as a business having only a Type 02 license (winegrower/winery), as opposed to any other ABC license classification;

T. On-site beer tasting in conjunction with a small brewery, as defined by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) as a business having only a Type 23 license (small beer manufacturer), as opposed to any other ABC license classification;

U. Notwithstanding any provision in subsections (S) and (T) of this section to the contrary, the same site may operate both a winery with on-site wine tasting and a small brewery with on-site beer tasting, provided a conditional use permit has been obtained to operate both;

V. Mobile food facilities located on the same site as permitted on-site beer tasting or on-site wine tasting (as defined in subsections (S) and (T) of this section), subject to an administrative conditional use permit pursuant to CMC 17.62.190(E). (Ord. 16-2057 § 6, 2016; Ord. 14-2034 § 4, 2014; Ord. 97-1813 § 9, 1997; Ord. 94-1767 § 1, 1994; Ord. 92-1735 § 1, 1992; Ord. 91-1730 § 1(H), 1991; Ord. 1647 § 7, 1987; Ord. 1597 § 4, 1985; Ord. 1596 § 3, 1985; Ord. 1593 § 3, 1985; Ord. 1581 § 2, 1984; Ord. 1507 § 14, 1981; Ord. 1384 § 2, 1978; Ord. 1323 § 1, 1976; Ord. 1301 § 1, 1975; Ord. 1237 § 1, 1973; Ord. 1198 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.02.)


17.54.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the M-1 zone:

A. Residential uses other than those permitted in CMC 17.54.020(H);

B. Manufacturing plants manufacturing the following products:

1. Abrasives,

2. Boneblack,

3. Carbon black and lampblack,

4. Cement,

5. Charcoal,

6. Chemicals (heavy or industrial),

7. Coal and coke,

8. Detergents, soaps and by-products using animal fat,

9. Gas manufacturing,

10. Glue and sizing,

11. Graphite,

12. Gypsum and other forms of plaster base,

13. Insulation (flammable types),

14. Matches,

15. Metal ingots, pigs, casting or rolling mill,

16. Metals extraction and smelting,

17. Paper pulp and cellulose,

18. Paraffin manufacturing,

19. Petroleum and petroleum products,

20. Serum, toxin and virus,

21. Sugar and starch,

22. Tannery,

23. Turpentine,

24. Wax and wax products,

25. Wool pulling or scouring;

C. Adult-Oriented Businesses:

1. Established or located within 500 feet of any other adult-oriented businesses.

2. Established or located within 500 feet of any existing residential zone or use, park, church, or school.

D. Processing:

1. Animal by-products,

2. Carbon black and lampblack refining,

3. Chemicals (heavy or industrial),

4. Coal and coke processing,

5. Detergents and soap processing,

6. Dog and cat food processing,

7. Fish and fish by-products processing or canning,

8. Grain milling and sacking,

9. Paper milling,

10. Petroleum and petroleum products processing or refining,

11. Potash,

12. Printing ink,

13. Radium or uranium extraction,

14. Rubber,

15. Salt,

16. Soap,

17. Smelting,

18. Tar or asphaltic roofing,

19. Vinegar,

20. Volatile or poisonous gas storage,

21. Wood preserving by creosoting, wolmanizing or other pressure impregnation of wood by preservatives,

22. Wood and lumber kilns for industrial kiln-drying;

E. Commercial uses and sales limited to retail sale operations only, except as permitted in CMC 17.54.020(A);

F. Storage of flammable liquids in outside ground level or aboveground level storage facilities. (Ord. 97-1813 § 9, 1997; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.03.)


17.54.050 Property development standards generally.

The property development standards contained in CMC 17.54.060 through 17.54.310 shall apply to all land and buildings in the M-1 zone, except that any lot existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is substandard in dimensions may be used subject to all other standards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.060 Lot area.

There are no lot area provisions for the M-1 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.070 Lot dimensions.

All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now existing may not be reduced below these standards:

A. There are no lot width provisions;

B. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.080 Population density.

There are no population density provisions for the M-1 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.090 Building height – Generally.

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than 50 feet except by conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.100 Building height – Exceptions – Permitted projections above limit.

Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church steeples, flagpoles, roof signs when permitted in the zone, chimneys, water tanks or similar structures, when approved by the commission, may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed; provided, that the same be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. No penthouse or roof structures, or other space above the height limit, shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. All roof equipment and machinery shall be entirely screened from view with a screening device utilizing materials which are compatible to the materials used on the building. (Ord. 11-1996 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1543 § 7, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.110 Yards – Generally.

Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property line or from future right-of-way line as established by general plan for an existing right-of-way. All utility equipment and machinery located in yards shall be screened behind enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the adjacent building or shall be screened by landscaping. (Ord. 1543 § 8, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.120 Yards – Lots adjoining a commercial or manufacturing zone.

A. Where the M-1 zone fronts, sides or rears on a major or secondary highway which is a boundary between the M-1 and any commercial or other manufacturing zone, there shall be a yard abutting the highway of not less than 25 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage.

B. Where the M-1 zone fronts, sides or rears on a local street which is a boundary between any M-1 zone and any commercial or other manufacturing zone, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 10 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.130 Yards – Lots adjoining a residential or agricultural zone.

A. Where the M-1 zone fronts, sides or rears on a major or secondary highway which is a boundary between the M-1 and any residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (G) of this section, there shall be a yard abutting the highway of not less than 50 feet.

A solid masonry wall not less than three feet nor more than four feet in height shall be provided five feet from and parallel with the front, side or rear property line abutting the highway. The space between the required wall and the property line shall be landscaped and maintained. The remainder of the required yard may be used for parking, but shall not be used for loading or storage.

B. Where the M-1 zone fronts, sides or rears on a local street which is a boundary between the M-1 zone and any residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (G) of this section, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 85 feet.



The 25 feet nearest the street shall be landscaped and maintained. The remainder may be either landscaped or used for parking, but shall not be used for loading or storage.

C. Where the M-1 zone sides or rears on any alley which is a boundary between the M-1 and any residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (G) of this section, there shall be a yard abutting the alley of not less than 80 feet measured from the side of the alley opposite the subject M-1 property.

The required yard may be used for parking or storage; provided, that items are not stacked higher than the required wall. Single objects, not stacked or piled, each having a height greater than six feet may be stored in the required yard; provided, that an unobstructed aisle not less than six feet in width is maintained between such storage area and any side or rear property line.

A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the property line abutting the alley, excepting where the alley is used as access for servicing. The yard may be used for loading, provided the wall is erected not less than 30 feet from the side of the alley opposite the subject property. Access may be provided through the wall as approved by the planning director at the time of site plan review.

D. Where the M-1 zone sides or rears on a railroad right-of-way which is the boundary between the M-1 and any residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (G) of this section, there shall be a yard of not less than 50 feet measured from the opposite side of the railroad right-of-way.

The required yard may be used for parking, loading or storage, provided items are not stacked higher than six feet. Single objects, not stacked or piled, each having a height greater than six feet may be stored in the required yard; provided, that an unobstructed aisle not less than six feet in width is maintained between such storage area and any side or rear property line. A railroad loading dock is the only structure permitted in the required yard abutting a railroad right-of-way.

E. Where the M-1 zone sides or rears on a drainage channel right-of-way which is the boundary between the M-1 and any residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (G) of this section, there shall be a yard of not less than 80 feet measured from the opposite side of the channel right-of-way.

The required yard may be used for parking, loading or storage, provided items are not stacked higher than six feet. Single objects, not stacked or piled, each having a height greater than six feet may be stored in the required yard; provided, that an unobstructed aisle not less than six feet in width is maintained between such storage area and any side or rear property line.

F. Where the M-1 zone sides or rears directly on a residential or agricultural zone with no street, highway, alley, drainage channel right-of-way or railroad right-of-way between, except as provided CMC 17.54.020(A) and subsection (G) of this section, there shall be a yard of not less than 80 feet. The commercial uses listed in CMC 17.54.020(A) shall have a yard of not less than 20 feet.

A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line. The wall shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street. The required yard may be used for parking or storage provided items are not stored higher than the required wall.

G. Where the M-1 zone fronts directly on a public park or fronts on a street which is a boundary with a public park, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 25 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. If across a local street from a park site, a wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is loading or storage to the rear of the line.

Where the M-1 zone sides or rears on a public park, or sides or rears on a major or secondary highway, local street, alley, railroad right-of-way or drainage channel right-of-way, which is a boundary with a public park, no yard shall be required. A solid masonry wall of not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the side or rear property line where there is no building on the line. Access may be provided through the wall as approved by the planning director at the time of site plan review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.140 Yards – Substandard depth lots existing and zoned M-1.

Lots existing and zoned M-1 on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which are substandard in depth shall comply with the following:

A. When such a lot fronts, sides or rears on a street which is a boundary with a residential or agricultural zone, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 10 feet, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section. The required yard shall be landscaped and maintained. If across a local street from a residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, a solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is no building on the line and where there is parking, loading or storage to the rear of the line;

B. When such a lot abuts a residential or agricultural zone, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, there shall be a yard of not less than 25 feet abutting the zone boundary. A solid masonry wall of not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary line. The required yard may be used for parking, loading or storage, provided items are not stacked higher than the required wall. Single objects not stacked or piled, each having a height greater than six feet, may be stored in the required yard; provided, that an unobstructed aisle not less than six feet in width is maintained between such storage area and any side or rear property line;

C. When such a lot fronts directly on a public park or fronts on a street which is a boundary with a public park, there shall be a yard abutting the street of not less than 25 feet. The required yard may be landscaped or used for parking; however, it shall not be used for loading or storage. If across a street from a park site, a wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the setback line where there is loading or storage to the rear of the line. When such lot sides or rears on a public park, no yard shall be required.

A solid masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on a side or rear property line where there is no building. Access may be provided through the wall as approved by the planning director at the time of site plan review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.150 Distance between buildings.

There are no provisions on this subject for the M-1 zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.160 Fences and walls – Required walls.

A. Walls shall be erected as required in CMC 17.54.130(A), (C), (F) and (G) and 17.54.140. Walls shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required yard abutting a street except as otherwise provided herein, and shall comply with the corner cutback provisions in CMC 17.54.190.

B. Where no building exists on a yard setback line established in CMC 17.54.130 and 17.54.140, a masonry wall not more than six feet in height may be required, unless otherwise provided herein, at the time of site plan review, to separate the M-1 zone from adjacent residential and agricultural zones. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.170 Fences and walls – Outdoor storage.

All outdoor storage areas abutting residentially zoned property shall be enclosed by a building wall or by a solid fence or wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.180 Fences and walls – Hazardous areas.

A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the conditions on the property or physical hazards, such as frequent inundation, erosion, excavation or grade separation, are considered by the commission to be dangerous to the public health and safety. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.190 Fences and walls – Corner cutback area regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys and/or private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback area established herein:

A. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersections and intercepting streets. The cutback area shall be defined by a horizontal line drawn from a point on the front, side or rear property line, the point being not less than 25 feet measured from the intersection of the front, side or rear property lines, or the prolongation of such property lines, to a point similarly located on the intersecting property lines;

B. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway and/or alleys intersecting a street or alley. The cutback line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front or rear property line as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than 10 feet from the edges of the driveway or the alley where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.200 Permitted fences, hedges and walls.

A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not more than six feet in height shall be permitted to the lot interior of all required yard setback lines.

B. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls not more than three feet in height shall be permitted within required landscaped yards. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.210 Off-street parking.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.120 apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.220 Access.

A. There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated street or alley to off-street parking and loading facilities on the property requiring the parking and loading.

B. The location and number of ingress and egress points shall be specified at the time of site plan review. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.230 Signs – Generally.

The intent of CMC 17.54.230 through 17.54.300 is to regulate signs to protect the safety of users of the streets and highways, to assure compatibility with uses associated with signs and to avoid adverse effects on adjacent property values and living conditions.

CMC 17.54.230 through 17.54.300 shall include as parts of their provisions those portions of existing codes and ordinances relating to the erection and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising structures which are not in conflict herewith. Signs and outdoor advertising shall be permitted in this zone only as provided in CMC 17.54.230 through 17.54.300. Signs not visible from a dedicated street or highway shall not be subject to the provisions of CMC 17.54.230 through 17.54.300. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.240 Permitted signs.

The following signs shall be permitted, subject to the standards in CMC 17.54.250 through 17.54.300:

A. Identification signs indicating the name and nature of the occupancy and/or the name and address of the building and/or the name and address of the owner;

B. Directional signs related to the location of buildings and facilities on the premises, provided they are located on the subject property;

C. “For Sale,” “For Rent” and similar signs, provided they are posted on the subject lot or building by the owner or his authorized agent;

D. Nameplates;

E. Monument signs;

F. “Murals” are permitted in the M-1 zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.061. (Ord. 01-1879 § 5, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000; Ord. 1392 § 15, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.250 Signs – Standards generally.

The standards and conditions contained in CMC 17.54.260 through 17.54.300 shall apply to all signs. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.260 Signs – Safety standards.

Signs shall in no way endanger the health and safety by causing distraction to operators of motor vehicles on the streets and highways. Location, lighting and color of signs shall be such as to cause no confusion with public signs or traffic movement. (Ord. 1392 § 16, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.270 Signs – Commercial uses.

Commercial uses located within the M-1 zone shall be allowed signs in conformance with the provisions, conditions and standards of CMC 17.44.200 through 17.44.210. (Ord. 1392 § 17, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.280 Signs – Industrial park zones generally.

A. Each building shall be allowed one monument sign displaying either the name and/or address of the business (if only one occupancy) or the address of the building (if more than one occupancy). The occupant may have an identification sign mounted flat against the building wall instead of a monument sign. This sign shall have an aggregate sign area not in excess of 15 percent of the area of the first story of the building. The monument sign shall be located in a landscaped area and shall not exceed a height of six feet and shall have a maximum sign face area of 20 square feet per side.

B. If a building has more than one occupant and the allowed monument sign is utilized to display the building address only, each occupant shall be allowed one identification sign. This combination sign shall be mounted flat against the building wall and shall have an aggregate sign area not in excess of 15 percent of the area of the first story height of the building.

C. Each building shall be allowed one pedestrian-oriented identification sign for each public entrance. This sign shall be mounted flat against the building wall or suspended from an overhanging feature which is an integral part of the building and shall have an aggregate sign area not to exceed three square feet.

D. Each building shall be allowed sufficient directional signs, as determined by the planning department, for identifying parking areas, service entrances, loading docks, etc. (Ord. 1392 § 18, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.285 Allowable signs and special regulations – Highway industrial zones.

A. Each building complex shall be allowed one monument sign, displaying the name and/or address of the business (if only one occupant) or the names and/or addresses of the several occupants within the complex, or one freestanding sign under the same aforementioned conditions. Neither the monument sign nor the freestanding sign shall be on the same side of the street nor within the required corner cutback. The monument sign shall be located within a landscaped area, shall have a height not in excess of 15 feet, and shall have a sign face area not to exceed 50 square feet per side. The freestanding sign shall be located in a landscaped area and shall have a height not to exceed 18 feet and shall have a sign face not to exceed 50 square feet per side. The occupant may have an identification sign mounted flat against the building wall instead of a monument sign or a freestanding sign. This sign shall have an aggregate sign area not in excess of 15 percent of the area of the first story of the building.

B. If a building complex has more than one occupant, each occupant shall be allowed one identification sign. This sign shall be mounted flat against the building wall and shall have an aggregate sign area not in excess of 15 percent of the area of the first story height of the building.

C. Each building, if only one occupant is present, shall be allowed one pedestrian-oriented identification sign for each public entrance. This sign shall be mounted flat against the building wall or suspended from an overhanging feature which is an integral part of the building and shall have an aggregate sign area not to exceed three square feet.

D. Each building complex shall be allowed sufficient directional signs, as determined by the planning department, for identifying parking areas, service entrances, loading docks, etc.

E. When a building rears onto a public alley or parking lot with a public entrance serving those areas and the building already has its allowable identification signs, an additional sign may be erected at that entrance. The area devoted to such sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the rear face of the building to the first story height, and such sign must be mounted flat against the building wall. (Ord. 1392 § 19, 1978.)


17.54.290 Signs – All industrial zones generally.

For signs in any industrial zone, the provisions of Chapter 17.74 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1392 § 20, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.300 Overlay zones – Off-site signs.

Signs are allowed in M-1 zone only if overlay zones have been so designated. (Ord. 1392 § 21, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.310 Loading.

The provisions of CMC 17.72.130 and 17.72.140 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.04.)


17.54.320 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.05.)


Chapter 17.55 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES

Sections:

17.55.010    Purpose.

17.55.020    Definitions.

17.55.030    Minimum proximity requirements.

17.55.040    Amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented business uses.

17.55.050    Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use.


17.55.010 Purpose.

It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community-wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult-oriented businesses in certain areas. (Ord. 97-1813 § 2, 1997.)


17.55.020 Definitions.

A. Establishment of an Adult-Oriented Business. As used herein, to “establish” an adult-oriented business shall mean and include any of the following:

1. The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business;

2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein;

3. The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or

4. The relocation of any such adult-oriented business.

B. “Specified anatomical areas,” as used herein, shall mean and include any of the following:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human (a) genitals or pubic region; (b) buttocks; and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of areola;

2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

3. Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (B)(1) or (2) of this section.

C. “Specified sexual activities,” as used herein, shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

2. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

3. Masturbation, actual or simulated;

4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section.

D. “Adult-oriented businesses” means any one of the following:

1. “Adult arcade,” as used in this chapter, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2. “Adult bookstore,” as used in this chapter, is an establishment that has 30 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

3. “Adult cabaret,” as used in this chapter, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (a) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (b) which regularly features persons who appear seminude; and/or (c) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

4. “Adult hotel/motel,” as used in this chapter, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: (a) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (b) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

5. “Adult motion picture theater,” as used in this chapter, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

6. “Adult theater,” as used in this chapter, means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

7. “Modeling studio,” as used in this chapter, means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities.

8. “Adult enterprise,” as used in this chapter, means a car wash, massage parlor, barber shop, lingerie show and/or any other economic organization and/or activity which includes any display of specified anatomical areas, but which is not an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult hotel/motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater and/or modeling studio.

E. “Church,” as used in this chapter, is a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.

F. “Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon,” as used in this chapter, shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3d 151 (1981).

G. “Regularly features,” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret, means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occur on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 90-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

H. “School,” as used in this chapter, is any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any other establishment, organization, firm, business and/or person offering specialized instruction.

I. “Seminude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. (Ord. 97-1813 § 2, 1997.)


17.55.030 Minimum proximity requirements.

No adult-oriented business shall be established or located in any zone in the city other than M-1 light manufacturing, or within certain distances of certain specified land uses or zones as set forth below:

A. No such business shall be established or located within 500 feet of any other adult-oriented business.

B. No such business shall be established or located within 500 feet of any existing residential zone or use, park, church, or school.

C. The distances set forth above shall be measured as a radius from the primary entrance of the Adult-Oriented Business to the property lines of the property so zoned or used without regard to intervening structures. (Ord. 97-1813 § 2, 1997.)


17.55.040 Amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented business uses.

Any use of real property existing on January 1, 1997, which does not conform to the provisions of CMC 17.55.030, but which was constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a Group B nonconforming use under Chapter 17.70 CMC, and may be continued for the period allowed by Chapter 17.70 CMC. On or before the date of termination of the nonconforming use(s), all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of CMC 17.55.050.

A. Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult-oriented business shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use.

B. Amortization – Annexed Property. Any adult-oriented business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of CMC 17.55.030, shall be terminated within one year of the date of annexation unless an extension of time has been approved by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of CMC 17.55.050. (Ord. 97-1813 § 2, 1997.)


17.55.050 Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use.

The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in CMC 17.55.040 may apply under the provisions of this section to the planning commission for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use.

A. Time and Manner of Application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of CMC 17.55.030 may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an application must be filed with the planning division at least 90 days but no more than 180 days prior to the time established in CMC 17.55.040 for termination of such use.

B. Content of Application – Fee. The application shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council.

C. Hearing Procedure. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within 45 days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

D. Approval of Extension – Findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the planning commission makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law:

1. The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to January 1, 1997;

2. The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and

3. The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with CMC 17.55.030. (Ord. 97-1813 § 2, 1997.)


Chapter 17.56 OVERLAY ZONE (OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES)

Sections:

17.56.010    Generally.

17.56.020    Permitted uses.

17.56.030    Overlay restricted to certain zones.

17.56.040    Use limitations.

17.56.050    Advertising displays adjacent to landscaped freeways.

17.56.060    Exempt advertising displays.

17.56.070    Removal of prohibited structures.


17.56.010 Generally.

Outdoor advertising structure zones shall be created in the same manner as property is reclassified from one zone to another within the city, as set forth in CMC 17.80.080 through 17.80.150. When such a zone has been created, it shall be designated upon the city’s official zoning map as an overlay zone, by adding the parenthetically enclosed letter “S” (S) after the zoning symbol which indicates the zone in which the property is included. Outdoor advertising structure zones shall be referred to as “S zones.” (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.50.)


17.56.020 Permitted uses.

In addition to all other permitted uses on properties which are included within an S zone, there shall be permitted the erection and maintenance of outdoor advertising structures, subject to the regulations set forth in this code. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.51.)


17.56.030 Overlay restricted to certain zones.

S zones shall be overlaid only upon the following zones as the same are defined in this title: M-1. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.52.)


17.56.040 Use limitations.

No person shall use, locate, construct or maintain an outdoor advertising structure on any property except in an S zone. The location and maintenance of outdoor advertising structures on such properties shall comply with the following regulations:

A. The total area of an outdoor advertising structure shall not exceed 800 square feet, nor be less than 300 square feet;

B. No advertising structure shall exceed an overall height of 35 feet, measured from the finished grade of the lot upon which the sign is located; nor shall the bottom of the structure be less than 12 feet above the grade;

C. Structures shall be supported by not more than two columns, which columns shall be metal, or material equal to or stronger than metal;

D. The standards for material used as a border around the sign area, as well as the screening on the back of single-faced structures, shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council, which resolution and standards therein may be amended from time to time, as necessary, to ensure the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare;

E. All outdoor advertising structures shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly to a person of normal sensibility, nor in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance at law. The planning director shall be charged with the enforcement of this subsection;

F. Outdoor advertising structures shall be located in compliance with the following:

1. No outdoor advertising structure shall be located other than in compliance with all setback requirements of the zone underlying the S zone upon which the same is located, and

2. No outdoor advertising structure shall be located within 400 feet, as measured along the street on one side thereof, of any property zoned for or used for residential, agriculture, church, school, park, hospital or civic center purposes, and

3. No outdoor advertising structure, except for bidirectional signs, shall be located within 450 feet, as measured along the street on one side thereof, of any other outdoor advertising structure whether or not on the same lot, and

4. No outdoor advertising structure shall be located within two feet of any other building or structure, except that bidirectional outdoor advertising structures may be located adjacent to one another if the distance between the same does not exceed 18 inches. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.53.)


17.56.050 Advertising displays adjacent to landscaped freeways.

No advertising display shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a section of freeway which has been, or hereafter may be, landscaped as defined in this title, if the advertising display is within 500 feet of the freeway or is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on such landscaped section of a freeway. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.54.)


17.56.060 Exempt advertising displays.

The provisions of CMC 17.56.050 shall not apply to any of the following listed advertising structures or signs used exclusively to:

A. Advertise the sale or lease of the property on which the advertising display is placed;

B. Designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is placed, or to identify the premises;

C. Advertise the business conducted or goods manufactured or produced, or services rendered upon the property upon which the advertising display is placed. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.55.)


17.56.070 Removal of prohibited structures.

Notwithstanding any other contrary provisions of this code dealing with the removal of nonconforming uses, any advertising structure which is now, or hereafter may be, in violation of any of the provisions of CMC 17.56.020 through 17.56.060 shall be removed within three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title except:

A. Outdoor advertising structures having supporting columns of wood shall be removed within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein;

B. Outdoor advertising structures which comply as to location and zone, but not construction, shall be made to comply or be removed within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein;

C. Outdoor advertising structures which may become nonconforming due to the future landscaping of a section or section of a freeway shall be removed within three years of the time the freeway landscaping has been completed or accepted, and the character of the section or sections has been changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.56.)


Chapter 17.57 OUTDOOR DINING AND DISPLAY

Sections:

17.57.010    Purpose and intent.

17.57.020    Definitions.

17.57.030    Outdoor dining and display districts.

17.57.040    Location.

17.57.050    Insurance.

17.57.060    General standards for outside dining.

17.57.070    General standards for outdoor display.

17.57.080    Review process.

17.57.090    Encroachment permit.

17.57.100    Terms and renewal.

17.57.110    Enforcement.


17.57.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations to allow limited dining and commercial display to encroach into the public right-of-way as an ancillary component of an adjacent primary business which is located on private property. It is intended that such outdoor dining and display will not unduly restrict public access or utilize a design that detracts from the image and appearance of the surrounding area. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:

A. “Outdoor dining” is defined as use of an adjacent, outside area by a food or beverage establishment for the same eating and drinking activities that occur within the establishment. The outdoor dining area may be located in a public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter.

B. “Outdoor display area” is defined as the area in which goods are placed outside a building for display or sale purposes, and in conjunction with permanent commercial uses located inside adjacent buildings. The display area may be on private or public property, pursuant to this chapter.

C. “Chair” shall mean either a distinct piece of furniture designed to allow one person to sit upon the same, or when seating is provided on a bench or other similar structure, then every 20 inches of seating space shall be considered as the equivalent of one chair for determining seating capacity. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.030 Outdoor dining and display districts.

Outdoor dining and display shall be permitted to encroach into the public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter in the following areas:

A. The town center-commercial (TC-C) and town center-professional (TC-P) zone districts where the encroachment is on Citrus Avenue, Badillo Street, College Street, School Street, Italia Street, Orange Street, Cottage Street and San Bernardino Road.

B. The regional or community shopping center (C-3A) zone district where the encroachment is on or abutting Shoppers Lane.

C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the outdoor display of pennant/flags shall be permitted in the town center-commercial (TC-C) and town center-professional (TC-P) zones and in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.063. (Ord. 01-1879 § 6, 2001; Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.040 Location.

A. Outdoor dining and display in the public right-of-way shall not extend beyond the boundaries of the primary business property to which such activity is subordinate.

B. Outdoor display may not encroach more than two feet into the public right-of-way.

C. Outdoor dining may extend into the public right-of-way; however, a clear pedestrian pathway shall be maintained the full width of the property. The pathway shall maintain a minimum unobstructed passageway of five feet as measured from the dining area to any obstruction including but not limited to light standards, benches, street trees and newsracks. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.050 Insurance.

The permittee shall maintain general liability insurance for the benefit of the city of a type and amount as determined appropriate by the city manager. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.060 General standards for outside dining.

A. Development Standards.

1. Facilities and equipment shall be of a quality and style that is consistent with the downtown design guidelines adopted by the Covina redevelopment agency and any other applicable design standards and policies. The design, quality, materials and colors used for chairs, tables, lighting and other fixtures shall complement the architectural style and colors used on the adjacent buildings.

2. Outdoor dining areas that have more than four tables or more than eight chairs shall separate the dining area from the walkway with fencing, swag roping, decorative plants, landscape planters, or other architectural barriers that prevent encroachment of tables and chairs into the five-foot pathway being maintained for pedestrian access. Outside dining areas that have more than eight tables or more than 16 chairs must provide permanent fencing between the dining area and the walkway. The chief planning official may relax this standard when it is clear that there is no reasonable possibility of tables or chairs being moved to encroach on the required pedestrian pathway.

3. Lighting will be required for outdoor dining areas where food will be eaten during the evening hours. The lighting fixtures must be decorative and complement the architectural character of the building and area. Lights mounted on the building shall not cause direct glare or other visual obstruction to pedestrians or vehicle drivers along the street and public walkway, and should illuminate only the sidewalk area.

4. Portable umbrellas may be permitted provided they do not obstruct the public right-of-way or walkway, and do not contain advertising.

B. Operational Standards.

1. The owner of the primary business is responsible for proper operation of the outdoor dining area. Outdoor dining shall be continuously supervised by management or employees. Food establishments serving alcoholic beverages shall have a supervisor, at least 21 years of age, on-site at all times of operation. Any behavior that disturbs customers or passersby on the sidewalk will constitute grounds for revocation of any permit(s) to operate an outdoor dining area.

2. Establishments are required to maintain all areas in and around the sidewalk dining area in a manner which is clean and free of litter and debris.

3. The outdoor dining hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of operation of the associated food or beverage establishment.

4. All plans and permits for the outdoor dining area approved by the city must be kept on the premises for public inspection at all times during which the associated establishment is open for business.

5. Outdoor dining areas shall be operated in a manner that meets all requirements of the health department of Los Angeles County and all other applicable regulations, laws, ordinances and standards. Food establishments serving alcoholic beverages shall also obtain all necessary permits required by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.070 General standards for outdoor display.

A. Locational Standards.

1. All outdoor displays must be placed so as not to obstruct business entrances, pedestrian pathways and driveways.

2. Outdoor displays shall not encroach more than two feet into the public right-of-way and must be placed so that the clear sidewalk space for the passage of pedestrians is at least six feet on nonarterial streets and eight feet on arterial streets.

3. Outdoor displays shall be placed so as not to interfere with the reasonable use of storefront windows for display purposes by adjacent businesses.

4. Outdoor displays shall not unreasonably obstruct visibility of other businesses.

5. Outdoor displays shall not create a vehicle or pedestrian hazard.

B. General Standards.

1. All outdoor displays shall be limited to artwork and pottery, flowers and plants, general merchandise related to the adjoining business or other items which are determined by the chief planning official to be consistent with the intent of this code and the downtown redevelopment plan.

2. All outdoor displays shall be portable and removed from public view at the close of each business day.

3. Outdoor displays shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition, and in good repair at all times.

4. Outdoor displays shall not include signs or contain advertising materials. However, restaurant menu signs will be allowed if they do not exceed six square feet (limit one per business).

5. Outdoor displays shall be limited to the hours of operation of the originating business.

6. Outdoor displays shall be limited to a maximum area of one-half square foot of display area for every foot of store frontage on the street.

7. The design and configuration of outside displays shall be attractive, compatible with the architecture of the building, and incorporate themes, colors and materials that are consistent with the downtown redevelopment plan. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.080 Review process.

A. Review Authority.

1. The chief planning official shall have administrative authority to review and approve minor permits. The chief planning official may impose reasonable conditions to assure that the dining or display area is not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and is consistent with applicable redevelopment plans and design guidelines. Minor permits include:

a. Outdoor display areas which conform with this chapter.

b. Outdoor dining areas which have not more than eight tables or 16 chairs. For purposes of this chapter, each 20 inches of space on a bench shall be considered as one chair.

2. The planning commission shall have authority to review and approve dining areas with more than eight tables or more than 16 chairs.

B. Conditions of Approval. The chief planning official or planning commission, as applicable, may impose reasonable conditions of approval to ensure that outdoor dining and display areas operate in a manner that is not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, is consistent with all applicable codes, policies and guidelines, and enhances the image, appearance and vitality of the area in which the use is located. This includes but is not limited to authority to regulate the design, layout, materials, colors, quality and appearance of outside dining and display areas; to require security deposits, insurance and other reasonable financial guarantees and to prescribe operating terms which the permittee must follow.

C. Appeal.

1. The decision of the chief planning official may be appealed to the planning commission.

2. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

3. The above decisions must be appealed in writing to the city clerk’s office within 10 days after the decision is made.

D. Fees. When filing an application for an outdoor dining or display permit or any related appeals, a uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purposes of defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings. The fees shall be determined by the city council and adopted by resolution which may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.090 Encroachment permit.

An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city before any outdoor display or dining is permitted. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.100 Terms and renewal.

A minor permit for an outdoor dining or display area may be approved for a maximum of one year. Renewal permits may be granted for one-year periods. Major permits may be approved by the planning commission for periods of up to five years. The city reserves the right to temporarily suspend the permit upon seven days’ notice because of anticipated or actual conflicts in the use of sidewalk areas due to street repairs, parades, festivals and other similar events. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.57.110 Enforcement.

A. Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.28 CMC. In addition, the city may seek civil remedies for any violation including but not limited to the recovery of reasonable costs for the enforcement and correction of the violation.

B. Revocation. Violation of any of the standards in this code or any of the conditions imposed under CMC 17.57.080 shall be grounds for revocation of the permit to operate an outdoor dining or display area. Such revocation shall require a majority vote of the planning commission at a regular meeting to which the permittee has been given at least 10 calendar days’ notice. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


Chapter 17.58 PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD) DISTRICTS

Sections:

17.58.010    Generally.

17.58.020    Permitted uses.

17.58.030    Purpose.

17.58.040    Restrictions.

17.58.050    Area.

17.58.060    Application – Generally.

17.58.070    Application – Filing.

17.58.080    Application – Form and contents.

17.58.090    Application – Supplemental data – Provisional plan.

17.58.100    Application – Filing fee.

17.58.110    Procedure – Generally.

17.58.120    Department investigation.

17.58.130    Public hearing – Generally.

17.58.140    Findings and conditions.

17.58.150    Time limit for development.

17.58.160    Precise plan – Requirements generally.

17.58.170    Precise plan – Revocation.

17.58.180    Precise plan – Expiration.

17.58.190    Precise plan – Modification.

17.58.200    Failure to give notice.

17.58.210    Site plan review.


17.58.010 Generally.

Planned community districts shall be created in the same manner as property is reclassified from one zone to another within the city, as set forth in this title. When a PCD district has been so created, it shall be designated upon the zoning map of the city as an overlay zone by adding the parenthetically enclosed letters “PCD” after the zoning symbol indicating the zone in which the subject property is included. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.020 Permitted uses.

The proposed development may include any of the uses allowed in the underlying zone by rights of zoning or by conditional use permit, as well as such other uses as may be permitted by any other section of this title; provided such other uses are necessary to the development of the planned community and are not detrimental to the surrounding properties or uses permitted in the general area and subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.030 Purpose.

When a proposal for a new development is made and it is desirable to apply regulations more flexible than those applicable to other zones in this title, a planned community development district shall be established. Such districts may provide diversification in location of structure, uses and other site qualities while ensuring compatibility with uses and future developments on the surrounding areas as indicated within the general plan. (Ord. 1494 § 1, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.040 Restrictions.

In granting a planned community development overlay zone, the granting body shall require such safeguards as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and to prevent any possible detriment to the city or surrounding properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.050 Area.

There is no minimum area for a PCD district other than the area shown on an approved precise plan. (Ord. 1494 § 1, 1981; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.060 Application – Generally.

An application for a change of classification to a PCD district shall be according to the requirements set forth in CMC 17.58.070 through 17.58.100. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.070 Application – Filing.

The application for a change of classification under this chapter shall be filed by the owner or owners of the property for which the permit is sought, or by the authorized representative of the owner or owners. Where the owner or representative is a corporation or partnership, the principal partners or owners shall be listed. “Principal partners or owners” means any person holding any interest larger than one percent of the total corporation or partnership. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.080 Application – Form and contents.

Application shall be made to the planning commission on forms furnished by the planning department and shall be full and complete, including such date as may be prescribed by the planning director to assist in determining the validity of the request. The applicant shall verify the application and the date of verification shall be noted on the application. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.090 Application – Supplemental data – Provisional plan.

In addition to the application, the applicant shall submit with his application 15 copies of a provisional site plan, elevations and architectural standards for the total development. Such plans shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate clearly and with full dimensions the following information:

A. Lot dimensions and lot elevations of subject property and adjacent property;

B. All buildings and structures; location, typical floor plans, building elevations, size, height, proposed use;

C. The relation to the existing buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area. Models, raised contour and/or relief displays may be required;

D. Yards and spaces between buildings;

E. Walls and fences, locations, height and materials;

F. Off-street parking, location, number of spaces and dimensions of parking area, internal circulation pattern;

G. Access; pedestrian, vehicular, service; points of ingress and egress;

H. Loading, location, dimensions, number of spaces, internal circulation;

I. Street dedication and improvements, if required;

J. Drainage pattern;

K. Trash collection system;

L. All public utilities installations including poles, transformers, generators, vaults and meters;

M. If residential units are included, a unit breakdown shall be provided indicating type of unit, size in square feet of each typical type of unit;

N. All other data as may be required by the planning director;

O. The following information shall be made a part of the application unless waived by the commission at the public hearing:

1. An economic feasibility study by an independent economic firm or city staff at no expense to the city; the subject form and report scope shall be approved by the planning director,

2. A school impact study by an independent firm or city or school district staff at no expense to the city, indicating the effect of the proposed development upon the public school system; the subject form and report scope shall be approved by the planning director,

3. A report to the planning director and city manager listing financial capabilities to accomplish the development proposed; such data shall be available to the planning director and city manager in a form adequate for their review and recommendation to the planning commission and/or city council as to the security of completing the development proposed,

4. A traffic impact study at no cost to the city, by a registered civil engineer experienced in traffic studies; such study shall include the impact of the proposed development on the surrounding area, the traffic potential to be generated by the development, the adequacy or inadequacy of existing streets and highways to safely carry the predicted traffic loads, necessary changes in the street system or design caused by the development, projected cost of such improvements not to be borne by the developer and such other information as may be required by the planning director in order to aid in making his decision; the form, content and scope of the study shall be approved by the planning director. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.100 Application – Filing fee.

When the application under this chapter for a change of classification is filed, the uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.110 Procedure – Generally.

The change of classification shall be determined pursuant to the procedure set forth in CMC 17.80.090 through 17.80.150 entitled “zone change” and the provisional plan shall be merged with the PCD district for the particular property so classified. A provisional plan which does not adhere to standards of development in the underlining zone may be approved when such plan fulfills the purpose of a PCD district. A change in the provisional plan enacted with a PCD district shall constitute a change in the zoning map, and such change shall be determined pursuant to CMC 17.80.080 through 17.80.150. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.120 Department investigation.

All city departments shall investigate the facts bearing on the use to provide the commission with data essential for action consistent with the intent of this chapter. Such data shall include cost of providing city service to the proposed development. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.130 Public hearing – Generally.

All provisions set forth in CMC 17.80.120, 17.80.130, 17.80.140 and 17.80.150 shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.140 Findings and conditions.

The city council in approving a planned community development district shall find as follows:

A. That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use;

B. That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and kind of traffic generated by the proposed use;

C. That the proposed use is not detrimental to the surrounding properties or uses permitted in the general area;

D. That the conditions stated in the decision are deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare; such conditions shall include, but not be limited to:

1. A time limit for development,

2. Regulation of use or uses,

3. Special yards, spaces and buffer areas,

4. Fences, walls and screening devices,

5. Surface of parking areas subject to specifications established by the council,

6. Required street, service road or alley dedication and improvements,

7. Regulation of points of vehicle ingress and egress,

8. Regulation of signs,

9. Required landscaping and maintenance thereof,

10. Regulation of noise, vibrations, odors, glare,

11. Required maintenance of grounds,

12. Regulation of time for certain activities during the construction phase and during the lifetime of the project,

13. Duration of use,

14. When there is more than one parcel of land involved, the land shall be recorded as one parcel for state and city code prior to issuance of the building permit,

15. Require bonding or financial guarantee of any requirements or conditions made a part of the approval by the council,

16. Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the use in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this chapter. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.150 Time limit for development.

The city council must establish a time limit within which the subject property and use shall be developed. The time limits shall be reasonable, based on the size and nature of the proposed development. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.160 Precise plan – Requirements generally.

No development of the subject site shall begin and no permits shall be issued in any case until a precise plan of planned community development has been approved by the planning department. In order that building structures, signs and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and appearances in the area and not obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly appearances, the applicant shall apply for and receive approval of a precise plan as provided for in Chapter 17.64 CMC, Site Plan Review. In addition to the requirements of that chapter, the planning department in reviewing the precise plan shall consider the following items in addition to those provided for in Chapter 17.64 CMC:

A. The total development plan showing all the dimensions and locations of proposed structures, buildings, streets, parking, yards, playgrounds, school sites, open spaces and other public or private facilities. The plan shall include a statement of all uses proposed to be established and the location of each use;

B. Architectural drawings or sketches showing the design and character of the proposed structures, uses and facilities and the physical relationship of all elements;

C. Detailed landscaping plans indicating type of material and size;

D. The size, type, location and design of all signs and advertising devices;

E. The colors and materials on the exterior of all buildings;

F. The type and pitch of roofs;

G. The size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings;

H. Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television masts;

I. Engineering site plans;

J. Other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine that the contemplated arrangement or use makes it desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable under this code;

K. The precise plan shall substantially conform to the provisional plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.170 Precise plan – Revocation.

Upon recommendation by the planning director the city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether such precise plan approval should be revoked. If the granting body finds any one of the following facts to be present, it shall revoke the approval:

A. That the approval was obtained by fraud; or

B. That the precise plan is being implemented contrary to any conditions imposed upon approval of the plan, or in violation of any law. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.180 Precise plan – Expiration.

Any precise plan approval permit shall be null and void if it is not exercised within the time specified in the resolution approving such precise plan, or, if no time is so specified, if the same is not exercised within one year from the date the approval becomes final; provided, that if litigation is filed prior to the exercise of such rights, attacking the validity of such approval, the time for exercising such rights shall be automatically extended pending a final determination of such litigation. The granting body, upon good cause shown by the applicant, may extend the time limitations imposed by this chapter once, for a period of not to exceed one year, without a public hearing. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.190 Precise plan – Modification.

Any condition imposed upon the approval of a precise plan may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided, that no such modification shall be made unless the planning director finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, or, in case of deletion of such a condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable development under the precise plan as approved. All such modifications shall be in substantial compliance with the provisional plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.200 Failure to give notice.

Failure to give notice in the manner hereinabove prescribed shall have no effect upon any proceeding before the commission or the council. (1964 Code Appx. A § 9.70.)


17.58.210 Site plan review.

The provisions of Chapter 17.64 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 1679 § 21, 1988.)


Chapter 17.59 MAINTENANCE OF REAL PROPERTY

(Repealed by Ord. 13-2018)


Chapter 17.60 PERMITTED USES

Sections:

17.60.010    Listed uses.

17.60.020    Unlisted uses – Generally.

17.60.025    Repealed.

17.60.030    Unlisted uses – Procedure.

17.60.040    Unlisted uses – Findings.


17.60.010 Listed uses.

Buildings, structures and land shall be used, designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged only for the purposes permitted in the zone in which such building or land is located and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law and ordinances. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.00.)


17.60.020 Unlisted uses – Generally.

It is recognized that, in the development of a comprehensive zoning ordinance:

A. Not all uses of land can be listed, nor can all future uses be anticipated; or

B. A “use” may have been omitted from the list of those specified as permissible in each of the various zones herein designated; or

C. Ambiguity may arise concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title.

Hence, the phrase, “plus such other uses as the commission and council may deem (pursuant to Chapter 17.60 CMC) to be similar and not more obnoxious and detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare,” appears in “permitted uses” in each zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.00.)


17.60.025 Unlisted and unpermitted use – Medical marijuana dispensary – Public nuisance declared – Violations.

Repealed by Ord. 17-09. (Ord. 13-2025 § 3, 2013; Ord. 13-2022 § 4, 2013.)


17.60.030 Unlisted uses – Procedure.

When an unlisted use is proposed for a particular zone or when classification of an unlisted use is requested, it shall be the duty of the commission to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning the use and by resolution of record set forth its findings and the reasons for designating a specific classification for such use. Such resolution shall be referred to the council and, if approved by the council, thereafter such designated classifications shall govern. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.00.)




17.60.040 Unlisted uses – Findings.

In permitting or classifying an unlisted use, the commission shall first make a finding that all of the following conditions exist:

A. That field investigations have disclosed that the subject use and its operation are compatible with the uses permitted in the zones wherein it is proposed to be located; and

B. That the subject use is similar to one or more uses permitted in the zone within which it is proposed to be located; and

C. That the subject use will not cause substantial injury to the values of property in the zone within which it is proposed to be located; and

D. That the subject will be so designed, located and operated that the public health, safety and general welfare will be protected. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.00.)


Chapter 17.61 SMOKE SHOPS AND TOBACCO STORES

Sections:

17.61.010    Purpose.

17.61.020    Definitions.

17.61.030    Zoning and land use standards for smoke shops and tobacco stores.

    Prior legislation: Ord. 14-2030.


17.61.010 Purpose.

The regulation of smoke shops and tobacco stores is necessary and in the interests of the public health, safety and general welfare because there is the substantial likelihood of the establishment and operation of smoke shops and tobacco stores in the city of Covina. The expansion of smoke shops and tobacco stores in the city would result in undesirable impacts to the community. Among these impacts are increased potential for tobacco sales to minors, greater opportunity for the sale of illegal drug paraphernalia that is marketed as tobacco paraphernalia, and heightened risk of negative aesthetic impacts, blight, and loss of property values of residential neighborhoods and businesses in close proximity to such uses. This chapter contains amendments consistent with good zoning and planning practices to address such negative impacts of smoke shops and tobacco stores while providing a reasonable number of locations and zones for such shops/stores to locate within the city of Covina. (Ord. 14-2031 § 6, 2014.)


17.61.020 Definitions.

“Ancillary sale” shall mean where a grocery store, supermarket, convenience store or similar market uses no more than two percent of its gross floor area, or 200 square feet, whichever is less, for the display, sale, distribution, delivery, offering, furnishing, or marketing of conventional cigars, cigarettes or tobacco. For any grocery store, convenience market, retail kiosk or similar use consisting of 250 square feet or less, “ancillary sale” shall mean where no more than five square feet are used for the display, sale, distribution, delivery, offering, furnishing, or marketing of conventional cigars, cigarettes or tobacco. The display, sale, distribution, delivery, offering, furnishing, or marketing of e-cigarettes or any other tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, regardless of square footage used, is subject to the restrictions of this chapter and shall not constitute ancillary sale” under any circumstances.

“E-cigarette” shall mean any electronically actuated device or inhaler meant to simulate cigarette smoking that uses a heating element to vaporize a liquid solution, popularly referred to as “juice,” and that causes the user to exhale any smoke, vapor, or substance other than that produced by unenhanced human exhalation. The juice used in e-cigarettes typically contains nicotine, and for this reason e-cigarettes and their juice can be classified as both tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia.

“Smoke shop and tobacco store” shall mean any premises dedicated to the display, sale, distribution, delivery, offering, furnishing, or marketing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia; provided, however, that any grocery store, supermarket, convenience store or similar retail use that only sells conventional cigars, cigarettes or tobacco as an ancillary sale shall not be defined as a “smoke shop and tobacco store” and shall not be subject to the restrictions in this chapter.

“Tobacco” shall mean any preparation of the nicotine-rich leaves of the tobacco plant, which are cured by a process of drying and fermentation for use in smoking, chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or ingesting by any other means into the body.

“Tobacco paraphernalia” shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment, device, or instrument that is primarily designed or manufactured for the smoking, chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or ingesting by any other means into the body of tobacco, tobacco products, or other controlled substances as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054 et seq. Items or devices classified as tobacco paraphernalia include but are not limited to the following: pipes, punctured metal bowls, bongs, water bongs, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers, hookahs, and devices for holding burning material. Lighters and matches shall be excluded from the definition of tobacco paraphernalia.

“Tobacco product” shall mean any product in leaf, flake, plug, liquid, or any other form, containing nicotine derived from the tobacco plant, or otherwise derived, which is intended to enable human consumption of the tobacco or nicotine in the product, whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “tobacco product” excludes any product that has been specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for sale as a tobacco/smoking cessation product or for other medical purposes, where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. (Ord. 14-2031 § 6, 2014.)


17.61.030 Zoning and land use standards for smoke shops and tobacco stores.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, smoke shops and tobacco stores shall be a conditionally permitted use only in the following zones, subject to the regulations contained in this chapter:

1. C-4 commercial zone (highway).

2. C-5 commercial zone (specified highway).

B. All smoke shops and tobacco stores wishing to operate within the above zones after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must obtain a conditional use permit (CUP) in accordance with Chapter 17.62 CMC.

C. Additional zoning and land use standards for smoke shops and tobacco stores shall be as follows:

1. Smoke shops and tobacco stores shall not be located within 300 feet, measured property line to property line, from a school (public or private), family day care home, child care facility, youth center, community center, recreational facility, park, church or religious institution, hospital, or other similar uses where children regularly gather.

2. Smoke shops and tobacco stores shall not be located within 500 feet, measured property line to property line, from another smoke shop and tobacco store.

3. It is unlawful for a smoke shop and tobacco store to knowingly allow or permit a minor, not accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, to enter or remain within any smoke shop and tobacco store.

4. Smoke shops and tobacco stores shall post clear signage stating that minors may not enter the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. At least one such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location near each public entrance to the smoke shop and tobacco store. It shall be unlawful for a smoke shop and tobacco store to fail to display and maintain, or fail to cause to be displayed or maintained, such signage.

D. Standard conditions of approval for any CUP shall, at minimum, include the following:

1. No smoking shall be permitted on the premises at any time.

2. No sales may be solicited or conducted on the premises by minors.

3. No self-service tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco paraphernalia displays shall be permitted.

4. No distribution of free or low-cost tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, as well as coupons for said items, shall be permitted.

E. Smoke shops and tobacco stores that are legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue to operate as legal nonconforming uses in accordance with Chapter 17.70 CMC and shall not be required to obtain a conditional use permit. However, any change or expansion of the legal nonconforming use may require compliance with this chapter and a conditional use permit, as more particularly set forth in Chapter 17.70 CMC. (Ord. 14-2031 § 6, 2014.)


Chapter 17.62 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:

17.62.010    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Permitted when.

17.62.020    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Additional standards.

17.62.025    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Automobile service stations in light manufacturing zone and commercial zones.

17.62.026    Sales – Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Liquor, on-sale and off-sale.

17.62.027    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Hotel or motel in C-P, C-3, C-3A and C-4 zones.

17.62.030    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Buildings exceeding height limit.

17.62.040    Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Additional uses.

17.62.050    Application – Filing.

17.62.060    Application – Form and contents.

17.62.070    Application – Not in scope.

17.62.080    Application – Filing fee.

17.62.090    Application – Department investigation.

17.62.100    Commission public hearing – Date and notice.

17.62.110    Commission public hearing – Decision.

17.62.120    Commission findings and conditions.

17.62.130    Appeal from commission decision.

17.62.140    Council public hearing – Date and notice.

17.62.150    Council public hearing – Decision.

17.62.160    Time limit for development.

17.62.170    Voiding permits.

17.62.180    Previously granted permits.

17.62.190    Administrative conditional use permits.

17.62.193    Repealed.

17.62.195    Recycling collection facilities.

17.62.200    Application – Filing.

17.62.210    Application – Form and contents.

17.62.230    Application – Filing fee.

17.62.240    Application – Department investigation.

17.62.250    Findings.

17.62.260    Appeals procedure.


17.62.010 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Permitted when.

Uses listed in the zones or sections of this title as permitted subject to conditional use permit may be so permitted when such uses are necessary to the development of the community and are in no way detrimental to surrounding properties or uses permitted in the zone. In granting the permit the commission may require certain safeguards and establish certain conditions to protect the health, safety and general welfare. Uses existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which are listed as permitted in this title, subject to a conditional use permit, in the zone in which they are located, may continue without securing such a permit; however, any extension or expansion of such use shall require a conditional use permit. This chapter shall not apply to conditional use permits granted pursuant to Ordinances 329, 326 and 317. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.020 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Additional standards.

Uses listed in the zones as “permitted subject to conditional use permit” may be permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter; however, the following uses shall also be subject to the standards of this section:

A. Drive-up facilities:

1. Shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all alleys, streets, highways and on-site collector roads;

2. Shall be located 50 feet away from any other buildings;

3. Shall be located so as to avoid pedestrian or vehicular conflict;

4. Shall not exceed a total area of 2,000 square feet;

5. Shall not contain more than 100 square feet of building;

6. Shall have one-way drive-up lanes at least 12 feet wide;

7. Entrances and exits shall be clearly marked and not conflict with the movement of traffic in and around the commercial center;

8. The building and roof materials shall be of a natural color, requiring no painting, and be designed in the same style as the primary buildings in the center. If no style has been established, the building shall complement the center;

9. Lighting shall be indirect and not reflect on adjoining property;

10. Five square feet of landscaping, enclosed in at least six-foot-wide planters with sprinkler system, shall be installed for each square foot of building area;

11. If the drive-up aisle is adjacent to a driving aisle, then the planter shall be at least 19 feet in length;

12. If the drive-up aisle is adjacent or parallel to parking stalls, then the planter shall be as long as the adjacent stall line;

13. Areas between drive-up aisles shall be landscaped;

14. Planters shall be enclosed by a six-inch-wide reinforced continuous curb at a height to be determined by the planning director;

15. One 15-gallon tree shall be required for each 100 square feet of required landscaping;

16. A detailed landscaping plan, including common and botanical plant names with quantity, size, height and spacing of each, shall be submitted;

17. Signs shall conform to the sign regulations, except that only wall signs shall be permitted and no roof signs or signs above the ceiling of the building shall be allowed; and not more than five percent of each wall may be devoted to signs;

18. One parking place shall be required for each employee on duty. If parking places have been deleted from the center property, they shall be replaced, unless a surplus of spaces exist, in which case a parking plan shall be submitted to the planning department showing how the overall property complies with city parking requirements;

19. All plans for drive-up facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the architectural board of review prior to the issuance of any permit or license;

20. All facilities and landscape areas shall be continuously maintained and kept free of trash and other debris.

B. Drop-off bins and facilities:

1. Shall be located in parking areas so as to avoid conflict with vehicular and pedestrian traffic;

2. Bins shall be set back at least 50 feet from all alleys, streets, highways and on-site collector roads;

3. Bins shall be located at least 50 feet from any buildings;

4. Bins shall be located on raised concrete pads at least six inches higher than the adjacent finished grade;

5. There shall be at least two feet of raised planter around each drop-off bin or facility.

C. Public Storage Facilities.

1. A report shall be submitted by applicant to the planning department showing the economic feasibility of the proposal in relation to other similar facilities in a five-mile radius.

2. All leases submitted by the public storage facility to the tenants shall include the requirement for periodic safety inspections by the city of Covina.

3. No building or structure shall be located within 25 feet of any property line abutting a street unless noted otherwise in this section. All such required yards shall be landscaped and sprinklered in accordance with a plan approved by the planning commission.

4. Permitted signs shall consist of one of the following:

a. A monument-type sign not to exceed an area of 50 square feet per face nor an overall height of 10 feet, and a setback not less than 10 feet; or

b. A wall sign not to exceed 100 square feet and mounted flat against the building.

5. The architectural character of the proposed structures shall be based upon the appropriate use of sound materials and upon the principles of harmony and proportion in the element of the structures. The buildings shall always be maintained in their original condition.

6. All materials used along the street frontage of the building face shall consist of an architectural-type masonry wall.

7. The roof element on all buildings fronting on all public streets shall be approved by the planning director.

8. A full-time, resident manager shall be required. The manager’s residence must have a minimum of 850 square feet and shall have a two-car garage.

9. Each public storage facility shall have an office separate from the residence and adequate public restroom facilities.

10. All utilities available on-site are not for use by tenants except for electric lighting. Method of control of these utilities to be approved by the city of Covina.

11. No uses permitted or conditionally listed in the M-1 zone will be allowed in the public storage facility other than that of the storage of goods by private parties or the storing of files or inventory by businesses. No storage facility will be used as a warehouse.

12. All limitations described above are to be written in the tenant lease. Failure by any tenant to adhere to the restrictions listed above can result in cancellation of lease.

13. One parking stall shall be provided at the main entrance for office visits. Temporary parking will be permitted throughout the facility; provided, that sufficient room between the parked cars be maintained to allow for normal traffic flow within the facility.

14. Whenever a public storage facility is discontinued for a period of 270 days or not maintained in a suitable condition, the permit may be voided.

15. All other police and fire department requirements not listed herein shall be complied with.

D. Compact parking stalls:

1. Shall be clearly marked with a minimum dimension of eight feet by 16 feet. Aisle widths may be reduced to no less than 22 feet for 90-degree parking where the aisle exclusively serves compact parking spaces (double loaded). If either row of a double loaded parking space is regular size, or the compact spaces are mixed with regular spaces, the aisle width shall be 25 feet minimum;

2. Shall only be located on lots or sites serving 20 or more automobiles;

3. Shall not be used to meet requirements for covered residential parking, but may be used to provide a portion of the required open residential parking in lots serving 20 or more vehicles;

4. At least 25 percent of the land areas saved through the utilization of compact parking spaces shall be developed with supplemental landscaping that is located within the remaining parking area.

E. Automobile Impound.

1. All vehicle storage areas shall be screened from view on adjacent property or public right-of-way with decorative block walls, landscaping, buildings or other structures. The planning commission may permit or require that the height of any screening walls be greater than otherwise permitted by this code provided no such wall shall exceed eight feet in height.

2. Vehicles shall not be stored above one another unless they are screened by approved enclosures having a height in excess of any vehicle stored above another vehicle.

3. Prior to or concurrent with the issuance of any conditional use permit for an automobile impound yard, the applicant for such a permit shall prepare a plan and take appropriate action for prevention of soil and ground water contamination.

4. All existing automobile impound and/or towing operations shall obtain conditional use permits or discontinue operation on or before July 1, 1992. (Ord. 18-05 § 7(a), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 7(a), 2017; Ord. 91-1730 § 1(I), 1991; Ord. 1643 § 5, 1987; Ord. 1593 § 4, 1985; Ord. 1438 § 22, 1979; Ord. 1386 § 8, 1978; Ord. 1274 § 2, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.025 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Automobile service stations in light manufacturing zone and commercial zones.

In addition to the provisions of CMC 17.62.020, automobile service stations may be permitted in light manufacturing zones and all commercial zones and shall meet the following standards:

A. This section shall not be so construed as to replace or reduce any minimum zoning, building, or other municipal code requirements of more general application; provided, however, that whenever the requirements of this section are more restrictive, or impose greater minimum requirements, the requirements of this section shall control.

B. Operations of automobile service stations shall be limited to the sale of motor fuels and lubricating oils, the sale of new and used tires, windshield wiper blades, fuel tank caps, radiator pressure caps, radiator hoses, hydraulic and cooling fluids, automobile lamp replacements, spark plugs, batteries, and other replacement parts. All service operations, with the exception of the sale and delivery of motor fuels, oil products, brake and cooling fluids, replacement of radiator and fuel caps and windshield wipers, shall be conducted within a building. Repairs or replacements requiring removal of transmission or differential, body and fender repair, painting, tire recapping, or upholstery are prohibited.

C. Hours of operation for the sale of motor fuels, lubricating oils, brake and cooling fluids, and such services and replacements as are permitted without the confines of a building, are unlimited. All servicing operations required to be within a building may be conducted at any time, unless the site is adjacent to a residential zone, in which case such services shall be limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

Delivery of products to an automobile service station may take place at any time, except where the site is adjacent to a residential zone, in which case the deliveries are prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

D.1. The minimum area of a site for an automobile service station shall be 22,500 square feet, with a minimum frontage of 150 linear feet on each adjacent street. There shall be constructed thereon a building of not less than 1,200 square feet, exclusive of canopies. An accessory structure of not less than 150 square feet may be provided, in addition to the above provision, when located beneath a canopy. All other accessory structures other than public telephone booths and trash areas are prohibited. The service station site engineer will provide to the staff an analysis of all site traffic flow when all available automobile stations are fully occupied.

2. The minimum area of a site for an automobile service station limited to self-service shall be 15,000 square feet, with a minimum frontage of 125 linear feet on each adjacent street. A “self-service station” shall mean a retail place of business limited to the sale of motor fuels, lubricating oils and hydraulic and cooling fluids. Repair or replacement services shall be prohibited as a function of self-service operations. There shall be constructed thereon a building of not less than 150 square feet when provided beneath the canopy or a building of not less than 600 square feet, exclusive of canopies, or both. All other accessory structures other than public telephone booths and trash areas are prohibited. The service station site engineer will provide to the staff an analysis of all site traffic flow when all available automobile stations are fully occupied. Operations of a self-service station shall be limited to the sale of motor fuels, lubricating oils and hydraulic and cooling fluids. Repair or replacement services shall be prohibited as a function of self-service operations.

E. Public restrooms shall be provided at all automobile service stations. All automobile stations shall provide during their business hours air and water facilities for their customers.

F. A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission to enable it to confirm that the proposed development of property for an automobile service station is in conformity with both the intent and provisions of this code. No building permit for the construction of an automobile service station shall be issued until a site plan for the total development of the property affected has been approved. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate clearly the following:

1. Property dimensions;

2. The location, size, height and proposed use of each building and structure;

3. The location and size of pump islands, pumps and display cabinets;

4. The location of canopies, roof overhangs and other structures;

5. The location, height and proposed materials of walls or fences;

6. The location, size and materials for construction of each refuse storage area;

7. The location and dimensions of all phone booths;

8. The type, size, height, coloring, lighting materials and details of constructions of all permanent signs, and the proposed location of all portable signs;

9. The location and type of landscaping proposed;

10. The location of all restrooms;

11. The location and type of lighting;

12. The location of all utilities, including the location of all poles, transformers, vaults, terminal boxes, meter cabinets and cable placements;

13. The type, location and purpose of all outdoor display or storage cabinets;

14. The location, number of spaces and dimensions of all off-street parking stalls, and the proposed internal circulation traffic patterns;

15. The location of all pedestrian, vehicular and service points of ingress and egress, and the dimensions thereof;

16. The location of all street dedications and off-site improvements;

17. Such other data as may be required by the planning department to permit the planning commission to make the required findings.

G. Every automobile service station located within the city hereafter remodeled or constructed, and notwithstanding whether or not such automobile service station shall be or has been heretofore required to comply with the provisions of this section, shall comply with the following regulations:

1. Buildings shall be located not less than 25 feet from street and five feet from interior property lines. If the interior property lines abut a residential zone, buildings shall set back 25 feet. If a driveway is provided at the rear of the buildings, it shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width;

2. Twenty-five percent of the building face area, other than doorways and windows, shall consist of ornamental masonry and other ornamental materials;

3. Pump islands shall be located not less than 20 feet from street and interior property lines;

4. There shall be a minimum distance between any two pump islands and between any pump island and any building of 20 feet measured from the centerline of such pump islands to the face of the building or measured from pump island to pump island;

5. No portion of any structure, other than one identification sign for each street frontage, shall project closer than five feet to any street or property line. A solid masonry wall or wall of other ornamental materials, identical to those used in the construction of the main building, shall be required on all interior property lines. Such walls shall be constructed to a height specified by the planning director at the time of the site review;

6. Refuse storage areas shall be enclosed on all sides by a solid masonry wall or wall of other ornamental material. Such areas shall be not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height, except for accessway, which shall be enclosed with solid, decorative gates. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a closed manner at all times to prohibit visibility from public rights-of-way or adjacent property;

7. Phone booths must be installed behind the building setback lines;

8. Signs for service stations in any permitted zone shall meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.74 CMC, Signs in Commercial Zones;

9. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of all debris and structures, excepting permitted identification signs and approved lighting facilities shown on the site plan. All landscaped areas shall include appropriate irrigation facilities and shall be continuously maintained and located as follows:

a. Raised planters not less than three feet in width shall be adjacent to all street rights-of-way except where driveway entrances exist and shall be tapered to allow for normal curve for driveway entrances,

b. Raised planters not less than five feet in width shall be located adjacent to interior property lines, which planters shall extend from public rights-of-way to the building setback line,

c. A raised planter containing not less than 650 square feet of landscaping shall be provided at the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way,

d. A minimum of 15 square feet of raised planter shall be provided along the building facade facing streets,

e. Raised planters shall not be less than six inches in height,

f. When required by the planning director, the property owner shall assume all costs incurred in securing the services of a landscape architect to review required landscaping as to type and arrangements;

10. All lights shall be hooded so as to prevent the reflection of lights upon abutting property;

11. All electrical, telephone, CATV and similar service wires or cables, which provide direct service to the property to be occupied by the automobile service station, shall, within the exterior boundary line of the affected property, be installed underground:

a. Risers on poles and buildings are permitted and shall be provided by the developer or owner onto the pole which provides service to the property,

b. The developer or owner shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities,

c. Appurtenances and associated equipment, such as, but not limited to, service mounted transformers, pedestal maintained terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed aboveground in an enclosed structure;

12. Outdoor display or storage of items for sale, rent or lease shall be prohibited except for the following:

a. Containers of oil, lubricants, polish, cleaners and the like may be stored in closeable cabinets on pump islands,

b. Tires may be stored in a single, closeable storage cabinet but such cabinet must be attached to the main building, not be placed in any setback area, and may not create a visual or circulatory obstruction,

c. Items for sale may be exhibited adjacent to the main building from facing streets so long as such items are not more than 36 inches in width, 48 inches in height and are located within 24 inches of the building face and are parallel thereto;

13. Parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of one stall for each employee on duty at any one time, plus three stalls for each service bay or roll-up door, whichever is greater, plus one stall for each service vehicle retained in conjunction with the operation of the automobile service station, plus one stall for each vehicle, trailer, truck or car normally held for rental from the premises;

14. No driveway opening shall be located within five feet of any interior property line, or within 20 feet of the beginning of any corner curb return measured along the street property line. Driveway openings shall be not less than 25 feet nor more than 40 feet in width, and there shall be a minimum distance between driveway openings of not less than 30 feet in length, with the curb separation between such openings appropriately painted to prohibit on-street parking;

15. No building permit shall be issued until required dedications of necessary rights-of-way, in accordance with the master plan of streets and highways, have been made and accepted by the city;

16. All improvements shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city, and all improvements of dedicated public rights-of-way shall be secured by appropriate bonds prior to the issuance of a building permit.

H. In addition to the sales activity and operations set forth above, an automobile service station may offer and consist of the following:

1. Hand washing of automobiles where an area of not more than 500 square feet is so used;

2. Rental of trailers, trucks and other such devices, limited to 25 percent of the site area, shall not interfere with the required parking or access and shall be located a minimum 15 feet from any street side property line;

3. Mini-mart or convenience store for the sale of beverages, packaged food, tobacco and similar convenience goods for gasoline supply customers.

I. In addition to the sale activity and operations set forth in this section, a newly constructed, redesigned or remodeled facility for the purpose of a self-service station may engage in the sale of beverages, packaged food, tobacco and similar convenience goods, so long as all products for sale are displayed and merchandised within a building designed for the sale of such items.

1. Parking shall be provided on the basis of one stall for every 200 square feet of gross floor area;

2. Ingress and egress to fuel islands and to the facility must be mutually exclusive.

J. Whenever an automobile service station is discontinued for a period of 180 days, such automobile service station structure and grounds shall be continually maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or shall be removed by the owner if not maintained. (Ord. 18-05 § 7(b), 2018; Ord. 17-17 § 9, 2017; Ord. 17-14 § 7(b), 2017; Ord. 1631 §§ 1 – 4, 1986; Ord. 1565 § 1, 1984.)


17.62.026 Sales – Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Liquor, on-sale and off-sale.

A. The following establishments shall obtain a conditional use permit and are subject to the requirements of this section:

1. Establishments that do not currently but propose to sell liquor;

2. Establishments that currently sell liquor but which propose to change the type of liquor to be sold by changing the type of retail liquor license within a license classification;

3. All establishments that currently sell liquor, if the establishment substantially changes its mode or character of operation, which includes, but is not limited to:

a. An increase in floor area; or

b. A 10 percent increase in facing used for the display of liquor; and

4. Establishments which have either been abandoned or discontinued operation which sells liquor for a period of 90 days. For purposes of this section only, a liquor, on-sale or off-sale, establishment, which has received an approved conditional use permit, shall not be deemed to be abandoned or discontinued if such establishment ceases operation due to war, insurrection, riots, floods, earthquakes, fire, casualties or similar causes which are strictly beyond the control and without fault of the owner of the establishment.

B. In addition to the findings required pursuant to CMC 17.62.120(A), prior to approving a conditional use permit for any type of liquor sales use, the planning commission must find as follows:

1. With respect to liquor, on-sale establishments:

a. That the requested use does not fall within 700 feet, measured from property line of the proposed use to the property line of a use for religious worship, school, park, playground, residential or any similar sensitive use; and

b. That the requested use does not fall within 700 feet, measured from property line of the proposed use to the property line of an existing liquor, on-sale use; and

c. That the requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the nearby community; and

d. That the exterior appearance of the structure of the proposed use will not be inconsistent with the exterior appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood as to cause blight, deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood.

2. With respect to liquor, off-sale establishments:

a. That the requested use does not fall within 700 feet, measured as a pedestrian travels, from a place used exclusively for religious worship, school, park, playground, residential or any similar sensitive use, subject to subsection (B)(2)(a)(i) of this section:

i. That the planning commission may find that the public convenience and necessity for the proposed use outweigh the distance restrictions of subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section, upon additional findings that:

(A) The immediate neighborhood requires and needs such services;

(B) Not greater than five percent of the sales floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for the display or sale of alcoholic beverages;

b. That the requested use does not fall within 700 feet, measured as a pedestrian travels, from the proposed use to the property line of an existing liquor, off-sale use, subject to subsection (B)(2)(b)(i) of this section;

i. That the planning commission may find that the public convenience and necessity for the proposed use outweigh the distance restrictions of subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section, upon additional findings that:

(A) The immediate neighborhood requires and needs such services;

(B) Not greater than five percent of the sales floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for the display or sale of alcoholic beverages;

c. That the requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the nearby community; and

d. That the exterior appearance of the structure of the proposed use will not be inconsistent with the exterior appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as to cause blight or deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood.

3. With respect to liquor, on-sale, in conjunction with lodges or meeting halls:

a. That the requested use does not fall within 700 feet, as a pedestrian travels, from a place used exclusively for religious worship, school, park, playground, residential or any similar sensitive use, subject to subsection (B)(3)(a)(i) of this section:

i. The planning commission may find that the public convenience and necessity for the proposed use outweigh the distance restrictions of subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section, upon additional findings that:

(A) The immediate neighborhood requires and needs such services;

b. That the requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the nearby community; and

c. That the exterior appearance of the structure of the proposed use will not be inconsistent with the exterior appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as to cause blight or deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood.

C. Subsection (B) of this section shall not apply to liquor on-sale, in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment or hotel use with on-sale liquor as an ancillary use. (Ord. 19-04 §§ 10 – 13, 2019; Ord. 08-1951 § 1, 2008; Ord. 01-1884 § 1, 2001; Ord. 93-1748 § 11, 1993.)


17.62.027 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Hotel or motel in C-P, C-3, C-3A and C-4 zones.

In addition to the provisions of CMC 17.62.020, a hotel permitted in the C-P, C-3, C-3A and C-4 zones pursuant to this chapter shall obtain a conditional use permit and shall meet the following standards:

A. Aesthetics/Design.

1. The development shall utilize materials that project an image of permanence and beauty. Such materials which are, but not limited to, brick, stone, tile, marble, granite, concrete, steel and glass must be incorporated around all building sides.

2. Large areas of unbroken walls shall be broken up through the use of varied heights and setbacks, arrangement of colors or facade elements, and/or landscaping treatments.

3. The hotel must be designed to an appropriate scale, size, type, and color of materials in order to achieve consistency with surrounding buildings and uses.

4. Pedestrian walkways within the development shall be enhanced with landscaped setbacks, planters, trees, stamped concrete, and other decorative elements.

B. Layout.

1. Each hotel shall have at least 25 rooms, and no room shall be less than 280 square feet.

2. Hotel rooms may include kitchens. However, no room shall be rented to any person for continuous occupancy for more than four months.

3. In terms of size, the lobby shall be at least 300 square feet plus 25 square feet for each five rooms. The lobby must be designed so as to be conveniently accessible to all entrances and corridors. The location of the front desk shall facilitate employee and guest activities.

4. The development shall contain an adequate amount of storage, janitorial, and related space to accommodate all maintenance and procurement operations.

5. The main entrance shall be clearly visible from the abutting street and/or principal driveway area.

C. Setbacks.

1. The following setback provisions shall be followed:

	 	 	Abutting or Adjacent to Residential-Zoned Property	Abutting or Adjacent to Nonresidential-Zoned Property

	Front	 35 feet	25 feet

	Side	 	 

	 	Street	25 feet	20 feet

	 	Interior	25 feet	15 feet

	Rear	25 feet for a two-story hotel or 35 feet in building height measured from the peak or parapet of the roof; for each foot of building height above 35 feet add 1.5 feet of building setback up to a maximum of 60 feet	25 feet

2. There shall be a minimum five feet of landscaped buffer around all sides of parking lots not abutting or adjacent to a residential zone.

D. Parking and Circulation.

1. Repealed by Ord. 18-05.

2. If a structure is utilized, said structure shall contain an element of building materials and colors that are incorporated in the main building.

3. There shall be provided a separate drop-off area for hotel guests located at the main entrance. The drop-off area must not interfere with the principal driveway network.

4. Parking spaces shall be located in areas that are readily accessible to all rooms and any ancillary uses.

E. Landscaping.

1. A minimum of 10 percent of the total site shall be landscaped. This figure includes the landscaping required in setbacks.

2. All trees shall be as follows: 30 percent – 24-inch box and 17-1/2 percent – 48-inch box. All shrubs must be at least five-gallon in size. Larger trees and shrubs shall be located at all vehicular and pedestrian entrances plus focal points on the site.

3. All areas around buildings, exclusive of walkways, driveways, and parking stalls, shall be landscaped.

4. The provisions subsection (A)(4) of this section shall be followed.

5. The provisions of subsection (C)(2) and (3) of this section shall be followed.

6. The provisions of subsection (F)(1) of this section shall be followed.

F. Amenities.

1. Each development shall include a pool and/or spa with an adjacent seating area. The pool and seating area must be buffered from any driveway, parking stall, or pedestrian walkway by a minimum seven and one-half foot wide landscaped strip. Also, pool areas shall be entirely enclosed by a five-foot to six-foot-high security fence composed of wrought iron and/or brick, or other ornamental materials.

2. A minimum of 10 square feet of conference meeting area for each guest room shall be provided. Such room(s) shall be conveniently accessible to kitchen and service areas.

3. Each development may include the following ancillary uses: cafes, grab and go markets, gift shops, on-sale liquor, business services, and fitness centers.

G. Miscellaneous.

1. A decorative six-foot-high masonry wall shall be provided along each interior property line. The height shall be reduced to three feet and set back 10 feet from any exterior property line.

2. For each 25 rooms, there shall be at least one trash enclosure. Additional trash enclosures for ancillary uses shall be provided according to staff and/or planning commission determination.

3. All outside lighting shall be hooded so as not to shine on abutting properties.

4. A market feasibility study shall be submitted with the project application. (Ord. 19-04 §§ 14, 15, 2019; Ord. 18-05 § 7(c), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 7(c), 2017; Ord. 1678 § 3, 1988; Ord. 1671 § 2, 1988.)


17.62.030 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Buildings exceeding height limit.

Buildings and structures exceeding the height limit stated in the zone may be permitted subject to conditional use permit, except in the A and various R-1 zones. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.040 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit – Additional uses.

In addition to the provisions of CMC 17.62.020 and 17.62.030, the following uses may be permitted pursuant to this chapter in any zone except where expressly prohibited, when such uses are deemed by the commission to be essential or desirable for the public welfare and convenience and in conformity with the general plan and its objectives. In no case shall a conditional use permit be granted in any zone for a use specifically prohibited in the zone within which the subject property is located:

A. Airport or aircraft landing facilities;

B. Cemeteries, buildings, apparatus or appurtenances;

C. Development of natural resources, with necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances thereto, except:

1. Drilling or production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances;

2. Extraction or production of rock and/or gravel;

D. Golf courses and/or driving ranges;

E. Hospitals;

F. Radio and/or television antennas and/or transmitters (commercial); wireless communication facilities and similar equipment, Chapter 17.65 CMC shall apply; satellite or disc antennas shall be screened at ground level from adjacent properties in the manner provided for by the planning commission;

G. Regional uses which serve persons in a regional area as well as in the city, including but not limited to the following:

1. Regional shopping centers;

2. Regional recreation centers;

H. Riding stable or academy;

I. Shopping centers, planned as integrated developments;

J. Stadia;

K. Governmental facilities;

L. Public utility structures;

M. Planned integrated housing developments if the planning commission, in addition to the findings required by CMC 17.62.120, finds all of the following:

1. The proposed site is not less than five acres in area prior to subdivision;

2. At least 20 percent of the total area of the site, not including parts set aside for streets, is set aside to be developed and maintained as a common area;

3. Each dwelling unit proposed to be constructed has appurtenant to it private open space, open to light and air, at one of the following ratios:

a. If a single-family dwelling unit, 300 square feet,

b. If in a duplex or triplex building, for each dwelling unit, 200 square feet,

c. If in a single building larger than a triplex, for each dwelling unit, 150 square feet;

4. The proposed density does not exceed one and one-half times that permitted in the zone in which the site is located;

N. In any commercial or industrially zoned property, the keeping of sentry dogs, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25971, in accordance with the requirements and provisions of Chapter 13, Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code commencing with Section 25970.

In granting a conditional use permit under this subsection, the planning commission shall prescribe such other property development standards as may be necessary, which standards, as far as possible, shall conform to the property development standards of the zone in which the site is located. (Ord. 11-1996 § 7, 2011; Ord. 98-1826 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1594 § 5, 1985; Ord. 1325 § 8, 1976; Ord. 1275 § 2, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.050 Application – Filing.

Application for a conditional use permit shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the permit is sought, or by the authorized representative of the owner. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.060 Application – Form and contents.

Application shall be made to the planning commission on forms furnished by the planning department and shall be full and complete, including such data as may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request. The applicant shall verify the application and the date of verification shall be noted on the application. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.070 Application – Not in scope.

In cases where the planning director considers the reasons and conditions as set forth on the application not within the scope of the conditional use permit or that the application is incomplete, the applicant shall be so informed; whereupon, if the application is filed and the fees are accepted, the application shall be signed by the applicant to the effect that he was so informed. Acceptance of an application does not constitute an indication of approval. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.080 Application – Filing fee.

When the application for a conditional use permit is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid for defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

When the application under this chapter for a change of classification is filed, the uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 1694 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1357 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.090 Application – Department investigation.

The planning department shall investigate the facts bearing on the case to provide the commission with data essential for action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.100 Commission public hearing – Date and notice.

A. After an application for a conditional use permit is deemed complete, the planning director shall set the matter for a public hearing to be held by the planning commission.

B. Notice of public hearing shall be given in all the following ways, and shall contain the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use of the subject property:

1. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 10 days before the date set for the hearing;

2. Not less than 10 days prior to the date of any hearing, the planning director shall cause a copy of a notice containing the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use of the subject property to be mailed to the applicant and to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest available assessment roll of the county, or are known to the planning director, as owning property within a distance of 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the subject property. (Ord. 16-2061 § 6, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1388 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1228 § 1, 1973; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.110 Commission public hearing – Decision.

A. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice.

B. The commission shall announce its decision at a regular meeting or scheduled special meeting within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall approve, approve with stated conditions or disapprove the application and shall set forth the findings of the commission and any such conditions, including a time limit for development, deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons in the neighborhood and in the city as a whole.

C. The decision shall immediately be filed with the council and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the petitioner at the address shown on the petition. (Ord. 16-2061 § 7, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.120 Commission findings and conditions.

The commission in approving a conditional use permit shall find as follows:

A. That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and all yards, spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and other features required by this title to adjust the use with land and uses in the neighborhood;

B. That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and kind of traffic generated by the proposed use;

C. That the proposed use will have no adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof;

D. That the conditions stated in the decision are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions may include:

1. Regulation of use,

2. Special yards, spaces and buffers,

3. Fences and walls,

4. Surfacing of parking areas subject to city specifications,

5. Requiring street, service road or alley dedications and improvements or appropriate bonds,

6. Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress,

7. Regulation of signs,

8. Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof,

9. Requiring maintenance of the grounds,

10. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc.,

11. Regulation of time for certain activities,

12. Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed,

13. Duration of use,

14. And such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner and conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this title. (Ord. 1369 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.130 Appeal from commission decision.

The decision of the commission shall become final at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day next succeeding the date of decision unless, prior to that hour, an appeal to the council is filed in writing in the office of the city clerk.

Appeals may be initiated by:

A. The applicant;

B. An owner of real property, any part of which is located within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the subject property;

C. A member of the city council. If the appeal is initiated by a member of the council, not an applicant or an owner within the meaning of subsection (B) of this section, such initiation of appeal shall not be effective unless approved by a majority of the elected members of the council acting at the next regular meeting of the council following the date of filing of such appeal. Such initiation of appeal shall be considered without public hearing or discussion of the merits of the matter by the council;

D. The filing of an appeal within the time limit herein specified shall stay the order of the commission and the issuance of any permits predicated thereon until the council has either acted thereon, as provided in CMC 17.62.150, or until a majority of the council has failed to approve an appeal by a member of the council, whichever date first occurs;

E. The fee for an appeal of the planning commission’s decision shall be 90 percent of the current application fee for a conditional use permit, except in subsection (C) of this section, in which case there will be no fee;

F. If the appeal of the permits is approved in whole or part by the city council, the appeal fee will be reimbursed in full. (Ord. 1612 § 1, 1986; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.140 Council public hearing – Date and notice.

A. The hearing date shall be set by the city clerk and shall be held not more than 30 days after the expiration date for the filing of an appeal.

B. Notice shall be given as provided in CMC 17.62.100(B). (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.150 Council public hearing – Decision.

A. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice. The appellant shall present at the hearing information and data in support of the appeal.

B. The council shall, within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing sustain, reverse or modify the commission’s decision by resolution, setting forth the findings, listed in CMC 17.62.120, and any conditions of approval deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons in the neighborhood and in the city as a whole. The council may establish a time limit for development, as provided in CMC 17.62.160. In adding to, modifying or reversing the commission decision, the affirmative votes of not less than three members of the council shall be required on each conditional use permit so acted upon.

C. Notification of the council action shall be mailed to the petitioner at the address shown on the petition. (Ord. 16-2061 § 8, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.160 Time limit for development.

The commission and/or council may establish a time limit within which the subject property and use shall be developed. The time limits shall be reasonable, based on the size and nature of the proposed development. The commission may grant one extension of time, not to exceed one year from the time limit specified without public hearing. Any additional request for an extension of the time limit shall be treated as a new application for a conditional use permit. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.170 Voiding permits.

A. The council, with or without a recommendation from the commission, may by resolution, upon notice and hearing as specified herein, void any conditional use permit for noncompliance with the conditions set forth in granting the conditional use permit. Notice of intent to void specifying the reasons therefor and containing a time and place of the hearing shall be given to the permittee not less than 20 days before the specified date. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in CMC 17.62.100(B).

B. Notification of the council action shall be mailed to the petitioner and shall include a copy of the council resolution specifying the reasons for voiding the conditional use permit.

C. If an established time for development expires, the conditional use permit shall be considered void if no extension of time, from the time specified, has been granted in the manner provided for in CMC 17.62.160.

D. Where the use which is the subject of a conditional use permit is replaced or discontinued for a period of 180 days, then the conditional use permit shall be considered void. (Ord. 1657 § 2, 1987; Ord. 1355 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.180 Previously granted permits.

Any conditional use permit granted pursuant to any zoning ordinance enacted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be construed to be a conditional use permit under this title subject to all conditions imposed in such permit unless otherwise provided herein. Such permit may, however, be voided as provided in CMC 17.62.170. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.10.)


17.62.190 Administrative conditional use permits.

When in the public interest and agreed to by the applicant, the city manager or his/her designee may, without publishing, posting or mailing of notice and without public hearing, consider and render decisions on conditional use permits involving the following uses:

A. Temporary Fund-Raising Activities. Where said activity does not exceed three total days of operation per nonprofit organization within any six-month period and when sponsored by a civic, religious, educational, fraternal or charitable organization.

B. Promotional Sales Activities.

1. Where said activity, within a six-month period, does not exceed 10 consecutive days of operation and when conducted as a temporary extension of the store’s normal retail sales in a neighborhood shopping center, regional shopping center or community shopping center, and upon the same premises.

2. Where said activity does not exceed three consecutive days of operation within any three-month period and when conducted at a neighborhood shopping center, regional shopping center or community shopping center, and the product being sold is not sold by any retailers in the shopping center.

C. Seasonal Sales Activities. Where said activities do not exceed three days of operation within any three-month period when conducted as an advertising feature in connection with a retail commercial business. However, certain seasonal activities which occur only once during the year may be conducted for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days within any 12-calendar-month period.

D. Minor wireless communication facilities and similar equipment, Chapter 17.65 CMC shall apply.

E. Mobile food facilities in those zones where permitted, subject to the following conditions:

1. The mobile food facility operator must have the express written permission of the site owner and the on-site business owner, if different, where it intends to operate;

2. The mobile food facility operator must possess a valid permit, certificate or other required approval from the Los Angeles County department of public health to sell food and/or beverages to the public;

3. All food products sold or provided from the mobile food facility shall comply with all applicable food labeling requirements established by the state of California and the operator must obtain all required permits, including without limitation health permits, to sell or provide such items;

4. The mobile food facility operator must possess a valid city of Covina business license;

5. While the mobile food facility is occupying the site, there must be sufficient remaining off-street parking to meet minimum requirements under the Covina Municipal Code and the mobile food facility may not obstruct access to the remaining off-street parking;

6. The mobile food facility may not sell or distribute any item in a manner than causes any person to stand in a public highway, alley or street;

7. No portion of a mobile food facility may encroach onto a public sidewalk, including any signage, equipment or furniture related to its operations;

8. No alcoholic beverages, general merchandise or commercial sales other than food are permitted from a mobile food facility;

9. No amplified music or other sound may be emitted from a mobile food facility;

10. A mobile food facility may only sell food to the public between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day; provided, however, that a mobile food facility may occupy the site for up to one hour prior to opening and up to one hour after closing in order to set up and take down operations for that day. No mobile food facility shall remain on the site at any time before or after the hours listed above;

11. No mobile food facility shall discharge any liquid (e.g. water, grease, oil, etc.) onto the site or into any public streets, storm drains, catch basins, or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the operator;

12. An operator shall maintain a clearly designated litter receptacle in the immediate vicinity of the mobile food facility, marked with a sign requesting use by patrons. Prior to leaving the site, the operator shall pick up, remove and dispose of all trash generated by the operation located within a 25-foot radius of the mobile food facility’s location;

13. An operator shall comply with all applicable state and local laws regarding mobile food facilities;

14. Such other conditions as the city manager, or his/her designee may require to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community.

An operator seeking an administrative conditional use permit for a mobile food facility shall pay an application fee of $600.00.

F. Model Home Sales Office. Model homes may be used as offices solely for the sale of homes within a new subdivision or recorded tract, subject to the following conditions:

1. Approval of a model home sales office shall be for a two-year period. Upon the expiration of the two-year period, the model home sales office use shall be terminated and the structure restored back to its original condition. Extensions may be granted by the director of community development in one-year increments up to a maximum of two additional years or until 90 percent of the development is sold, whichever is less.

2. The subdivider shall submit to the city a cash deposit, letter of credit, or other security determined satisfactory by the city to ensure the restoration of the residential dwelling unit and removal of the model home sales office use.

3. The model home sales office is to be used only for transactions involving the sale, rental, or lease of lots or structures within the subdivision or tract in which the model home sales office is located.

4. The subdivider’s failure to remove a model home sales office and restore residential dwelling unit, or failure to apply for an extension of the administrative conditional use permit before the expiration of the permit, will result in the subdivider’s forfeiture of the security provided and a halt in further construction or inspection activity on the project site, and may result in an enforcement action to ensure restoration of the residential dwelling unit.

5. The subdivider shall complete street improvements and provide temporary parking at a rate of two spaces per model home sales office to the satisfaction of the director of community development prior to commencement of sales activities and prior to the display of any model homes. The parking spaces shall be located within an off-street facility, subject to the following conditions:

a. The model home sales office, model homes, and on-street parking spaces shall be coordinated with the construction phasing such that there are no resident homeowners living in the homes located adjacent to the gated and secured areas of the street;

b. The parking spaces shall be striped and shall conform to the city’s applicable standards; and

c. The model homes, model home sales office, and on-street parking shall be secured with a decorative fence and gate across the street that is kept locked during nonoperating hours.

6. The subdivider shall provide an area for off-street overflow parking to the satisfaction of the director of community development. The overflow parking area shall be located adjacent to the model home sales office, in an outside secured area, appropriately signed, and provided with a drive approach constructed to applicable city standards.

7. The subdivider shall provide temporary landscaping, including a minimum of 36-inch box trees, within the on-street parking area and a planter area surrounding the overflow parking area.

8. Parking shall be permitted only within and on the project site. Parking along adjacent or perimeter streets shall not be used to satisfy the model home sales office parking requirements.

9. All fences proposed in conjunction with model homes and model home sales offices shall be constructed and installed outside of the public right-of-way.

10. Flags, pennants, or other on-site advertising shall be regulated in accordance with the city’s sign regulations. The use of signs shall require submittal of a separate sign permit application for review and approval by the planning division prior to installation.

G. Other Temporary Activities. Other temporary activities that the director of community development deems to be similar in nature and intensity to those identified in this section. (Ord. 17-17 § 10, 2017; Ord. 14-2034 § 5, 2014; Ord. 00-1866, 2000; Ord. 98-1826 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


17.62.193 Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.

Repealed by Ord. 11-1996. (Ord. 98-1826 § 3, 1998.)


17.62.195 Recycling collection facilities.

A. Definitions.

1. “Recyclable material” is reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code.

2. “Recycling facility” is a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following:

a. Collection Facility. A “collection facility” is a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in subsection (C) of this section, Criteria and Standards. Collection facilities may include the following:

i. Reverse vending machine(s);

ii. Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than 500 square feet, and may include: 

(A) A mobile unit,



(B) Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet,

(C) Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures,

(D) Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials;

iii. Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures.

b. Processing Facility. A “processing facility” is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. “Processing” means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:

i. A “light processing facility” occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

ii. A “heavy processing facility” is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

3. “Reverse vending machine” is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically; provided, that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

A “bulk reverse vending machine” is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and will pay by weight instead of by container.

4. “Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

B. Permits Required. No person shall permit the placement, construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining an administrative conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in the code.

C. Criteria and Standards. Those recycling facilities permitted with an administrative conditional use permit shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards listed. Those recycling facilities permitted with a conditional use permit or site plan review shall meet the applicable criteria and standards; provided, that the city planner, planning commission, or city council, as the case may be, may relax such standards or impose stricter standards as an exercise of discretion upon a finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this section.

1. Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machine(s) located within a commercial structure do not require discretionary permits. Reverse vending machines do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers and may be permitted in all commercial and industrial zones with an administrative use permit; provided, that they comply with the following standards:

a. Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

b. Shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

c. Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use;

d. Shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height;

e. Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

f. Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

g. Shall have a sign area of maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions;

h. Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

i. Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use;

j. Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn;

k. All outdoor storage shall be screened from view and materials shall not be stored higher than any screening fence or wall.

2. Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be sited in commercial and industrial zones with an administrative permit provided they comply with the following conditions:

a. Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

b. Shall be no larger than 500 square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers;

c. Shall be set back at least 50 feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

d. Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with permission of the local public health official;

e. Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines;

f. Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule;

g. Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present;

h. Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day;

i. Shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA;

j. Attended facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.;

k. Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use;

l. Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers;

m. Signs may be provided as follows:

i. Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of 20 percent per side or 16 square feet, whichever is larger, in addition to informational signs required in subsection (C)(2)(l) of this section; in the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the containers,

ii. Signs must be consistent with the character of the location,

iii. Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the city planner if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way,

iv. The city planner may authorize increases in the number and size of signs upon findings that it is compatible with adjacent businesses;

n. The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinances for any concurrent use by this title or any permit issued pursuant thereto;

o. No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed;

p. Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present;

q. Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist:

i. The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation,

ii. A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site,

iii. The permit will be reconsidered at the end of 18 months.

A reduction in required parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed by the planning commission subject to a conditional use permit. Any such reduction shall not exceed:

	Number of Available Parking Spaces	Maximum Reduction

	0 – 25	0

	26 – 35	2

	36 – 49	3

	50 – 99	4

	100+	5

r. If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration.

3. Large Collection Facilities. A large collection facility is one that is larger than 500 square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, and which may have a permanent building. A large collection facility is permitted in neighborhood commercial zones with a minor use permit and in other commercial and industrial zones with a site development permit, provided the facility meets the following standards:

a. Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use;

b. Facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or:

i. Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping,

ii. At least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for residential use, and

iii. Meets all applicable noise standards in this section;

c. Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located;

d. All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the San Gabriel Valley fire authority. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

e. Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

f. Space will be provided on-site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the city planner determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety;

g. One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements will be provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility;

h. Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA;

i. If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

j. Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

k. Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

l. Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the city planner, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way;

m. Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved through a use permit process or at the discretion of the city planner if noise and other conditions are met.

4. Processing Facilities. A processing facility is permitted in light industrial zones with a conditional use permit and site plan review.

A processor will meet the following conditions:

a. Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use or a noise sensitive use, such as hospital, school, etc.;

b. Processors will operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage, or:

i. Within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque fence or wall not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages,

ii. Located at least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for residential use;

c. Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials;

d. A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code;

e. Setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located;

f. All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the San Gabriel Valley fire authority. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

g. Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present;

h. Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of 10 customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the city planner determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety;

i. One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located;

j. Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA;

k. If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned or planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open;

l. Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

m. Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. Facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

n. Sign requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. In addition, facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation;

o. No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties. (Ord. 1647 § 9, 1987.)


17.62.200 Application – Filing.

Application for an administrative conditional use permit shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the permit is sought, or by the authorized representative of the owner. (Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


17.62.210 Application – Form and contents.

Application shall be made to the planning director on forms furnished by the planning department and shall be full and complete, including such data as may be prescribed by the director to assist in determining the validity of the request. The applicant shall verify the application and the date of verification shall be noted on the application. (Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


17.62.230 Application – Filing fee.

When the application for administrative conditional use permit is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid for defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings. Exemptions from the filing fee are fund-raising events held by civic, religious, fraternal, and educational organizations, as determined by the city.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 05-1922 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1694 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


17.62.240 Application – Department investigation.

The applicant shall provide the facts bearing on the case to provide the director with data essential for action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan. (Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


17.62.250 Findings.

The planning director in approving a conditional use permit shall find:

A. That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use;

B. That the proposed use will have no adverse effects on abutting property or the permitted use thereof;

C. That the approval of such application shall be made subject to conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions may include:

1. Regulation of use,

2. Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress,

3. Requiring maintenance of the grounds,

4. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc.,

5. Regulation of time and date of operation, setup and maintenance,

6. Any such other conditions as will ensure the protection of the adjacent property and the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


17.62.260 Appeals procedure.

The decision of the planning director shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission and city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the planning director within 10 days after the decision, and shall be placed on the agenda of the commission’s next regular meeting. The commission shall review the application and shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval, based on findings listed in CMC 17.62.250 and shall report its recommendations to the council. The council shall, at its next regular meeting after receipt of the commission’s recommendation, review the application and shall approve, approve with conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or disapprove it, based on findings listed in CMC 17.62.250. (Ord. 1275 § 1, 1974.)


Chapter 17.63 FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES

Sections:

17.63.010    Purpose and intent.

17.63.020    Child care – Small family day care homes.

17.63.030    Child care – Large family day care homes.

17.63.040    Application – Large family day care homes.

17.63.050    Notice – Large family day care homes.

17.63.060    Hearing – Large family day care homes.

17.63.070    Approval – Large family day care homes.

17.63.080    Noncompliance – Large family day care homes.


17.63.010 Purpose and intent.

This chapter is intended to accommodate the development of facilities for child care, health care, and social services by establishing standards and conditions which enable such facilities to be created in accordance with state law and which also protect the character and integrity of surrounding property and neighborhoods. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.020 Child care – Small family day care homes.

Small family day care homes providing care for six or fewer children are a permitted use in all residential districts provided the operator has and maintains the appropriate license from the state of California. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.030 Child care – Large family day care homes.

Large family day care homes providing care for seven to 12 children shall be permitted in all residential, estate and agricultural districts; provided, that the home obtains a city permit and complies with the conditions listed in CMC 17.63.070. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.040 Application – Large family day care homes.

Applications for large family day care homes shall be filed with the community development department together with a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council. Application shall be accompanied by information and materials determined necessary by the community development department and reasonably related to areas of lawful city concern and authority, including but not limited to a site plan, a floor plan, a drop-off and pick-up plan, and documentation showing that all requirements for licensing have been met. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.050 Notice – Large family day care homes.

Within 10 calendar days after the application has been deemed complete, written notice of the proposed child care facility and information regarding the time limits to request a hearing by the planning commission shall be sent to all property owners and residents within a 100-foot radius, as well as to the planning commission and the city council. Requests for a hearing made by members of the public shall be in writing and submitted to the chief planning official. If, within 15 calendar days after notice has been mailed, no requests for a hearing have been received, the chief planning official shall approve the application; provided, that the conditions in CMC 17.63.070 have been met. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.060 Hearing – Large family day care homes.

If a request for a hearing has been submitted to the chief planning official, a date shall be set not less than 30 calendar days and not more than 60 calendar days from the date the notice was sent. At the hearing, the planning commission shall consider the information submitted in the application and the comments of the applicant and affected citizens. If the commission determines that the conditions listed in CMC 17.63.070 have been met, it shall grant approval of the application. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.070 Approval – Large family day care homes.

A large family day care home shall be approved if the facility meets the following requirements:

A. The facility must comply with all applicable child care, health, safety, and welfare regulations and receive and keep current a state license for the specific facility and number of children.

B. A large family day care home shall not locate within 600 feet of a similar facility provided for under state law, including smaller facilities. The planning commission may reduce this distance to not less than 300 feet if the commission finds a significant neighborhood need for the facility exists and that the facility will not adversely affect the surrounding properties and residents.

C. The applicant shall provide a drop-off and pick-up plan which is considered safe by city staff. Sufficient space shall be provided on-site for the simultaneous drop-off and pick-up from two vehicles.

D. A two-car garage shall be kept clear and available for parking two automobiles. The required garage shall not be used as a child care or play area.

E. The facility shall comply with Chapter 9.40 CMC (noise ordinance). No child who is being provided with care and supervision shall play outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m.

F. Outdoor play areas shall be enclosed with a combination of building walls and solid fences or walls with a minimum height of five feet.

G. Signs or other exterior evidence identifying the home as a day care facility are prohibited.

H. The permit is granted to the applicant and location only and is nontransferable. If the use lapses for a period in excess of six months, then the permit shall expire.

I. The entire facility shall comply with all local, state and federal regulations.

J. The applicant shall allow the city the right to inspect the facility during reasonable business hours. The focus and intent of the inspection must be reasonably related to areas of lawful city concern and authority. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


17.63.080 Noncompliance – Large family day care homes.

The planning commission may revoke approval of the large family day care home upon a determination at a public hearing that the above conditions are not being met. Notification of the hearing shall be in accordance with standard notice procedures. The applicant or any interested person may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council within 10 calendar days of the planning commission hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for all city enforcement costs associated with the revocation of a permit as a result of the violation of applicable conditions. (Ord. 93-1760 § 1, 1993.)


Chapter 17.64 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Sections:

17.64.010    Purpose.

17.64.020    Generally.

17.64.030    Pre-application conference.

17.64.040    Application.

17.64.050    Approval authority.

17.64.060    Review process.

17.64.065    Review process – Minor work.

17.64.070    Approval conditions.

17.64.080    Appeal.

17.64.090    Dating and signing.

17.64.100    Structure conformance required.

17.64.110    Revisions.

17.64.120    Underground utility services.

17.64.130    Street improvements.

17.64.140    Application fee.

17.64.150    Time limit for construction of approved site plan.

17.64.160    Site plan revocation.

17.64.170    Maintenance of improvements and requirements.

17.64.180    Review of development impact on transit service.

17.64.190    Traffic impact analyses.

17.64.200    Transportation demand management requirements for nonresidential development with a floor area of 25,000 square feet or more.

17.64.210    Transportation demand management requirements for nonresidential developments with a floor area of 50,000 square feet or more.

17.64.220    Transportation demand management requirements for nonresidential developments with a floor area of 100,000 square feet or more.

17.64.230    Monitoring.

17.64.240    Enforcement.

17.64.250    Exemptions from certain sections of Chapter 17.64 CMC.


17.64.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the site plan review process shall be to assist property owners in obtaining the best utilization of their property; to assure the highest quality of land planning, design and exterior appearance; to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and general interest; to reduce vehicular congestion and facilitate traffic flow by means of facility improvements, traffic mitigation measures, and consultation with transit operators as required by the Los Angeles County congestion management program; and to assure that the new development will strengthen and sustain the character, desirability and stability of the community. (Ord. 93-1750 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.020 Generally.

Where required by this title, a site plan shall be submitted to the chief planning official to enable the official to make a finding that the proposed development is in conformance with both the intent and provisions of this title.

Site plan review and approval shall be required in all zoned districts prior to the construction, remodeling or expansion of any building, dwelling, parking or storage lot, or developing any areas of the city except for minor work which shall comply with the provisions of CMC 17.64.065, and which is deemed to be the following:

A. Additions to single-family residential structures during any one-year period totaling less than 500 square feet in area or totaling 900 square feet in area in any three-year period;

B. Minor renovations, alterations and remodeling of multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial buildings which do not result in any of the following: (1) increase the building floor space or the area of the subject use; (2) increase the parking requirement for a site by more than 15 percent or 10 parking stalls, whichever is less for commercial or industrial applications; and (3) renovations, alterations and remodeling costing in excess of $20,000 except for Covina redevelopment agency approved facade improvements under a storefront improvement rebate agreement;

C. The resurfacing and restriping of any existing parking or storage lot provided the area of the lot is not increased and the design and layout of the lot is not changed;

D. Facade improvements approved by the Covina redevelopment agency, under a storefront improvement rebate agreement that do not conflict with any other subsection of this section. (Ord. 00-1871, 2000; Ord. 1678 § 22, 1988; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.030 Pre-application conference.

A conference between appropriate city staff and the applicant shall take place prior to submission of the application for site plan review. The purpose of this conference is to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of this section and to identify city ordinances and improvement standards which create opportunities and/or pose significant constraints on the proposed development. The pre-application conference shall include, but not be limited to, the following subject matter:

A. Subject parcel: its size, location and access; land use and development in the vicinity;

B. Proposed development: the type and placement of buildings and other improvements of the subject parcel and the proposed use;

C. Public improvements: type and amount of public facilities likely to be required by the development and method of avoiding and maintaining the same;

D. Location, type and method of maintenance of open space, landscaping and supporting facilities;

E. Proposed grading and site drainage;

F. Proposed internal circulation system, access and ingress points and parking;

G. Method of compliance with transportation demand management and traffic impact analysis requirements. (Ord. 93-1750 § 3, 1993; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.040 Application.

An application for site plan review shall be filed with the community development department. The application form, required number of copies and other technical details as may be required in support of the application shall be the administrative responsibility of the chief planning official. The applicant may be required to clarify, correct or supply additional information. The chief planning official shall not accept a site for filing if the application does not conform with the following:

A. Site Plan. The site plan shall be drawn to a reasonable scale on sheets between 18 inches by 24 inches and 24 inches by 36 inches in size. The plans shall indicate clearly and with full dimensioning the following information:

1. Lot dimensions;

2. All buildings and structures; location, size, height and proposed use;

3. Yards, setbacks and space between buildings;

4. Off-street parking; location, number of spaces, overall dimensions, internal circulation patterns; type of improvements and handicapped parking;

5. Access; pedestrian, vehicular, service; points of ingress and egress;

6. Signs; if proposed, showing location, size, height, type of materials and lighting;

7. Loading; location, dimensions, number of spaces, internal circulation;

8. Trash enclosure(s);

9. Lighting; location and general nature, hooding devices;

10. Landscaping; giving a basic description of existing and proposed types of landscaping and irrigation system;

11. Location, type, trunk caliper and canopy overhang for all trees which will be disturbed by the proposed development;

12. Preliminary grading plan including drainage patterns, locations and heights of retaining walls, slopes in excess of four percent and any grade differentials between the site and surrounding properties; contours at one-foot intervals shall be shown on sites with grade differentials in excess of three feet;

13. Vicinity map;

14. Summary table indicating total building area by type, parking totals, total lot size, lot coverage, landscaped area and other relevant data;

15. North arrow and scale of drawing;

16. Date(s) of preparation and/or revision(s);

17. Name of the property owner, applicant and person who prepared the plans along with the address and phone number where the person can be contacted during normal business hours;

18. Easements;

19. Public utility lines, poles and facilities on or adjacent to the site including but not limited to sewers, water, gas, electric, telephone, storm drains;

20. Existing adjacent street and alley rights-of-way together with any proposed right-of-way dedications; existing and proposed public gutters, sidewalks, drive approaches, parkway drains, street lights, street trees and fire hydrants;

21. Any such other data as may be required to permit the chief planning official to make the required findings.

B. Building Elevations and Floor Plans. Building elevations and floor plans shall be accurately drawn to scale on the same size sheets as the site plan and shall indicate the following information:

1. The general appearance, design, size, height, features, materials and colors of all sides of each building;

2. Roof overhangs, balconies, projections and any other features that protrude from the building surface;

3. Manner in which the interior space of all buildings will be divided (floor plans);

4. Size and use of each room;

5. Status of the project’s compliance with applicable handicapped accessibility requirements.

C. Materials and Color Board. A building materials and color board shall be provided showing samples of roof, exterior wall and trim materials and colors for any proposed building.

D. The chief planning official may waive any portion of the above-required information where such information is clearly unnecessary for the chief planning official to determine whether the site plan complies with all applicable codes, standards and policies. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.050 Approval authority.

A. The planning commission shall have approval authority over an application for site plan review located in any commercial, industrial or multiple-family residential zone district located adjacent to or across any street, railroad, public right-of-way, drainage channel or easement from an agricultural, estate or single-family residential zone district where the site plan review involves the construction of more than 500 square feet of additional floor area.

B. The chief planning official, or his designee, shall have approval authority over all other applications for site plan review.

C. The chief planning official or planning commission, as applicable, shall have authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny a site plan review provided the authority to deny is not used to prohibit a permitted use of the property. Conditional approval may require, but is not limited to, such changes as revised site plan; reduced height, bulk or mass; increased setbacks and open space; changes in materials, design and roof lines; increased screening of garages, trash receptacles, motors or mechanical equipment; increased landscaping; increased framing, molding or other detailing; and change of color. (Ord. 1685 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.060 Review process.

A. The chief planning official shall determine whether the application is complete. An application shall be deemed to be complete when it complies with the standards of CMC 17.64.040. If the application is found to be incomplete then the applicant shall be notified by mail as to why the application is incomplete and how the plans can be made complete.

B. After an application is determined to be complete, it shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act and an environmental determination shall be made. During this time period, the site plan shall be distributed to appropriate city departments and public agencies for review and comment.

C. Following the environmental determination, the chief planning official shall approve, conditionally approve or deny any site plan over which the chief planning official has approval authority.

D. Where the planning commission has approval authority, the chief planning official shall present the site plan, along with any environmental studies and a report and recommendation, to the planning commission. The planning commission shall approve, or conditionally approve or deny, an application.

E. The approval, conditional approval or denial of the site plan by the chief planning official or planning commission as applicable shall be effective 10 days after the order of approval, conditional approval or denial unless an appeal is filed pursuant to CMC 17.64.080 within such period. (Ord. 1685 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.065 Review process – Minor work.

A. The chief planning official, or his designee, shall have approval authority over all minor work.

B. Within five working days following the submission to the chief planning official of plans and specifications for such minor work as required for issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of CMC Title 14, the chief planning official shall approve, conditionally approve or deny such minor work.

C. The applicant for such minor work may appeal in writing the decision of the chief planning official pursuant to the provisions of CMC 17.64.080. (Ord. 1679 § 23, 1988.)


17.64.070 Approval conditions.

The approval authority shall not approve or approve with conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, a site plan unless it finds that:

A. All provisions of this title are complied with;

B. The following are so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected, and there will be no adverse effect on surrounding property:

1. Buildings, structures and improvements;

2. Vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation;

3. Setbacks;

4. Height of buildings;

5. Location of service;

6. Walls;

7. Landscaping;

C. The project design conforms to the general plan, the design guidelines, transportation demand management regulations, and any specific plans or guidelines which may be applicable to the project;

D. The project design is harmonious, consistent and complete within itself and functionally and visually compatible with neighboring structures and the area in which it is located;

E. The development will constitute an adequate environment for the intended use by sustaining the desirability and stability of the neighborhood and community;

F. Proposed lighting is so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties;

G. Proposed signs will not by size, location, color or lighting, interfere with traffic or limit visibility;

H. Utility and street improvements pursuant to CMC 17.64.120 and 17.64.130. (Ord. 93-1750 § 4, 1993; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.080 Appeal.

The applicant may appeal in writing the decision of the approval authority. Such appeal, accompanied by a fee as set by council, shall be filed with the chief planning official within 10 days after the decision and shall be placed on the agenda of the next discretionary body having approval authority over the item being appealed at their next regular meeting. (Typically the planning commission in the case of a determination by the chief planning official or the city council in the case of a determination by the planning commission.) The next discretionary body shall review the site plan and shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove based on findings listed in CMC 17.64.060.

Where the city council is the sole discretionary body having approval authority over an appeal, the appeal shall be first presented to the planning commission for a recommendation. The appeal, site plan and recommendation of the planning commission shall then be presented to the city council for a decision as provided above. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.090 Dating and signing.

The approved site plan, with any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto, shall be dated and signed by the chief planning official. One copy of the approved site plan and conditions shall be mailed to the applicant. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.100 Structure conformance required.

Before a building permit may be issued or amended for any building or structure in a development requiring site plan review, the chief planning official shall make a determination that the proposed building or structure is in conformity with the approved site plan. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.110 Revisions.

Revisions to an approved site plan shall be made pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter. Request for revisions shall be accompanied by a fee as may be set by council. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.120 Underground utility services.

Any new utility service lines which are installed to serve either new or existing buildings or other structures which are part of the overall development subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be placed underground. Utility service lines include service for electricity, telephone communications, and cable television. Appurtenant equipment such as transformers, metal cabinets, and terminal boxes may be installed aboveground when approved by the appropriate approval authority.

The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility company to provide the underground services.

This section shall not apply to temporary utility services installed for construction purposes. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.130 Street improvements.

A. Where street improvements do not exist adjacent to a parcel being developed and subject to the requirements of this chapter, or where existing street improvements adjacent to the subject parcel are not standard as to location, design or condition, new street improvements shall be constructed at ultimate alignment and grade, and in accordance with current city standards and specifications.

B. Street improvements include curb, gutter, cross-gutter, sidewalk, drive approaches, street and alley pavement and base materials, street trees, street signs, street lights, drainage facilities, fire hydrants, utility relocations, and appurtenant facilities.

C. Prior to obtaining any building permits necessary for the parcel development, all required street improvements shall be constructed in accordance with city requirements. The developer may, in lieu of constructing the street improvements prior to issuance of any building permits, satisfy the requirements of this section by either of the following, as determined in the discretion of the city engineer:

1. The developer shall post a cash or faithful performance bond in an amount determined by the city engineer guaranteeing the construction of the required improvements. All required improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy of the developed parcel.

2. The developer shall enter into a written contract with the city, approved as to form by the city engineer and city attorney, agreeing to pay the costs of the required street improvements when said improvements are ultimately constructed. The contract shall be recorded, shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the developer and all subsequent successors in interest to the subject parcel.

D. When required by the city, public improvement drawings, prepared by a state-licensed civil engineer, shall be submitted for city approval.

E. Parcel developments subject to the requirements of this chapter are also subject to the requirements of CMC Title 11, Street and Sidewalks. (Ord. 06-1928 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.140 Application fee.

When the application for approval, revision or extension of a site plan is filed, a uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.150 Time limit for construction of approved site plan.

A. Approval shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which the approval became effective, unless a greater amount of time is granted as a condition of approval, or unless prior to the expiration date a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the application.

B. If the approved site plan is approved concurrent with a tentative map, the time limit for construction of the approved site plan shall expire upon the expiration of the approved tentative map, including any extensions granted under CMC 16.08.160.

C. The applicant, after paying an appropriate fee as set by council, may apply for an extension of time for a maximum of one additional year. The discretionary body shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the extension based on the findings listed in CMC 17.64.070; provided, that there are no changed circumstances that would preclude the discretionary body from making the findings upon which the original approval was based, or, if changed circumstances exist, the applicant has demonstrated that it has diligently pursued the construction of the approved site plan prior to the application for the extension of time. (Ord. 17-07 § 6, 2017; Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.160 Site plan revocation.

A. Upon violation of any applicable provisions of this chapter, failure to comply with the conditions of approval, or failure to maintain a property in accordance with conditions of approval, the approved site plan may be suspended and the director of community development may suspend applicable building permits or order appropriate actions necessary to restore compliance with the terms of the site plan review. Notice of the suspension shall be sent immediately to the building official, to the person or persons responsible for noncompliance and to the city council. The basis for such suspension shall include but not be limited to:

1. The approval was obtained by fraud;

2. The site plan is being built, maintained or executed contrary to the approved plans, conditions, or terms of approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation.

B. Within 30 days, and if the applicant, property owner or project sponsor does not correct the discrepancies that were the basis of the suspension or order in a manner that is acceptable to the community development director, the community development director shall notify the city council. Upon notification, the council shall hold a public hearing within 30 days in the manner prescribed by CMC 17.62.100.

C. If the council is not satisfied that the regulations, general provisions, conditions of approval are being complied with, the council may revoke the permits and/or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with such regulations, general provisions and conditions of approval. The city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the council’s decision. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1988.)


17.64.170 Maintenance of improvements and requirements.

All facilities, improvements, and landscaping developed pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained consistent with the layout of the approved site plan. All conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to the site plan review process shall be complied with for the life of the facilities and improvements. All facilities and improvements shall be maintained in a fully functional state of good repair. All landscape improvements shall be maintained in healthy conditions. (Ord. 93-1750 § 5, 1993.)


17.64.180 Review of development impact on transit service.

For any development project for which an environmental impact report is to be prepared, or because of a local determination, the city shall identify regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project and give them an opportunity to recommend transit-related mitigation measures.

The city shall send each transit operator a notice of preparation (or, in the case of a local determination, a project description) and a copy of the transit impact review work sheet contained in the most current version of the Los Angeles County congestion management program manual (or a similar form based on that work sheet). As part of the notice of preparation process, each transit operator may complete and return to the city the transit impact review work sheet, which will contain the operator’s comments on the project’s potential effect on transit service, recommendations for transit service or capital improvements, and recommendations for transit-related mitigation measures that minimize project-generated vehicle trips on the congestion management program network.

Impacts and mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft environmental impact report or other environmental review prepared for the project. The mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 93-1750 § 6, 1993.)


17.64.190 Traffic impact analyses.

The city shall require a congestion management program network traffic impact analysis for any development project that requires an environmental impact report, except for those exempted by the Los Angeles County congestion management program and listed in CMC 17.64.250. The city may require a local intra-jurisdictional traffic impact analysis for any development project. The congestion management program network traffic impact analysis shall assess the impact on the congestion management program network of traffic generated by the project. It must use the methodology specified in the most current Los Angeles County congestion management program manual, and must describe costs and measures to mitigate project-generated traffic at points on the congestion management program network where that traffic will have a significant impact. All traffic impact analyses must be approved by the city.

The city reserves the right to determine the definition of “significant impact” on intersections and roadway segments that are not part of the congestion management program network. The city further reserves the right to establish a more stringent definition of “significant impact” on the congestion management program network than is provided in the guidelines of the most current Los Angeles County congestion management program manual. (Ord. 93-1750 § 7, 1993.)


17.64.200 Transportation demand management requirements for nonresidential development with a floor area of 25,000 square feet or more.

For nonresidential development whose floor area is 25,000 square feet or more, the items listed in this section shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city.

One or more bulletin boards, or a display case or kiosk displaying transportation information. Information displayed shall include the following:

A. Current maps, routes and schedules of public transit lines serving the site;

B. Telephone numbers for transportation information, including numbers for the regional ride sharing agency and local transit operators;

C. Ridesharing informational material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

D. Bicycle route and facility information, including regional and local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

E. A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders, and pedestrians at the site. (Ord. 93-1750 § 8, 1993.)


17.64.210 Transportation demand management requirements for nonresidential developments with a floor area of 50,000 square feet or more.

For nonresidential development whose floor area is 50,000 square feet or more, the items listed in CMC 17.64.200 together with those listed here in this section shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city.

A. Ten percent or more of the employee parking spaces shall be located as close as practical to employee work-site entrances and reserved for use by carpool and vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential parking shall be identified on the site plan used in the initial application for development approval. At all times at least one space for projects with a floor area of 50,000 to 100,000 square feet, and two spaces for projects with a floor area of more than 100,000 square feet, will be signed or striped for carpool and vanpool vehicle use. Additional spaces will be signed or striped as demand warrants. The procedure that an employee must follow to reserve a preferential parking space must be described on the required transportation information board.

B. Vanpool vans must be able to reach and park in the spaces reserved for them. Parking spaces and turning radii must be large enough to accommodate the vans. If the reserved parking is in a structure, passages and spaces to be used by the vans must have vertical clearances of at least 86 inches.

C. Bicycle racks or other bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles for the first 50,000 square feet of nonresidential development, and one bicycle for each additional 50,000 square feet of nonresidential development or portion thereof. (Ord. 93-1750 § 9, 1993.)


17.64.220 Transportation demand management requirements for nonresidential developments with a floor area of 100,000 square feet or more.

For nonresidential development whose floor area is 100,000 square feet or more, the items listed in CMC 17.64.200 and 17.64.210, together with those listed here in this section, shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city.

A. A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers;

B. Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the public sidewalk to each building in the development;

C. If determined necessary by the city to mitigate project impact, bus stop improvements shall be provided. The city will give local bus service providers an opportunity to recommend improvements. Entrances to project buildings must be located where they will offer the safest and most efficient access to nearby rail stations and bus and shuttle stops;

D. Safe and convenient access from the city street system to bicycle parking facilities on-site. (Ord. 93-1750 § 10, 1993.)


17.64.230 Monitoring.

All improvements required pursuant to this chapter shall be completed and all requirements complied with prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for the related facilities unless otherwise stated in the terms of approval for the project or otherwise modified by the city. When deemed reasonable and necessary by the approval authority, a program shall be developed to monitor compliance with requirements and conditions imposed pursuant to this code; but a monitoring program will be created for all development projects subject to the requirements of the Los Angeles County congestion management program (CMC 17.64.180, 17.64.190, 17.64.200, 17.64.210 and 17.64.220). Responsibility for the cost of monitoring shall be borne by the property owner, the person who has management and control of the premises, and/or the person in possession of the premises. The monitoring process may be combined with the mitigation monitoring requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 93-1750 § 11, 1993.)


17.64.240 Enforcement.

Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.28 CMC. In addition, the city may pursue civil remedies for any violation of this chapter including but not limited to the recovery of reasonable costs for enforcement and correction of the violation. (Ord. 93-1750 § 12, 1993.)


17.64.250 Exemptions from certain sections of Chapter 17.64 CMC.

A development project may be exempt from certain sections of Chapter 17.64 CMC, as follows:

A. Exemption from CMC 17.64.180, Development Implications for Transit Service.

1. CMC 17.64.180 shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed complete by the city pursuant to California Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a draft environmental impact report has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, or for which an application for a building permit has been received, before the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted.

2. Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat the transit consultation and evaluation, or any other requirements of CMC 17.64.180, as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefor covered by a previously certified environmental impact report.

B. Exemption from CMC 17.64.190, Traffic Impact Analyses. As specified in the Los Angeles County congestion management program manual, certain development projects are exempted from conducting a congestion management program traffic impact analysis, as follows:

1. Projects that entered into a development agreement with a local jurisdiction before July 10, 1989;

2. Traffic generated by low and very low income housing;

3. High density residential development located within one-fourth mile of a fixed rail passenger station;

4. Mixed use development located within one-fourth mile of a fixed rail passenger station, if more than half of the land area, or floor area, of the mixed use development is used for high density residential housing, as determined by the agency;

5. Phased development projects or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, which need not repeat the traffic impact analysis as long as no significant changes are made to the project.

C. Exemptions from CMC 17.64.200, 17.64.210 and 17.64.220, Transportation Demand Management Measures.

1. CMC 17.64.200, 17.64.210 and 17.64.220 shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed complete by the city pursuant to California Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a draft environmental impact report has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, or for which an application for a building permit has been received, before the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted.

2. Development projects whose floor area is less than 25,000 square feet are exempt from CMC 17.64.200, 17.64.210 and 17.64.220. If a development project adds floor area to an existing structure, the floor area of the existing structure is not subject to these sections, and the newly added floor area is subject to these sections only if it is 25,000 square feet or more.

3. The transportation demand management strategies required by CMC 17.64.200 through 17.64.220 may be modified because of existing circumstances relating to the project. Requests for modifications shall be made by the developer in a form defined by the planning division. In determining whether a modification is acceptable, the following factors will be considered:

a. Problematic location or configuration of the project that would preclude use of required transportation demand management strategies;

b. Lack of specific services or facilities that would permit use of required transportation demand management strategies; or

c. Other specific factors that would make required transportation demand management strategies infeasible or ineffective.

A request for modification must be accompanied by a proposed transportation demand management strategy that is commensurate with the nature and trip generation characteristics of the facility. A modification will be considered by the approval authority and approved only if the proposed transportation demand management strategy is superior to the requirements of CMC 17.64.200 through 17.64.220, as determined by the city. (Ord. 93-1750 § 13, 1993.)


Chapter 17.65 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

17.65.010    Intent and purpose.

17.65.020    	Definitions.

17.65.030    Applicability.

17.65.040    Approval requirements.

17.65.050    Application contents.

17.65.060    Notices of hearing/determination. 

17.65.070    	Location and development standards.

17.65.080    Design criteria.

17.65.090    Waiver request.

17.65.100    Findings for denial.

17.65.110    Standard conditions of approval.

17.65.120    Revocations.

17.65.130    Maintenance requirements.

17.65.140    “Cells on wheels” prohibited – Exceptions.

17.65.150    Abandonment and removal.

17.65.160    Violation – Penalty.


17.65.010 Intent and purpose.

The purpose of these requirements is to provide placement, design, and screening criteria to regulate the establishment of wireless communication facilities to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and quality of life in the city, while providing needed flexibility to wireless communication providers. Additionally, these regulations protect the visual aesthetics of the community through the promotion of stealthing techniques that architecturally integrate or camouflage wireless communication facilities with their surroundings. This chapter shall be applied on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis to all applicants for wireless communication facilities. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Abandonment” means inoperative or unused for a period of 180 calendar days or more.

“Antenna” means that part of a wireless communication facility designed to transmit or receive radio frequency or electromagnetic signals, and includes panels, wires, poles, rods, dishes, or similar devices. 

“Applicant” means a provider of wireless communication services who applies to the city to install a wireless communication facility within the city.

“Cell site” or “site” means a parcel of land (or portion thereof) or public right-of-way location that contains a wireless communication facility(ies) including any antenna, support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the wireless communication facility.

“Co-location” means the sharing of one site and infrastructure for the purpose of locating two or more wireless communication facilities.

“Mount” means the structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. 

“Project site” means the site on which an applicant proposes to construct a wireless communication facility, including any antenna, mount or support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the wireless communication facility.

“Roof- or top-mounted” means a wireless communication facility where the antennas are mounted on the roof or top of an existing building or structure that serves a purpose other than primarily as a standalone facility (i.e., utility pole or water tank).

“Side-mounted” means a wireless communication facility where the antennas are mounted on the side of an existing building or structure that serves a purpose other than primarily as a standalone facility (i.e., utility pole or water tank).

“Site plan review” means the development review process as set forth in Chapter 17.64 CMC. 

“Standalone facility” means a wireless communication facility where the antennas are mounted to a dedicated ground-based structure primarily designed to elevate the antennas to a usable altitude (i.e., monopole, cell tower, etc.) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a newly constructed ground-based structure containing a wireless communication facility is a standalone facility, even if the structure should serve other purposes (i.e., light pole, flagpole, etc.) 

“Stealthed” means: (1) camouflaged, concealed or otherwise not identifiable as a wireless communication facility by a casual observer and (2) is aesthetically compatible and blends with the site and immediate surroundings. Stealthing may be achieved by any state-of-the-art means or combination of means including, but not limited to, the use of camouflage, textures, screening, painting or architectural integration with the surroundings (e.g., steeple or bell tower within a church, unobtrusive penthouse on a roof, false rock, false structure or a tree amongst other trees). For purposes of this definition, “stealth” or “stealthed” does not refer to and is not intended to be used as a trade name. 

“Wireless communication facility” or “facility” means a facility for the provision of wireless communication services. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.030 Applicability.

A. Except as set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the procedures and rules set forth in this chapter are applicable to all wireless communication facilities built, installed or modified within all zones of the city of Covina after the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is effective, including all wireless communication facilities built, installed or modified within all city public rights-of-way. 

B. This chapter shall not apply to the following:

1. Sites where the construction, installation or modification of a wireless communication facility is subject to a lease, license or other agreement with the city; or 

2. Public safety communications facilities owned or operated by the city or any other public agency (e.g., sheriff, fire, federal or state safety authorities). (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.040 Approval requirements.

A. No wireless communication facility shall be built, installed or modified, in the public right-of-way or on any public property in any zone, without first applying for and obtaining an encroachment permit from the director of public works. The director of public works shall review all encroachment permit applications in accordance with Chapter 11.08 CMC. 

B. Except as set forth in subsection (C) of this section, no wireless communication facility shall be built, installed or modified, on any private property within the city in any zone (including the city’s right-of-way), without first applying for and obtaining a conditional use permit from the planning commission. The planning commission shall hear all conditional use permit applications at a public hearing in accordance with Chapter 17.62 CMC. 

C. Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, applicants requesting approval for a new co-location to an existing wireless communication facility located on private property (“base facility”) shall only be required to obtain site plan review from the chief planning official, pursuant to Chapter 17.64 CMC, if all of the following apply:

1. The base facility has already received a conditional use permit;

2. The base facility has already been reviewed and approved by the city pursuant to CEQA, resulting in the preparation of a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report (statutory and categorical exemptions for the base facility are insufficient);

3. The new co-location does not require a subsequent or supplemental environmental impact report due to substantial changes to the base facility, its site, its circumstances, or new information; and

4. The new co-location incorporates all mitigation measures that were required by CEQA for the base facility. 

D. Any decision shall be subject to appeal pursuant to the following provisions of this code:

1. Decision of the planning commission with respect to a conditional use permit (to the city council): CMC 17.62.130.

2. Decision of the chief planning official with respect to site plan review (to the planning commission): CMC 17.64.080.

3. Decision of the director of public works (to the city manager): CMC 11.54.010. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.050 Application contents.

Applications for the approval of wireless communication facilities shall include that information required by this code for the applicable land use approval (conditional use permit, site plan review or encroachment permit), plus the following information:

A. Contact Information. The applicant shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact information on a form to be supplied by the city. The applicant shall notify city of any changes to the information submitted within 15 calendar days following any such change. This information shall include but is not limited to the following:

1. The identity, including name, address and telephone number, of the owner of the wireless communication facility including official identification numbers and FCC certifications and, if different from the owner, the identity of the person or entity responsible for operating the wireless communication facility;

2. Name, address and telephone number of a local contact person for emergencies and type of service provided.

B. Location and Zoning Information. Location of the project site, including the address and the names of the two nearest cross streets, as well as the present zone designation of the project site. 

C. Description of the Proposed Project. A description of the proposed wireless communication facility, including whether the project is a new facility, a co-located facility, or a modification to an existing facility. If a new facility, the applicant shall include an explanation of whether the new facility will be designed to accommodate future co-locations. The applicant shall provide a written description of the stealthing measures the applicant proposes to use to aesthetically blend the facility to the immediate surroundings. This should include at minimum a description of proposed stealthing techniques, and the textures and colors to be used in the stealthing process. The applicant shall also indicate the proposed height of the facility.

D. Noise. A description of the facilities and/or equipment within the applicant’s project that are expected to induce or generate noise, as well as anticipated noise levels of said facilities and/or equipment.

E. Wireless Communication Facility Site Plan. Fifteen copies of a wireless communication facility site plan, at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or larger and including the following:

1. The proposed wireless communication facility. If the proposed facility is to be located within or on an existing building, or involves construction of a building for housing accessory equipment, the application shall also include a floor plan showing the location of the proposed facility relative to the existing building and/or of the accessory equipment building to be constructed;

2. Location of lot lines, streets (with street names), easements, and all structures and improvements, including accessory equipment, underground utilities and support structures, existing and proposed;

3. Slopes, contours, trees and other pertinent physical features of the site, existing and proposed;    

4. All exterior lighting on the site, existing and proposed;

5. Location, use and approximate distance from property lines of the nearest structures on all properties abutting the site; and

6. The location of parking for maintenance personnel.

F. Landscape Plan. Fifteen copies of a landscape plan for the site, at a scale of one-eighth inch equals one foot or larger and including the following:

1. Existing trees with trunk diameter over six inches at four feet above grade, or 15 feet in overall height, within 50 feet of the proposed wireless communication facility;

2. Species, diameter and condition of all such trees;

3. Final disposition of all existing trees; and

4. Species, location and sizes of trees and other vegetation proposed to be installed with the wireless communication facility.

G. Site Photographs. Current color photographs of the site and its surroundings. 

H. Proximity Map and Information. For applications for a conditional use permit, a map depicting all properties (with street addresses) within 500 feet of the project site, a list of the names and addresses of all current owners of the depicted properties, according to the last equalized assessor’s roll, plus an affidavit indicating that the list of names and addresses described above is accurate, based upon due and diligent inquiry of the applicant. The proximity map and information set forth above shall not be required for an application for site plan review. 

I. Visual Impact Analysis. A visual impact analysis (which shall include photomontage, photo simulation or similar technique) and a building elevation plan which demonstrate, from all four primary directions (north, south, east and west), the potential visual impacts of the proposed wireless communication facility. Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as well as from private property. The analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed wireless communication facility and other existing wireless communication facilities in the area, and shall identify and include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological requirements of the proposed wireless communication service. All costs for the visual analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by the applicant. The visual impact analysis shall also include a signed certification by the applicant that the proposed facility, when built, will appear as indicated in the visual impact analysis. 

J. Wireless Communication Facility Mount. A description of whether the proposed facility is a co-located facility, standalone facility, roof/top-mounted, or side-mounted. 

K. Justification for Location/Co-Location. The applicant must provide justification as to why the applicant chose the location for the proposed wireless communication facility. Such justification shall include a written assessment of not less than two alternative locations considered by the applicant and the reasons why said alternative locations were rejected as candidates. Further, pursuant to CMC 17.65.070(I), the applicant shall provide written evidence that it has made a good faith effort to co-locate the proposed facility with an existing facility and indicate whether co-location is or is not feasible. 

L. FCC/Signal Standards. A report certified by a licensed radio frequency engineer stating that electromagnetic (EM) emissions from the proposed facility will not exceed standards set by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 

M. Map of Applicant’s Existing Wireless Communication Facilities. A map and narrative description of all existing wireless communication facility sites used by the applicant which are located within the city, and any wireless communication facility sites located outside of the city but which provide coverage within any part of the city.

N. Coverage Assessment. A written report setting forth how and why the proposed wireless communication facility will improve the quality of the applicant’s coverage. The report shall indicate the areas where coverage will be improved, and shall also include areas where the applicant currently has no coverage, a significant degradation in coverage or “dead zones.” The report shall include a capacity analysis, a propagation analysis and/or a decibel level report to indicate the quality of service provided by the applicant both at present and after installation of the proposed wireless communication facility. Where an applicant is seeking a waiver pursuant to CMC 17.65.090, the report shall also include a percentage of dropped calls at present.

O. Licenses. Documentation certifying the applicant has obtained all applicable licenses or other approvals to provide the services proposed in connection with the application, whether required by the Federal Communications Commission, California Public Utilities Commission, or any other agency with authority over the proposed wireless communication facility.

P. Application Fee. A fee in the amount established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council. 

Q. Waiver. Any application to develop a wireless communication facility that does not meet the general requirements and restrictions of this chapter shall include a request for a waiver, as set forth in CMC 17.65.090. A request for waiver may be submitted at a later time if it is determined that the proposed facility, as originally submitted, will not meet the requirements and restrictions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.060 Notices of hearing/determination. 

Whenever this chapter requires a public hearing to be held before the planning commission, notices of hearing and determination shall be given as prescribed in CMC 17.62.100 and 17.62.110, except that the notice shall be mailed to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest available assessment roll of the county, or are known to the planning director/chief planning official as owning property within a distance of 500 feet from the exterior boundaries of the site. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.070 Location and development standards.

A. Subject to the restrictions and requirements of this chapter, the following wireless communication facilities are allowed (“A”) or prohibited (“P”) in the following zones1: 

	Zone	New Roof-, Top- or Side-Mounted Facilities	Co-Locations to Existing Roof-, Top- or Side-Mounted Facilities	Co-Locations to Existing Standalone Facilities	New Standalone Facilities

	A-1 (Agricultural)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	A-2 (Agricultural)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	E-1/2 (Estate)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	E-1 (Estate)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	E-2-1/2 (Estate)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	E-5 (Estate) 	 A 	 A	 A 	 P

	R-1-20,000 (Single-Family Residential)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	R-1-10,000 (Single-Family Residential)	 A	 A	 A 	 P

	R-1-8500 (Single-Family Residential)	 A	 A 	 A 	 P

	R-1-7500 (Single-Family Residential)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	RD (Multiple-Family Residential)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	R-TP (Trailer and Mobile Home Park)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	R-R (Residential/Recreation)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	C-P (Commercial/Administrative/ Professional)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-2 (Neighborhood Shopping Center)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-3 (Central Business)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-3A (Regional/Commercial Shopping Center)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-4 (Highway Commercial)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-5 (Specified Highway Commercial)	 A	 A	 A	 A

	C-R (Commercial/Recreation)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	TC-P (Town Center Professional)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	TC-C (Town Center Commercial)	 A	 A	 A	 P

	M-1 (Light Manufacturing)	 A	 A	 A	 A

B. Setbacks/Lot Coverage/Noninterference. Except for wireless communication facilities to be located within public rights-of-way, no facility shall be located within or extend into the required setbacks established in the applicable zone and each facility shall also comply with all applicable lot coverage and building separation standards in the applicable zone. Notwithstanding the above, all new standalone facilities proposed to be located adjacent to a residential zone shall be set back from the nearest residential zone line by a minimum distance of 150 feet; provided, however, that this minimum distance may be shorter than 150 feet if the antennas on the new standalone facility are not visible from any adjacent residential zone from the shorter distance. The setback shall be measured from that part of the standalone facility that is closest to the nearest residential zone line (i.e., the setback for a monopole would be measured from the end of the branch closest to the residential zone line). 

For facilities proposed to be located within public rights-of-way, no facility shall unreasonably interfere with usual and customary access or use by pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles, or negatively impact vehicular parking, circulation, line-of-sight or safety. 

C. Lights, Signals and Signs. Wireless communication facility signals, lights or signs shall be designed so as to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable federal or state regulations. Beacon lights shall not be included in the design of a facility unless required by the FAA. Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts on surrounding areas. Any other lighting of the facility that is not otherwise required is prohibited. No facility or its supporting equipment shall bear any sign, graphic or advertising device other than warning/safety signage or those required by this code or other applicable law. 

D. Dish Antennas. Dish or parabolic antennas serving a wireless communication facility shall be situated so as to minimize visual impact without compromising their function. 

E. Equipment Structures. Ground level equipment, buildings, structures, and bases shall be concealed from public view.

1. Accessory Equipment. All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a wireless communication facility on public property or in the public right-of-way shall be located inside an existing building, a new addition to an existing building or an underground vault, unless not technically feasible, at which point accessory equipment may be located within a separate above-ground enclosure. Additional cost to the applicant alone shall not constitute technical infeasibility for purposes of this subsection. All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a wireless communication facility on private property may be located inside an existing building, a new addition to an existing building, an underground vault or a separate above-ground enclosure. No separate above-ground structure may exceed six feet in height measured from the base of the foundation unless a greater height is necessary to maximize stealthing/architectural integration. All accessory equipment and structures, vaults or enclosures containing said equipment shall comply with the development standards of the zone in which the accessory equipment is located. 

2. Security. Accessory equipment shall be equipped with tamper-proof cabinets and/or locks to mitigate safety siting issues. All wireless communication facilities shall be designed so as to be resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight or attractive nuisances. Barbed wire or razor wire fencing is prohibited. 

F. Building Codes. Wireless communication facilities shall comply with all applicable building codes.

G. Height. Notwithstanding any other height limitations contained in this title, wireless communication facilities may not exceed the height limitations set forth below: 

1. Roof-mounted facilities (new or co-located) that are placed on an existing building, or top-mounted facilities (new or co-located) that are placed on an existing utility pole, water tank, or other similar structure may extend to, but shall not exceed, a height of eight feet above the roof or top of the building or structure;

2. Side-mounted facilities (new or co-located) that are placed on an existing building, or on an existing utility pole, water tank, or other similar structure may not extend beyond the height of the existing building or structure;

3. Facilities co-located on an existing standalone facility may not extend beyond the height of the existing standalone facility; and

4. New standalone facilities may not exceed 55 feet in height. 

Any applicant that proposes to construct or co-locate a wireless communication facility that would exceed the applicable height limitations set forth above must request a waiver pursuant to CMC 17.65.090. 

H. Signal/Power Cables. All wireless communication facility cables, wires or similar electrical transmission devices must be placed underground, be placed within the existing building or structure or in cableways, and must be properly stealthed to the maximum extent possible.

I. Co-Location Requirements.

1. Co-Location. Where feasible, owners or operators shall share sites where wireless communication facilities are already located, thereby reducing the number of new facilities. 

2. Good Faith Effort. All applicants shall demonstrate a good faith effort to co-locate with existing facilities. The city may deny an approval to an applicant who has not demonstrated a good faith effort to co-locate with an existing facility. Such good faith effort includes written evidence by the applicant of:

a. Contact with all other licensed carriers for facilities within the area of proposed coverage.

b. Sharing nonproprietary technical information necessary to determine if co-location is feasible under the design configuration most accommodating to co-location. 

In the event the applicant determines that co-location is not feasible, the applicant shall include with its application a written statement of the reasons why co-location is not feasible. In the event the applicant determines that co-location is feasible, the applicant shall include provisions for co-location of its facility in its application.

3. Numerical Limits on Co-Location. Not greater than three facilities shall be co-located upon any single site. 

4. All co-located facilities upon a site shall be architecturally coordinated and stealthed consistently with each other. 

J. Parking. Any wireless communication facility and associated accessory equipment shall not reduce the number of available parking spaces below the amount required by this code, nor shall they obstruct any required drive aisle or corner cutback (i.e., line-of-sight) area.

K. FCC Requirements. All existing and future wireless communication facilities shall meet all applicable FCC emissions and exposure standards for electromagnetic (EM) radiation, and all required notices and signs shall be posted on the site as required by the FCC and PUC.

L. Noise. All wireless communication facilities must comply with all existing noise ordinances of the city, but in no case shall any facility generate sound in excess of: (1) 50 dB CNEL at the property line of the nearest residential use, or (2) 65 dB CNEL at the property line of the nearest nonresidential use. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.080 Design criteria.

A. Preexisting Character. Wireless communication facility location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the site as much as feasible. 

B. Landscaping and Vegetation. Existing landscaping and vegetation, including trees, foliage and shrubs, whether or not utilized for stealthing, shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site shall be minimized, unless removing, altering or disturbing the vegetation would result in less visual impact of the wireless communication facility on the surrounding area. Additional landscaping shall be planted where such vegetation is necessary to provide stealthing or to block the line of sight between a facility and adjacent residentially zoned properties. If landscaping is removed to install the facility, landscaping shall be replaced on the site at a one and one-half to one ratio for the landscaping removed. 

C. Stealthing. All wireless communication facilities shall be stealthed from view to the greatest extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, camouflage, color choice, architectural compatibility and other site characteristics. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas and supporting equipment possible to accomplish the owner/operator’s coverage objectives. The applicant shall also integrate the wireless communication facility so that it is most compatible with the site (including buildings and structures thereon) and with the area surrounding the site. 

D. Blending/Stealthing Methods.

1. All standalone facilities, plus supporting equipment, shall be composed of nonreflective materials and painted a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility, unless the FCC, FAA, or other government agency requires a different color. If a new standalone facility cannot be camouflaged in any other way, it shall be camouflaged as a tree (i.e., monopalm, monopine), flagpole, light pole or similar structure. Lattice towers and guyed towers shall not be permitted as new standalone facilities, except by waiver granted pursuant to CMC 17.65.090. Visible ground level equipment, structures and buildings shall be stealthed from view by landscape plantings, fencing or other appropriate stealthing means, and shall be treated with graffiti-resistant paint or coating. 

2. Roof-mounted, top-mounted or side-mounted wireless communication facilities shall be constructed, painted, finished and fully stealthed to match the color and texture of the building, structure and/or wall on which they are mounted. Facade-mounted equipment shall be camouflaged by incorporating the antenna into the design elements of the building or structure and shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure. If possible, antennas should be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to be completely screened from view. In no case shall antennas extend more than 24 inches out from the building face. 

Equipment buildings or stealthing enclosures mounted on a roof shall be architecturally consistent with the building, such as having a finish similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof-, top- or side-mounted antennas may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted.

3. The city council may, by resolution, promulgate additional regulations that further define and clarify the stealthing requirements of this subsection, consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.090 Waiver request.

A. Waiver. A waiver of any of the location, design or other requirements and restrictions set forth in this chapter may be granted by the planning commission, chief planning official or director of public works, whichever is applicable, upon the request of the applicant, where the applicant demonstrates that such restriction or requirement either:

1. Prohibits or has the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communication services pursuant to the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 USC 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II)); or

2. Unreasonably discriminates against the applicant when compared to other providers within the city who are providing functionally equivalent wireless communication services pursuant to the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 USC 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(I)).

B. Independent Consultant. Any application for a waiver shall include the applicant’s authorization for the city to retain the services of an independent, qualified consultant, at the applicant’s expense, to evaluate the issues raised by the waiver request. The application shall include a monetary deposit, as set by resolution of the city council, and an agreement by the applicant to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs associated with the consultation. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.100 Findings for denial.

Any decision to deny, in whole or in part, a conditional use permit, site plan review or encroachment permit to place, construct or modify a wireless communication facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in the written record. 

A. A conditional use permit, site plan review or encroachment permit, whichever is applicable, shall be approved unless it is determined that:

1. The applicant has failed to provide any information required in CMC 17.65.050; 

2. The proposed wireless communication facility fails to comply with the criteria of CMC 17.65.070 and 17.65.080; 

3. In the case of a conditional use permit, the planning commission cannot make the findings required by CMC 17.62.120, in the case of a site plan review, the chief planning official cannot make the findings required by CMC 17.64.070, or in the case of an encroachment permit, the director of public works has grounds for denial pursuant to CMC 11.08.120;

4. In the case of a new wireless communication facility, co-location at a site with an existing wireless communication facility is feasible. 

B. Any decision to deny, in whole or in part, a conditional use permit, site plan review or encroachment permit to place, construct or modify a wireless communication facility shall also indicate one of the following:

1. The applicant did not request a waiver from the requirements of this chapter; or

2. The applicant did request a waiver from the requirements of this chapter, but failed to present sufficient evidence that the requirements and restrictions of this chapter either have the effect of prohibiting wireless communication services or unreasonably discriminate against the applicant, pursuant to CMC 17.65.090. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.110 Standard conditions of approval.

In addition to conditions of approval which may be imposed in order to ensure compliance with this code, the following standard conditions shall be imposed on any conditional use permit, site plan review or encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

A. The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its officers, agents or employees to attack, set aside, void or annul any approval under this chapter. The applicant shall further defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any damages, liabilities, claims, suits, or causes of action of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the applicant, its agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors, pursuant to the approval issued by the city. 

B. For all wireless communication facilities located within the public right-of-way, the applicant shall remove or relocate, at applicant’s expense and without expense to the city, any or all of its wireless communication facilities, by reason of any change in grade, alignment or width of any public right-of-way, installation of services, water pipes, drains, storm drains, lift stations, power or signal lines, traffic control devices, public right-of-way improvements, or any other construction, repair or improvement to the public right-of-way.

C. Where a wireless communication facility site is capable of accommodating a co-located facility upon the same site, the owner or operator of the existing facility shall allow another carrier to co-locate its facilities and equipment thereon, provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions. 

D. The applicant shall, within 90 days after commencing wireless communication facility operations, submit a written report to the city prepared by a qualified engineer, certifying that the facility continues to comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. Thereafter, the applicant shall submit a written report to the city within 30 days after termination of any FCC, PUC or other federal or state operating license for the wireless communication facility. 

E. Prior to commencing operations of a wireless communication facility, the owner or operator shall file with the city, and shall maintain in good standing throughout the term of its approval, a bond or other sufficient security in an amount equal to the cost of physically removing the wireless communication facility and all related facilities and equipment on the site, as determined by the chief planning official or director of public works, whichever is applicable. However, the city may not require the owner or operator to post a cash deposit or establish a cash escrow account as security under this subsection. In setting the amount of the bond or security, the chief planning official or director of public works, whichever is applicable, shall take into consideration the applicant’s estimate of removal costs. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.120 Revocations.

A. At any time, the city may initiate proceedings to revoke an approval issued pursuant to this chapter. 

B. In addition to those provisions applicable to conditional use permits, site plan review and encroachment permits, the following shall also constitute grounds for revocation of an approval issued pursuant to this chapter:

1. The owner or operator has abandoned the wireless communication facility; or

2. The wireless communication facility is no longer in compliance with its respective conditions of approval, with the requirements of this chapter, or with any other applicable law; or

3. The wireless communication facility is no longer in compliance with applicable FCC or FAA regulations.

C. The city council may revoke a conditional use permit only after holding a noticed public hearing in accordance with CMC 17.62.170. The city council may revoke a site plan review only by following those procedures set forth in CMC 17.64.160. The director of public works may revoke an encroachment permit only by following those procedures set forth in CMC 11.08.120. 

D. After a final revocation decision has been rendered, the owner or operator of the wireless communication facility shall terminate operations and remove the wireless communication facility from the site in accordance with CMC 17.65.150. 

E. Any decision of the planning commission or chief planning official may be appealed pursuant to CMC 17.65.040(D). Any decision of the director of public works may be appealed pursuant to CMC 11.54.010. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.130 Maintenance requirements.

All wireless communication facilities shall comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards:

A. Equipment. All facilities, including antennas, mounts, wires, conduit, lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, poles and stealthing materials (including artificial foliage), shall be maintained by the owner or operator in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as practicable so as to maintain the facility’s original appearance and to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight. All trash, debris, litter and graffiti shall be removed by the owner/operator within 48 hours following notification from the city. 

B. Landscaping. Each facility and site which contains trees, foliage or other landscaping elements, whether or not used as stealthing, shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the owner or operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping as soon as practicable, and in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 

C. Inspections. Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter. Further, the chief planning official, director of public works, or designee may, upon providing reasonable advance notice to the owner or operator, conduct an inspection of a facility to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 

D. To ensure compliance with this chapter, the owner or operator of a facility shall affix a label or marker to the facility in a prominent location that identifies the facility and provides a telephone number that may be called to report any damage, destruction, graffiti or vandalism to the facility. 

E. Backup Generators. Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.140 “Cells on wheels” prohibited – Exceptions.

“Cells on wheels” or other mobile wireless communication facilities are prohibited in all zones, except for the following:

A. Telecommunications Emergency. Throughout the duration of a telecommunications emergency declared by the city; or

B. Special Events. During a special event within the city requiring enhanced telecommunications coverage, provided said event does not exceed three total days of operation within any three-month period and provided further that the applicant first obtains an administrative conditional use permit pursuant to CMC 17.62.190. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.150 Abandonment and removal.

A. Notice of Abandonment. Where an owner or operator intends to abandon a wireless communication facility or portion thereof, the owner or operator shall notify the city by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations and the date the facility shall be removed. The notice shall be given not less than 60 days prior to abandonment. Failure to give notice shall not affect the owner’s or operator’s obligation to remove an abandoned facility.

B. Removal Due to Utility Undergrounding. All facilities located on a utility pole or structure shall be promptly removed at the owner’s or operator’s expense at the time a utility is scheduled to be undergrounded. 

C. Removal. Upon abandonment, revocation, or other lawful order of any federal, state or local agency to terminate facility operations, the owner or operator shall physically remove the facility or terminated/abandoned elements within 30 days following the date of abandonment or termination of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:

1. Removal of antennas, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers from the subject site;

2. Transportation of the antennas, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers to an appropriate repository;

3. Restoring the site to its prior condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the planning director.

D. Stay. The chief planning official or director of public works, whichever is applicable, may stay the requirement to remove an abandoned/terminated wireless communication facility upon written request and evidence submitted by the owner or operator that another wireless provider is in reasonable negotiations to acquire and use the wireless communication facility.

E. If an owner or operator of an abandoned wireless communication facility fails to physically remove the facility and all related equipment within the time frames set forth herein, the city may do so at the owner/operator’s expense. The city may pursue forfeiture of all or a part of any bond or other security posted by the owner/operator pursuant to CMC 17.65.110(E). (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)


17.65.160 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any owner or operator of a wireless communication facility that violates the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 CMC. 

B. Civil Action/Nuisance Abatement. In addition to the above, if an owner or operator of a wireless communication facility violates the terms of this chapter, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available at law or equity, including but not limited to injunctive relief or initiation of a nuisance abatement action pursuant to Chapter 8.40 CMC. 

C. Costs of Action. All costs of taking action to enforce the terms of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the wireless communication facility. (Ord. 11-1996 § 2, 2011.)1

Applicants wishing to locate a wireless communication facility where it is otherwise prohibited by this section must request a waiver as set forth in CMC 17.65.090. 


Chapter 17.66 HIGHWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES

Sections:

17.66.010    Generally.

17.66.020    Required yards – Determination.

17.66.030    Establishment – Major highways.

17.66.040    Establishment – Secondary highways.

17.66.050    Establishment – Traffic collector streets.


17.66.010 Generally.

The highway right-of-way lines contained in this chapter refer to major and secondary highways and traffic collector streets shown on the general plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.30.)


17.66.020 Required yards – Determination.

When yards are required abutting major and secondary highways and traffic collector streets, the yards shall be measured from the future highway right-of-way line established by the general plan for an existing right-of-way. Where yards are not required, the building shall be located on or to the rear of the future highway right-of-way line. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.30.)


17.66.030 Establishment – Major highways.

The highway right-of-way line on each side of all major highways is established as 50 feet from the centerline (Total right-of-way width: 100 feet). (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.30.)


17.66.040 Establishment – Secondary highways.

The highway right-of-way lines on each side of all secondary highways is established as 40 feet from the centerline. (Total right-of-way width: 80 feet.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.30.)


17.66.050 Establishment – Traffic collector streets.

The highway right-of-way line on each side of all traffic collector streets is established as 40 feet from the centerline. (Total right-of-way width: 80 feet.) (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.30.)


Chapter 17.67 BODY ART FACILITIES

Sections:

17.67.010    Purpose.

17.67.020    Definitions.

17.67.030    Zoning and land use standards for body art facilities.


17.67.010 Purpose.

The regulation of the tattoo and/or body art facilities is necessary to ensure that their secondary effects do not pose a threat to residents of the city of Covina, or lead to blight and loss of property values of residential neighborhoods and businesses in close proximity to such uses, and to protect against harmful impacts on other sensitive land uses. This chapter contains content-neutral regulations to address such negative secondary impacts while providing sufficient avenues of communication for those wishing to open and operate tattoo and/or body art facilities, and provide a reasonable number of locations for such facilities to locate within the city. (Ord. 12-2013 § 3, 2012.)


17.67.020 Definitions.

“Body art facility” means the specified building, section of a building, or vehicle in which body art is performed, as more specifically defined in CMC 5.38.020(C). (Ord. 12-2013 § 3, 2012.)


17.67.030 Zoning and land use standards for body art facilities.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, body art facilities shall be a permitted use in the following zones, subject to the regulations contained herein:

1. C-5 commercial zone (specified highway).

2. M-1 light manufacturing zone.

B. Standards for body art facilities shall be as follows:

1. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each body art facility shall comply with Chapter 5.38 CMC.

2. The body art facility shall be designed to screen body art performed on a client's “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in CMC 17.55.020(B), from persons outside the facility. Signage, advertising or images depicting “specific anatomical areas” shall not be placed in the windows or be visible to persons outside the facility.

3. Body art facility signage shall comply with standards in this title.

4. Design and/or modification to a site or building in which a body art facility proposes to locate shall remain subject to site plan review under Chapter 17.64 CMC.

5. Body art cannot be provided as accessory to other permitted uses such as a barber and/or beauty shop without first complying with the provisions of this chapter and cannot be operated as home occupations.

6. The off-street parking requirement shall be one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. 12-2013 § 3, 2012.)


Chapter 17.68 EXISTING LOTS

Sections:

17.68.010    Requirements.


17.68.010 Requirements.

A. Every individual parcel of land existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be deemed to be one lot and shall be subject to all property development standards stated in the zone in which it is located.

B. No lot or parcel of land existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may be reduced in any manner below the minimum standards for lot area as established by this title for the district within which the lot is located.

C. No lot area may be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces will be less than prescribed by this title nor may the occupancy be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations herein established. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.40.)


Chapter 17.69 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS

Sections:

17.69.010    Intent.

17.69.020    Development standards.

17.69.030    Conversions of existing space.

17.69.040    Review and approval process.


17.69.010 Intent.

This chapter is intended to implement the requirements of California Government Code Section 65852.2. In the event of a conflict between the Government Code, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter, the Government Code shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and another provision of the CMC, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 19-07 § 35, 2019.)


17.69.020 Development standards.

Except as provided in CMC 17.69.030, the following development standards shall apply to accessory dwelling units:

A. An accessory dwelling unit that is attached to the primary unit may not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the primary unit, up to a maximum of 1,200 gross square feet. A detached accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 1,200 gross square feet. The area of an accessory dwelling unit shall be counted toward the maximum ground coverage limitations of CMC 17.26.106.

B. The applicant for an accessory dwelling unit permit must be the owner of the existing single-family dwelling or the lot on which the single-family dwelling and accessory dwelling unit are being simultaneously proposed. In addition, the property owner shall maintain residency in either the primary single-family dwelling or the accessory dwelling unit. If the property owner is a corporate entity or trust, at least one of the following persons must reside in either the primary unit or the accessory dwelling unit to comply with the owner-occupancy requirement: (1) a corporate officer; (2) a trustee of the trust; or (3) a beneficiary of the trust.

C. If an accessory dwelling unit is created within existing space in the primary residential unit, garage, or accessory structure, a separate electric or water meter shall not be installed for the accessory unit.

D. The accessory dwelling unit shall be substantially similar in architectural style and quality to the primary single-family dwelling.

E. An accessory dwelling unit only may be located on a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit may be rented separately but shall not be sold independently of the primary single-family dwelling.

F. When an accessory dwelling unit is attached to the primary dwelling, the applicable development standards shall be the same as for the primary dwelling. When an accessory dwelling unit is detached from the primary dwelling, the applicable development standards shall be the same as for an accessory building, as defined in CMC 17.04.012. Notwithstanding these standards, no setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit or to a portion of an accessory dwelling unit, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage.

G. Off-street parking for an accessory dwelling unit shall be provided at the rate specified in CMC 17.72.010 (Off-street parking – Space requirements). Such parking may be covered or uncovered, may be in a tandem configuration, and may be located within a setback area. If an accessory dwelling unit is created by conversion of parking space(s) in an existing garage, the converted parking space(s) shall be replaced with new garage space(s) equal to the number of garage spaces converted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the accessory unit.

H. A parcel with an existing guest house may not also have an accessory dwelling unit; however, a guest house may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this chapter.

I. The property owner shall record a declaration of restrictions, in a form approved by the city attorney, placing the following restrictions on the property, the property owner, and all successors in interest: (1) the property owner shall be an owner-occupant; (2) the accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling unit; (3) the property owner and all successors in interest shall maintain the accessory dwelling unit and the property in accordance with all applicable requirements and standards; and (4) any violation will be subject to penalties as provided in Chapters 1.16 and 1.26 CMC. Proof of recordation of the covenant shall be provided to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit.

J. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with building code requirements that apply to detached dwellings. (Ord. 19-07 § 35, 2019.)


17.69.030 Conversions of existing space.

A. An application for an accessory dwelling unit shall be approved ministerially with only a building permit if the proposed accessory dwelling unit will be entirely contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or accessory building, including, without limitation, a studio, pool house, or other similar structure.

B. To qualify for this more streamlined approval process, the proposed accessory dwelling unit must have independent exterior access from the existing residence, and side and rear setbacks that are sufficient for fire safety.

C. The applicant must be the owner of the existing single-family dwelling. In addition, the property owner shall maintain residency in either the primary single-family dwelling or the accessory dwelling unit. If the property owner is a corporate entity or trust, at least one of the following persons must reside in either the primary unit or the accessory dwelling unit to comply with the owner-occupancy requirement: (1) a corporate officer; (2) a trustee of the trust; or (3) a beneficiary of the trust.

D. The property owner shall record a declaration of restrictions, in a form approved by the city attorney, placing the following restrictions on the property, the property owner, and all successors in interest: (1) the property owner shall be an owner-occupant; (2) the accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling unit; (3) the property owner and all successors in interest shall maintain the accessory dwelling unit and the property in accordance with all applicable requirements and standards; and (4) that any violation will be subject to penalties as provided in Chapters 1.16 and 1.26 CMC. Proof of recordation of the covenant shall be provided to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 19-07 § 35, 2019.)


17.69.040 Review and approval process.

The following procedures for the review and approval of an accessory dwelling unit shall apply in all zones where an accessory dwelling unit is a permitted use:

A. Application. An accessory dwelling unit permit application shall be filed with the community development department. The application form, required number of copies, and other supporting materials shall be determined by the chief planning official. The chief planning official may waive any portion of the application information where such information is deemed unnecessary to determine whether the application complies with all applicable codes, standards and policies.

1. Name of the property owner, applicant, and person who prepared the plans along with the address and phone number where the applicant can be contacted during normal business hours;

2. Plot Plan. A plot plan drawn to a reasonable scale showing the following information:

a. Vicinity map;

b. Lot dimensions;

c. Location, proposed use, size, and height of all existing and proposed structures;

d. Floor plan and elevations of the proposed accessory dwelling unit drawn to scale, including the following information:

i. The general appearance, design, size, height, roof overhangs, balconies, projections, materials, and colors of all sides and roof of the proposed building;

ii. Size and use of each room;

iii. Status of the project’s compliance with applicable handicapped accessibility requirements;

e. Yards, setbacks, and space between buildings;

f. Off-street parking, including the location and number of spaces, overall dimensions, access points, and circulation pattern;

g. If a grading permit is required, the preliminary grading plan, including drainage patterns, locations, and heights of retaining walls, slopes in excess of four percent and any grade differentials between the site and surrounding properties; contours at one-foot intervals shall be shown on sites with grade differentials in excess of three feet;

h. Location of easements on and immediately adjacent to the site, including water, sewer, storm drainage, gas, electric, and telecommunications;

i. Summary table indicating total building area by type, parking totals, total lot size, lot coverage, landscaped area, and other relevant data;

j. North arrow and scale of drawing;

k. Date(s) of preparation and/or revision(s);

l. Any such other data as may be required to allow the chief planning official to make the required findings.

B. Review Process.

1. Within 10 working days following the submission of an accessory dwelling unit permit application, the chief planning official shall determine whether the application complies with the requirements of subsection (A) of this section. If the application does not contain all of the required information, the chief planning official shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the specific additional information required. Submittal of the additional information shall be subject to the same review for completeness as the initial application.

2. Within 120 days after submittal of an accessory dwelling unit application, the chief planning official shall determine whether the application substantially complies with applicable regulations and notify the applicant by mail of the determination. If the application is determined to substantially comply with the applicable regulations, the chief planning official shall approve the accessory dwelling unit permit. If it is determined that the application does not substantially comply with applicable regulations, or if the application does not include all of the information required by subsection (A) of this section, the chief planning official shall deny the application and notify the applicant in writing of the specific areas of noncompliance. The applicant may submit a revised application addressing the areas of noncompliance or may appeal the determination of the chief planning official to the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of CMC 17.64.080. A revised application shall be subject to the same review process as the original application. (Ord. 19-07 § 35, 2019.)


Chapter 17.70 NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS AND USES

Sections:

17.70.010    Declaration.

17.70.020    Group A nonconforming lots, buildings and uses – Generally.

17.70.030    Group A nonconforming lots.

17.70.040    Group A nonconforming buildings.

17.70.050    Group A nonconforming uses.

17.70.060    Group B nonconforming buildings and uses – Generally.

17.70.070    Group B nonconforming buildings.

17.70.080    Group B nonconforming uses.

17.70.090    Nonconforming use of land.

17.70.100    Nonconforming signs and billboards.

17.70.110    Nonconforming fences, hedges and walls.

17.70.120    Nonconforming off-street parking and loading facilities.

17.70.130    Reversion of nonconforming use.

17.70.140    Nonconforming building – Reconstruction.

17.70.150    Temporary nonconforming residential buildings – Elimination.

17.70.160    Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses under variance or conditional use permit.

17.70.170    Public utility distribution stations.

17.70.180    Nonconforming uses and structures – Review of amortization schedule or substitution of use.


17.70.010 Declaration.

Where lots, buildings or uses are legally existing on the effective date of any ordinance which makes them nonconforming with the provisions of this title, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter to declare such lots, buildings and uses to be nonconforming, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1297 § 1, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.020 Group A nonconforming lots, buildings and uses – Generally.

Group A nonconforming lots, buildings and uses are those which are generally not detrimental in the zone. They may be continued and under certain conditions altered or enlarged. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.030 Group A nonconforming lots.

Group A nonconforming lots are those lots which do not conform to the lot area and lot dimension standards for the zone in which they are located. The uses permitted in the zone shall be permitted on such lots, subject to all other property development standards of the zone. These provisions apply to unimproved lots. Lots with structures on them are subject to the provisions of CMC 17.70.040. Lots whose use involves no buildings are subject to the provisions of CMC 17.70.090. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.040 Group A nonconforming buildings.

Group A nonconforming buildings are those buildings which do not conform to the building height, yards and distance between building standards for the zone in which they are located. Such buildings shall be permitted to continue; provided, that any addition, alteration or enlargement thereto shall comply with all the property development standards of the zone as they apply to the buildings. When any Group A nonconforming building is for any reason removed from the land, all future buildings or structures erected on such lands shall conform to all property development standards of the zone. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.050 Group A nonconforming uses.

A. In agricultural and residential zones, Group A nonconforming uses of buildings are those uses which do not conform to the population density standards for the zone in which they are located. Buildings containing such uses may be altered; provided, that the population density shall not be increased.

B. In commercial and industrial zones, Group A nonconforming uses of buildings are those uses which are not listed as permitted but which are of the same general type (i.e., commercial uses in a commercial zone) and are determined by the planning commission to be not detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare as provided for in CMC 17.60.020 through 17.60.040. Such uses may be continued or altered, subject to the property development standards of the zone. (Ord. 92-1737 § 1, 1992; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)




17.70.060 Group B nonconforming buildings and uses – Generally.

Group B nonconforming buildings and uses are those which are detrimental in the zone. They must be terminated or removed within a specified period. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.070 Group B nonconforming buildings.

A. Group B nonconforming buildings are as follows:

1. In residential and agricultural zones, commercial and industrial buildings shall be considered as Group B nonconforming;

2. In commercial and industrial zones, residential buildings not specifically permitted in the zone shall be considered as Group B nonconforming.

B. The following time limits shall be applied to all Group B nonconforming buildings, the period to begin on the effective date of any ordinance which makes them nonconforming. This timetable is deemed to provide for the amortization of the affected buildings. On or before the termination of the period, such buildings shall be removed from the land unless the date of removal is prolonged by the planning commission pursuant to CMC 17.70.180 and the proceedings contained therein:

1. Types 1 and 2 construction, as such types are defined by the building code of the city, 20 years;

2. Types 3 and 4 construction, as such types are defined by the building code of the city, 15 years;

3. Type 5 construction, as such type is defined by the building code of the city, 10 years.

C. When the nonconforming building is removed from the land at or before the end of the amortization period, every future building and use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1297 § 2, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.080 Group B nonconforming uses.

A. Group B nonconforming uses shall be those uses in any zone which are expressly prohibited and those other uses which may not be classified as Group A nonconforming uses.

B. A Group B nonconforming use of a conforming building or of a Group A nonconforming building shall, within five years from the effective date of any ordinance which makes it nonconforming, be completely terminated or shall be so altered that it will be in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone. The termination of such uses may be prolonged by the planning commission pursuant to CMC 17.70.180 and the proceedings contained therein. Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the building, and if such use is discontinued for a period of 180 days, any future use of the building shall be in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone.

C. Group B nonconforming uses in a Group B nonconforming building may continue for the duration of the building and may be expanded or extended throughout the building; provided, that no structural alterations except those required by law or ordinance shall be made therein; further, if no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use in such a building may be changed to permit a similar or more restricted type of nonconforming use; provided, that the new use is approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 1297 § 3, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.090 Nonconforming use of land.

A nonconforming use of land, where no buildings or structures are involved, shall, when deemed by the council to be detrimental to health, safety and welfare, within five years after the effective date of any ordinance which makes it nonconforming, be completely terminated or so altered that it will be in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone. The termination of such use may be prolonged by the planning commission pursuant to CMC 17.70.180 and the proceedings contained therein. Such nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded in any way either on the same or adjoining property, and if such nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of 180 days, any further use of the land shall be in conformity with this title. (Ord. 1297 § 4, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.100 Nonconforming signs and billboards.

A. Identification signs which do not conform to this title, but which lawfully existed and were maintained on the effective date of any ordinance which made them nonconforming, shall, within five years after the effective date of such ordinance, be removed or made to conform.

B. Billboards which do not conform to this title but which lawfully existed and were maintained on the effective date of any ordinance which made them nonconforming shall, within three years after the effective date of such ordinance, be removed or made to conform.

C. During the interim period, the nonconforming signs and billboards shall be kept in good repair and visual appearance and no structural alteration shall be made thereto. (Ord. 1297 § 5, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.110 Nonconforming fences, hedges and walls.

Fences, hedges and walls which do not conform to the corner cutback provisions of this title shall, within three years after the effective date of any ordinance which made them nonconforming, be removed or made to conform. (Ord. 1297 § 6, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.120 Nonconforming off-street parking and loading facilities.

Where off-street parking or loading facilities do not conform to the provisions of this title, or where no such facilities have been provided for buildings constructed prior to the effective date of any ordinance which made them nonconforming or which required such facilities where none were provided, such buildings shall not be expanded nor may additional facilities be provided within the building until after the requirements for off-street parking and loading space have been complied with for those facilities added or enlarged. Property located in a duly formed municipal parking zone shall conform to CMC 17.72.110. (Ord. 1297 § 7, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.130 Reversion of nonconforming use.

Any portion of a nonconforming building or use which is altered or changed to a conforming use shall not thereafter be used for a nonconforming use. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.140 Nonconforming building – Reconstruction.

The provisions of this title shall not prevent the reconstruction, repair or rebuilding of any nonconforming building damaged by fire, explosion, or act of God or the enemy, subsequent to the effective date of any ordinance which made such building nonconforming; provided, that the cost of such reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding shall not exceed 50 percent of the reasonable replacement value of the building immediately prior to the damage, as determined by a qualified appraiser. (Ord. 1297 § 8, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.150 Temporary nonconforming residential buildings – Elimination.

Where a building temporarily being used for dwelling purposes exists on a lot in any residential or agricultural zone, a dwelling or dwellings as permitted in the zone in which the lot is located may be erected on the lot; provided, that within 30 days after the granting of an occupancy permit by the city for the use of the dwelling, the temporary dwelling shall be made to conform with the provisions of the zone or shall be removed. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.160 Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses under variance or conditional use permit.

Those nonconforming lots, uses and buildings which are existing under a variance or a conditional use permit granted under this title or any previous zoning ordinance shall be permitted to continue under the conditions and regulations imposed in the permit or variance, except as herein provided. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.170 Public utility distribution stations.

Nothing in this title pertaining to nonconforming buildings and uses shall be construed or applied so as to require the termination, discontinuance or removal, or so as to prevent the modernization, replacement, repair, maintenance, alteration, reconstruction or rebuilding of public utility distribution stations, buildings, structures, uses, equipment and facilities; provided, that there is no change of use or increase of its areas so used. (1964 Code Appx. A § 10.50.)


17.70.180 Nonconforming uses and structures – Review of amortization schedule or substitution of use.

A. Request for Review. An application may be filed with the commission:

1. Requesting extension of the time within which a nonconforming use or structure must be discontinued and removed from its site as specified in CMC 17.70.070, 17.70.080 and 17.70.090; or

2. Requesting substitution of another use permitted in the zone in which the nonconforming use is first permitted where a nonconforming building is vacant despite efforts to ensure continuation of a nonconforming use and is so constructed that it may not reasonably be converted to or used for a use permitted in the zone in which it is located. The commission may accept such filing either before or after the date of expiration of such nonconforming use.

B. Application and Procedure. Except as specifically provided in this section, the application and all procedures relative to notification, public hearing and appeals shall be the same as for a conditional use permit.

C. Burden of Proof. In addition to the information required in the application, the applicant shall substantiate, to the satisfaction of the commission, the following facts:

1. That the nature of the improvement is such that to require cessation of use would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and

2. That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity.

D. Findings and Decision. After a public hearing, the commission shall consider applications for a nonconforming use and structure review. In making such determination, the commission shall consider the following principles and standards and may approve such permit where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings:

1. That the nature of the improvement is such that to require cessation of use would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and

2. That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity.

E. Conditions. The commission in approving an application for a nonconforming use and structure review may impose conditions it deems necessary to ensure that the approval will be in accord with the findings required. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the use requested, including, but not limited to, those specified in CMC 17.62.120(D). (Ord. 1297 § 9, 1975.)


Chapter 17.72 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING

Sections:

17.72.010    Off-street parking – Space requirements.

17.72.020    Off-street parking – General requirements.

17.72.030    Off-street parking – Improvements required.

17.72.040    Off-street parking – Location.

17.72.050    Off-street parking – Mixed occupancies.

17.72.060    Off-street parking – Joint use.

17.72.070    Off-street parking – Common facilities.

17.72.080    Off-street parking – Uses not specified.

17.72.090    Off-street parking – Plans.

17.72.100    Off-street parking – Hardship cases.

17.72.110    Off-street parking – Exceptions.

17.72.115    Off-street parking – Alternative parking options in “Shopper’s Lane” district.

17.72.120    Off-street parking – Clarifications of ambiguity or omission.

17.72.130    Off-street loading – Space requirements.

17.72.140    Off-street loading – Requirements for various uses.

17.72.150    Off-street parking or storing – Commercial vehicles.


17.72.010 Off-street parking – Space requirements.

At the time of the erection of any building and/or structure permitted hereinafter listed or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, second dwelling units, floor area or seats, or at such time that a higher usage is applied, there shall be provided for such new construction or intensified use, enlargement or increased capacity and use of land the following minimum off-street parking space with adequate provisions for safe ingress and egress, and the parking space or spaces shall thereafter be maintained in connection with such building or structure and use of land:

	Use	Parking Spaces Required

	Animal hospital, shelter and kennel; and veterinarian office	Two for each employee

	Automotive repair shops	Three per service bay or roll-up door, whichever is greater, plus additional parking spaces based on the applicable floor area standard for office/retail/customer areas

	Automotive body and paint shops	Three per service bay or roll-up door, whichever is greater, plus additional parking spaces based on the applicable floor area standard for office/retail/customer areas

	Automotive service station	One for each employee on duty at any one time; add one space for each tow truck stored on site; additional requirements under CMC 17.62.025

	Batting cage	Two for each cage, plus one for each employee

	Bowling alleys	Five for each alley

	Chapels, when used independent of churches	One for each three fixed seats or one for every 25 square feet of seating area (where there are no fixed seats) plus one for each 800 square feet of floor area other than the main chapel

	Churches	One for each six fixed seats or one for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, whichever amount is greater

	Convalescent hospitals, nursing homes and skilled care facilities, but not acute care facilities such as hospitals	One for each three beds

	Dance halls, public and private	One for each 35 square feet of floor area reserved for dancing

	Residential Uses:

	a.    Single-family	Two-car garage

	b.    Accessory dwelling unit	One for each unit, unless an exception applies pursuant to California Government Code Section 65852.2(d) or successor statute

	c.    Duplex	Two-car garage for each unit

	d.    Multifamily including townhouses, stock cooperatives, condominiums, community apartments, and similar uses	 

	i.    Bachelor unit	One-car garage plus one space

	ii.    One-bedroom	One-car garage plus one space

	iii.    Two-bedroom unit	Two-car garage plus one-half space

	iv.    Three-bedroom unit	Two-car garage plus one space plus one-half space for each bedroom in excess of three

	v.	Fractional requirements of one-half or more shall be construed as a whole number

	vi.	Guest parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per every five units. Parallel guest parking space shall have the dimensions of nine feet wide by 22 feet long

	Lodges without sleeping rooms	One for each six fixed seats or one for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, whichever amount is the greater

	Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of food and beverages:	 

	Having less than 1,000 square feet of floor area	One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area

	Having less than 4,000 square feet of floor area but more than 1,000 square feet of floor area	One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area

	Having 4,000 square feet or more	40 plus one for each 50 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 4,000 square feet

	Golf courses	10 for each hole plus one for each 100 square feet of building floor area used for public assembly

	Golf driving range	Two for each tee

	Health activities or clubs, fitness centers or studios and other similar fitness facilities	One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area plus one for each employee at any shift

	Hospitals	One for each two beds plus one for each five employees

	Hotels, motels	One for each hotel unit/room; additional requirements under CMC 17.62.027

	Manufacturing uses, research and testing laboratories, creameries, bottling establishments, bakeries, canneries, printing and engraving shops or similar uses	One for each two employees on the maximum working shift, or not less than one for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever amount is greater

	Medical or dental clinics and medical professional offices	One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area

	Miniature golf courses	Three for each hole

	Model homes	Two for each unit/house built for display purposes

	Mortuaries and funeral homes	One for each 50 square feet of floor area of assembly rooms

	Motor vehicle or machinery sales and wholesale stores	One for each 800 square feet of gross floor area or one for each four employees, whichever amount is greater

	Pitch and putt courses	Three for each hole

	Retail stores, clothing stores	One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area plus one for each employee

	Rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs and fraternity houses	One for each sleeping room or one for each two beds, whichever is the greater

	Sanitariums, children’s homes, homes for the aged, asylums	One for each two beds, plus one for each five employees

	Education Services:

	Day care school	One for each employee

	Elementary	One for each employee

	High school and college	One for each five students which the school buildings and facilities are designed to accommodate, plus one for each employee

	Trade, business, private schools, exam preparation and tutoring, and other similar educational schools and instruction	One for each five fixed seats or one for each 100 square feet of floor area used for assembly and not containing fixed seats, whichever amount is greater, plus one for each employee

	Shooting ranges	Three for each lane, alley or target, plus one for each employee

	Stadiums, sports arenas, auditoriums and other public assembly	One for each five fixed seats or one for each 100 square feet of floor area used for assembly and not containing fixed seats, whichever amount is greater, plus one for each employee

	Surgery or surgical center – medical	One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area

	Theaters/arcades	One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area

	Trailer parks	One in conjunction with each trailer space, plus one for each 10 trailer spaces, the latter to be provided in the trailer park separate from the trailer spaces

	Warehouses and storage buildings	One for each employee

	Banks, business or professional offices	One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area

	Personal service shops such as but not limited to health spa, day spa, beauty salon, barber shops, threading shops and similar uses	One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area

	Libraries, library stations, museums	One for each 300 square feet of gross floor area

	Furniture and appliance stores, hardware stores, household equipment shops, service shops, shoe repair shops	One for each 500 square feet of gross floor area

(Ord. 19-07 § 34, 2019; Ord. 19-04 § 16, 2019; Ord. 19-01 § 40, 2019; Ord. 18-05 § 8(a), 2018; Ord. 17-14 § 8(a), 2017; Ord. 15-2036 § 1, 2015; Ord. 04-1901 § 13, 2004; Ord. 97-1813 § 10, 1997; Ord. 1683 § 1(B), 1989; Ord. 1649 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1535 § 21, 1983; Ord. 1300 § 1, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.020 Off-street parking – General requirements.

The following general requirements shall apply:

A. No parking area or parking space provided for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall hereafter be eliminated, reduced or converted in any manner below the requirements established in this title unless equivalent facilities are provided elsewhere in conformity with this title.

B. For dwellings, apartments or other structures designed for or intended to be used as a dwelling, there shall be provided parking spaces on the same site as the main building for each dwelling unit as herein indicated, or in the same trailer park, and each such space shall be not less than nine feet wide by 19 feet in length, except where a greater amount is required or provided for in this code. There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress with a minimum of 25 feet of unobstructed space to serve as an entrance and for the maneuvering of vehicles between the side of the accessory building and any other building and/or structure.

C. Repealed by Ord. 17-14.

D. Aisles to serve as accessways to vehicular parking spaces in a private, public or semipublic parking lot shall have a minimum width of nine feet to accommodate one-way vehicular traffic, and a minimum width of 18 feet to accommodate two-way traffic, except as hereinafter provided:

1. Parking spaces laid out parallel to or at angles through 30 degrees to the aisles shall have a one-way aisle width of not less than 12 feet.

2. Parking spaces laid out at angles from 31 degrees through 45 degrees to the aisle shall have a one-way aisle width of not less than 14 feet.

3. Parking spaces laid out at angles from 46 degrees to 60 degrees to the aisle shall have a one-way aisle width of not less than 18 feet.

4. Parking spaces laid out at angles from 61 degrees through 90 degrees shall have a two-way aisle width of not less than 25 feet. Where the width of the associated parking stalls has been increased, the aisle width may be decreased in accordance with the following table:

	Stall Length (in feet)	Stall Width (in feet)	Aisle Width (in feet)

	19	9	25

	19	9-1/2	24

	19	10	23

	19	10-1/2	22

E.1. The following parking requirements for handicapped stalls shall be as follows:

	Parking Spaces	Stalls Required

	Less than 40	1

	41 – 80	2

	81 – 120	3

	121 – 160	4

	161 – 300	5

Reference the Building Code, Title 24 for requirements exceeding the above. Reference State Vehicle Code, Section 22511.8 for the requirements of posting handicapped parking stalls.

2. The handicapped parking stalls shall be located no more than 100 feet from the main entrances of the building. The minimum size of a handicapped stall is 14 feet in width by 19 feet in length and to include a five-foot accessway.

3. If the parking requirements for the site are for less than five standard parking stalls, a handicapped stall shall be provided. All other required stalls shall be marked and signed with the handicapped symbols per the building code. The stalls shall be painted parking lot blue with the handicapped symbol at the entrance of the parking space. In order to satisfy the handicapped parking requirements, existing parking areas may be reduced by an amount necessary to satisfy the minimum requirements of the city for handicapped parking.

F. Up to 30 percent of the parking stalls used in a parking lot serving 20 or more automobiles may be designated as compact parking stalls meeting the standards of CMC 17.62.020(D). Any such use of compact parking stalls shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.62 CMC. (Ord. 18-05 §§ 8(b), (c), 2018; Ord. 17-14 §§ 8(b), (c), 2017; Ord. 1643 §§ 2, 3, 4, 1987; Ord. 1592 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1373 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1360 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.030 Off-street parking – Improvements required.

All public, semipublic and private parking areas improved and used for parking of vehicles shall be improved as follows:

A. Such parking areas shall be paved with hard, durable asphaltic paving at least two and one-half inches thick after compaction, or with portland cement paving at least four inches thick.

B. Where such areas adjoin a lot or parcel of land in a residential zone, a masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height shall be erected and maintained between the parking lot and the adjoining residential property back of the required front setback line of the adjoining residential properties. From the required front setback line to the front property line the height of the wall shall be not less than two and one-half feet, and not more than three feet.

C. Any lights provided to illuminate such parking spaces shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises.

D. All drainage of such parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the public works director of the city.

E. Where such parking areas abut a public sidewalk or street, a masonry wall two feet in height shall be erected and maintained between the parking lot and the public sidewalk or street.

F. Landscaping of parking areas shall be provided as follows:

Commercial and industrial zoned properties:

1. An amount equal to not less than two percent of the gross parking area, which for the purpose of calculation shall include all that area improved and used for the parking of vehicles as well as aisles, shall be reserved for landscaping.

Landscaping placed in required yards, planted on slopes exceeding two percent in grade, in easements and planting adjacent to buildings within or contiguous to improved parking areas, shall not be considered a credit for any of the required landscaping in parking areas, except when a required yard may be used for off-street parking as provided in this title and the yard is instead landscaped. This landscaped area may be included as a credit.

The botanical and common name of all plants shall be indicated on the site plan.

2. At least a minimum two percent interior landscaping and one tree for each 1,750 square feet of interior parking area as described in subsection (F)(1) of this section shall be provided in parking areas in commercial zones, and at least one tree for each 6,000 square feet of site area for industrial zones.

a. A tree-staking detail shall be required on all approved plans.

b. All trees shall be placed in a minimum of 15-gallon containers and have a trunk diameter of at least two inches and a height of eight feet or more.

c. All trees or landscaping areas that are neglected or damaged in any way shall be replaced by the owner, at the owner’s expense, within 10 days after notification from the city.

d. All tree wells shall have a minimum six-inch-wide continuous reinforced concrete curb enclosing them. The height of the curb shall be at least six inches.

e. All tree wells shall have a minimum area of 25 square feet.

f. Ground cover and shrubs shall be provided within all required tree wells and landscaped areas. Type, size and spacing of material used shall be approved by the planning director.

g. The botanical and common name of all trees shall be indicated on the site plan.

3. All landscaped areas including tree wells shall be served by an approved irrigation system to ensure adequate water supply for the continued maintenance of all plants and vegetation.

4. When automobile or vehicle parking spaces, or driveways on private property, are adjacent to a public or pedestrian sidewalk, it shall be separated with a landscaped area and/or wall as approved by the planning director.

5. Refuse enclosures shall be provided for each occupancy and business and shall be constructed of a masonry material compatible with the main building. The size of the enclosures shall be not less than six feet high by seven feet deep by eight feet wide. Enclosures shall be provided for all trash bins. All enclosures shall have metal self-enclosing doors to conceal the trash bin. (Ord. 1543 § 9, 1983; Ord. 1300 § 3, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.040 Off-street parking – Location.

Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.

A. For one-, two- or multiple-family dwellings or trailer parks, parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the buildings or trailers they are required to serve.

B. For hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged, asylums, orphanages, rooming houses, lodging houses, club rooms, and fraternity and sorority houses, parking facilities shall be located not more than 150 feet from the building they are required to serve.

C. For uses other than those specified above, parking facilities shall be located not over 300 feet from the building they are required to serve. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.050 Off-street parking – Mixed occupancies.

In the case of mixed uses, where there are at least four or more stores, and at least 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, there shall be one stall for each 200 square feet, minus 15 percent credit for common usage, for parking stalls. If two or three stores with at least two stores over 10,000 square feet exist, these stores have the characteristics of several stores. Therefore, the last-mentioned combination will also be considered common use and could qualify for a 15 percent credit. (Ord. 1300 § 2, 1975; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.060 Off-street parking – Joint use.

The planning commission may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property in the manner set forth in CMC 17.78.030 through 17.78.100, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the conditions specified herein:

A. Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this title for a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use. Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this title for a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use may be provided by a use considered to be primarily a daytime use; provided, that such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions as set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

B. Up to 100 percent of the parking facilities required by this title for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use; provided, that such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

C. The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing or wholesale buildings and similar uses. The following uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, dance halls, theaters and bars.

D. Conditions Required for Joint Use.

1. The building or use for which application is being made for authority to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within 150 feet of such parking facilities.

2. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours for the building or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.

3. Parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall evidence agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument approved by the city attorney and planning commission as to form and content. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.070 Off-street parking – Common facilities.

Common parking facilities may be provided in lieu of the individual requirements contained in this chapter, but such facilities shall be approved by the planning commission as to size, shape and relationship to business sites to be served; provided, that the total of such off-street parking spaces when used together shall not be less than the sum of the various uses computed separately. When any such common facility is to occupy a site of 5,000 square feet or more, then the parking requirements as specified in this chapter for each of two or more participating buildings or uses may be reduced not more than 15 percent upon approval of development plans by the planning commission in the manner set forth in CMC 17.78.030 through 17.78.110. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.080 Off-street parking – Uses not specified.

Where the parking requirements for a use is not specifically defined in this chapter, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the planning commission in the manner set forth in CMC 17.72.120. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in this chapter. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.090 Off-street parking – Plans.

Six copies of the plans of the proposed parking area shall be submitted to the building department at the time of the application for the building permit for the building to which the parking area is an accessory, or at such time any land is to be used for a parking area. The plans shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping and other features and appurtenances of the proposed parking lot as required by the building director. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.100 Off-street parking – Hardship cases.

Whenever practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships result or it is physically impossible to reasonably comply with the parking requirements contained in this chapter, the planning commission, upon receipt of a verified application from the owner or lessee of the property affected stating fully the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon, shall have the duty of recommending to the city council that the provisions of this title may be waived in the manner set forth in CMC 17.78.030 through 17.78.100. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.110 Off-street parking – Exceptions.

The provisions of the preceding sections shall apply uniformly throughout the city, except as provided herein:

A. Property located within the territorial limits of any completed proceeding for the formation of an off-street parking district shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.100 to the extent that the property has been originally assessed to provide for off-street parking.

Each assessment parcel within a parking district, as defined on the original assessment roll of the district, shall be deemed to have complied with CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.100 to the extent that the amount of the original assessment levied against that parcel divided by the quotient derived from dividing the original total amount of money assessed against the properties within the district by the original total number of square feet of parking area provided by the parking district. The quotient derived therefrom shall be calculated so as to convert the amount of each assessment into the number of square feet of parking area paid for by the assessment, and the number of square feet so calculated shall be deducted from the total amount of off-street parking required by CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.100.

B. Property located within the territorial limits of parking district No. 1 shall receive additional credit toward compliance with CMC 17.72.010 through 17.72.100 for parking spaces purchased by the district from proceeds of the annual assessment for expansion of parking. Such additional credit for a parcel shall be calculated as follows:

1. By dividing the assessed valuation of land and improvement for fiscal year 1987-1988 of such parcel by the quotient of the total valuation of land and improvements of the entire district for fiscal year 1987-1988 divided by the number of parking spaces purchased by the district from the proceeds of the annual assessments at the end of fiscal year 1987-1988; plus

2. By dividing the assessed valuation of land and improvements (or assessed value of land and building permit value, whichever is greater) of such parcel, at the time development or redevelopment is requested, by the quotient of the entire district assessable properties at that time divided by the total number of parking spaces purchased by the district from the proceeds of annual assessments after fiscal year 1987-1988. A fractional space resulting from the sum of original credit and additional credit shall be counted as a full space.

C. Property located within the territorial limits of parking district No. 1, which does not have adequate on-site parking, may also receive credit toward compliance with parking requirements by contributing parking spaces on another parcel to the district, or by contributing money to the district sufficient for the district to purchase the spaces necessary to meet the parking requirements for such property. Any parking credit resulting from such contribution of such property shall be added to any existing credit for such property at the time such contribution is made.

D. Properties located within the territorial limits of parking district No. 1 for which a variance from parking requirements is sought shall first secure a report and recommendation from the board of parking place commissioners of such district to the planning commission prior to any hearing thereon by the planning commission.

E. CMC 17.72.010 notwithstanding, the parking spaces required for the following uses for property located within the territorial limits of parking district No. 1 shall be as set forth in this subsection:

	Use	Parking Spaces Required

	Banks, business or professional offices, clothing shops, furniture and appliance stores, hardware stores, household equipment shops, libraries, library stations, museums, service shop, shoe repair shops, personal service shops	One for each 330 square feet of gross floor area

	Medical or dental clinics and medical professional offices	One for each 330 square feet of gross floor area

	Retail stores, except as otherwise specified herein: 	 

	Having not more than 20,000 square feet of floor area	One for each 330 square feet of gross floor area

	Having more than 20,000 square feet of floor area	60 plus one for each 250 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 20,000 square feet, plus one for each employee

(Ord. 1704 §§ 1, 2, 1990; Ord. 1618 § 1, 1986; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.115 Off-street parking – Alternative parking options in “Shopper’s Lane” district.

A. The city council finds that the “Shopper’s Lane” district is a unique commercial area within the city whose businesses, due to the limited space and orientation of their lots, face unique challenges that often prevent them from satisfying the parking requirements required by this chapter on site. This can result in lost opportunities to bring business into the district. On the other hand, there is a large public parking facility located within the district which, absent this amendment, businesses cannot legally use to satisfy parking requirements. Therefore, the city council hereby adopts the following regulations. 

B. In addition to any other available exception or credit provided in this chapter, commercial uses located within the territorial limits of the “Shopper’s Lane” district may qualify for a one-for-one credit to satisfy the off-street parking requirements otherwise imposed by this chapter by utilizing either of the following:

1. On-street parking spaces which are located adjacent to the front or rear property line of the commercial use. This reduction shall not apply to the number of handicapped accessible spaces required. 

2. Spaces available in off-site public parking facilities; provided, that:

a. There is a public parking facility owned or operated by the city, or any other public agency of which the city is a part, within 300 feet of the use it is to serve, measured in walking distance along the way open to public pedestrian passage;

b. The vehicle parking spaces located at said facility are made available to the general public and their use is not restricted to private owners, lessees, licensees or other parties; 

c. The planning commission finds that there exist sufficient public parking spaces at said facility to satisfy the off-street parking requirements imposed by this chapter upon the use under consideration. As a condition to planning commission consideration, the chief planning official may require an applicant to provide a parking analysis demonstrating that sufficient public parking spaces exist at the facility to accommodate the use. 

d. The planning commission shall have continuing authority to review the status of vehicle parking at public parking facilities within the “Shopper’s Lane” district. If, at a future date, the planning commission determines that a public parking facility is no longer available or no longer provides sufficient parking spaces to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for a particular use, the planning commission may require the use to provide an alternative means of satisfying off-street parking requirements, which means may include (i) providing off-street parking on the same lot or parcel of land, (ii) providing off-street parking at a substitute location allowed under this chapter, or (iii) providing off-street parking at another public parking facility, as set forth in this subsection.

C. This section shall not be construed to prohibit or limit the city’s authority to take any of the following actions:

1. To lawfully close or otherwise restrict access to a public street, alley or public parking facility within the “Shopper’s Lane” district; or 

2. To lawfully charge for the use of public parking spaces within the “Shopper’s Lane” district; or

3. To lawfully establish and maintain a parking and/or business improvement district to pay for the expenses of constructing, operating and maintaining public parking within the “Shopper’s Lane” district. (Ord. 12-2008 § 1, 2012.)


17.72.120 Off-street parking – Clarifications of ambiguity or omission.

If ambiguity or an omission arises concerning the appropriate classifications of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, or if ambiguity exists with respect to matters of off-street parking facilities, as set forth in this chapter and as they may pertain to unforeseen circumstances, it shall be the duty of the commission to ascertain all pertinent facts and by resolution of record set forth its findings and its interpretations, and such resolution shall be forwarded to the city council and if approved by the city council thereafter such interpretation shall govern. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.00.)


17.72.130 Off-street loading – Space requirements.

Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading spaces as provided in CMC 17.72.140 subject to conditions herein:

A. When the lot upon which the loading spaces are located abuts upon an alley, such loading spaces shall adjoin or have access from the alley. The length of the loading space may be measured perpendicular to or parallel with the alley. Where such loading area is parallel with the alley and the lot is 50 feet or less in width, the loading area shall extend across the full width of the lot;

B. Where the loading is permitted in a yard, the yard may be used in calculating the area required for loading, providing that there is no more than one entry or exit to 60 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof;

C. Loading space being maintained in connection with any existing main building on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall thereafter be maintained so long as the building remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided on a contiguous lot in conformity with the requirements of this section and CMC 17.72.140; provided, however, that this regulation shall not require the maintenance of more loading space than is hereby required for a new building, nor the maintenance of such space for any type of main building other than those specified above.

No loading space which is provided for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall hereafter be eliminated, reduced or converted in any manner below the requirements established in this title unless equivalent facilities are provided elsewhere, conforming to this title;

D. Loading space required by this title may occupy a required yard as provided in the districts, but in no case shall any part of an alley or street be used for loading. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.10.)


17.72.140 Off-street loading – Requirements for various uses.

The following off-street loading spaces shall be provided for all hospitals, institutions, hotels, commercial and industrial uses. The loading spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length, and with 14 feet of vertical clearance:



 

	Total Square Feet of Building Space (Gross Floor Area)	Loading Spaces Required

	Commercial and Industrial Buildings:	 

	3,000 – 20,000	1

	20,001 – 50,000	2

	50,001 and over	3

	Hospitals, Institutions, Hotels, Office Buildings:	 

	10,000 – 50,000	1

	50,001 – 100,000	2

	100,001 and over	3

(1964 Code Appx. A § 11.10.)


17.72.150 Off-street parking or storing – Commercial vehicles.

A. It is unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle on property which is zoned A-1, A-2, or any area zoned with a residential classification.

B. It is unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle on property which is zoned for commercial purposes except in a space which is reserved for a commercial vehicle parking purpose in the parking area required to be maintained in connection with such commercial use.

C. “Commercial vehicle,” as used in this section, means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the Vehicle Code used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.

D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to commercial automobiles, pickups, panel delivery trucks and station wagons or the parking of a vehicle temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. (Ord. 1424 § 1, 1979.)


Chapter 17.73 OFF-SITE SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGNS

Sections:

17.73.010    Intent.

17.73.020    Sign specifications.

17.73.030    Location.

17.73.040    Permits.

17.73.050    General requirements.


17.73.010 Intent.

This chapter is intended to provide for a more orderly display of off-site subdivision directional signs advertising various subdivisions throughout the city and to provide standard specifications for such signs. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1986.)


17.73.020 Sign specifications.

The design specifications for panel and sign structure design shall be in accordance with requirements established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1986.)


17.73.030 Location.

Locational requirements applicable to off-site subdivision directional signs shall be as follows:

A. The placement of each such sign structure shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director and city engineer.

B. All signs shall be placed on private property or city right-of-way with written consent of the property owner filed with the planning department or a city encroachment permit obtained and filed with the city engineer prior to the issuance of a sign permit.

C. No sign structure shall be located within 600 feet from any existing or previously approved sign site.

D. A sign location plan shall be prepared showing the site of each directional sign and shall be submitted to the planning director prior to the issuance of a sign permit. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1986.)


17.73.040 Permits.

It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, permit or maintain a subdivision directional sign upon any property within the city without first obtaining a written off-site subdivision directional sign permit from the planning department as required by this chapter. Application for such permit shall be made on a form provided by the planning department. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1986.)


17.73.050 General requirements.

The following regulations shall apply to all off-site subdivision directional signs:

A. Any such sign approved for a particular subdivision within the city shall not be changed to advertise another subdivision without approval of the planning director.

B. There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards or appurtenances added to the signs as originally approved. Further, no other directional signs may be used, such as posters or trailer signs.

C. No subdivision signs shall be erected advertising tracts or subdivisions located outside the city limits.

D. Said signs shall be allowed until a subdivision is sold out or for a period of 12 months, whichever first occurs. Extensions of the 12-month time limit may be approved by the planning director upon presentation of sufficient justification for the extension.

E. Said signs may contain directions to public buildings and facilities. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1986.)


Chapter 17.74 SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL ZONES

Sections:

17.74.010    Intent and purpose.

17.74.020    Definitions.

17.74.030    Permit – Required – Application.

17.74.040    Permit – Exceptions.

17.74.050    General requirements.

17.74.055    Temporary signs and attention-getting devices – Generally.

17.74.056    Temporary signs and advertising devices – Outdoor uses.

17.74.057    Enforcement of temporary sign regulations.

17.74.060    Requirements – Service stations.

17.74.061    Requirements – Mural.

17.74.062    Requirements – Painted sign.

17.74.063    Requirements – Sidewalk sign.

17.74.070    Review criteria.

17.74.080    Nonconforming signs.

17.74.090    Violations.


17.74.010 Intent and purpose.

This chapter is intended to provide for a more orderly display of advertising devices on commercially zoned property; to bring those devices in harmony with the building, the neighborhood, and other signs in the area; to protect the general welfare of the businessmen within the same area, as well as the citizens of Covina; and to do so by regulating and controlling the location, design, quality of materials, construction, illumination, and maintenance of signs and sign structures. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.020 Definitions.

In carrying out the intent of this chapter and the property development standards relating to signs in commercial zones, the following words, phrases and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, and shall be interpreted to have the standards and include the parts, elements and features set forth in this chapter:

A. “Aggregate sign area” means the total surface space of a sign within a single continuous perimeter containing the words, letters, figures or symbols, together with any frame, material or color forming an integral part of the display. Where the words, letters, figures or symbols are free from any encompassing structure or integral background space, the aggregate sign area will be construed as that percentage of the building face that is permitted for signing purposes.

B. “Animated or rotating signs” means any sign or device designed to attract attention by visual means through the movement or semblance of movement of the whole or any part of the sign including rotation, special lighting or wind-activated devices.

C. “Banner” means a sign generally made of flexible material, usually cloth, paper or plastic, temporary in nature.

D. “Billboard” means a sign usually designed for use with changing advertising copy and which is normally used for the advertisement of goods produced or services rendered at locations other than the premises on which the sign is located.

E. “Building face” means the vertical and horizontal dimensions at any one side of a building elevation, extending from the base of the building to the roof line and between the main building walks, exclusive of any architectural features, extensions or projections.

F. “Building frontage” means those building elevations which face upon a dedicated street or public parking area between such building and street.

G. “Bunting” means flags or strips of cloth or fabric which are suspended from a standard or building to form a decorative sign or attention-getting device.

H. “Contractor’s sign” means a sign stating the names of those individuals or firms directly connected with a construction project at the site on which such work is taking place.

I. “Copy area” means that portion of the sign area devoted to content or advertising as conveyed by any words, letters, figures or symbols. The total space as measured to the outer extreme of any words, letters, figures or symbols shall be computed as copy area.

J. “Directional sign” means a sign erected for the purpose of informing the viewer of the approximate route, direction or location of a given goal, not including advertising.

K. “First story height of buildings” means, for purposes of computing sign area, the first story height of the area from the base of the building to its roof line or to the top of the parapet, if any, for single-story structures up to a maximum of 16 feet for all buildings.

L. “Flashing sign” means a sign which contains or is illuminated by lights which are intermittently on and off, change in intensity or which create the illusion of flashing in any manner.

M. “Freestanding sign” means a sign supported or upon the ground not attached to a building. A freestanding sign extending through a building or architectural feature to the building shall be considered a roof sign.

N. “Height of sign” means the distance of the average surface grade immediately surrounding the base of the sign to the top of its highest element, including any structural element.

O. “Identification sign” means a sign attached to the building face and displaying only the name of the owner, the occupant or the address.

P. “Illuminated sign” means a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable. This definition includes internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs.

Q. “Lot or street frontage” means the linear front footage of a parcel of property abutting a dedicated public street.

R. “Monument sign” means a lower profile freestanding sign which is located entirely within or adjacent to a landscaped area of a front yard or side yard setback and which utilizes architectural forms, structural support, and materials that complement the style of the appurtenant building(s).

S. “Nonconforming sign” means any sign existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein which does not conform to the provisions of this title.

T. “Occupancy frontage” means each individual tenant space within a building or group of buildings which faces upon a dedicated street or public parking area between such space and street.

U. “Off-premises sign” means a sign identifying a business or product at some location other than the property where the sign is displayed.

V. “On-premises sign” means a sign located on the same property with the business or product being identified or advertised.

W. “Pennant” means devices or flags generally made of flexible materials, usually cloth, paper or plastic and under one square foot in size which are suspended from lengths of string or rope.

X. “Permanent sign” means every sign except “temporary signs” as defined in this section.

Y. “Principal building” means the building which contains, in area, 50 percent or more of the principal use permitted upon the property.

Z. “Projecting sign” means any sign which is suspended from or supported by a building or wall, and which projects 12 inches or more outward therefrom.

AA. “Promotional sign” means a sign intended to direct attention to a special event or product, temporary in nature.

BB. “Roof Sign.” All signs projecting above the highest roof line of the building to which the sign is mounted. Roof signs are not permitted in any zone in the city.

CC. “Safety sign” means a sign which may be necessary to facilitate the safe movement of vehicles served by a public parking area, not including advertisement.

DD. “Shopping center” means a group of four or more businesses which function as an integral unit on a single parcel and which utilize common off-street parking and access.

EE. “Sign” means any form of visual communication which is intended to be viewed from public areas. The definition includes all parts, portions, units and materials composing same, together with illumination, frame, background, structure, support and anchorage therefor.

FF. “Street setback” means the line which defines the depth of the required yard setback, parallel with the existing or future street right-of-way, and removed by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in that particular zone.

GG. “Temporary sign” means a sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas or other similar lightweight material, with or without frames, including painted windows. Gold leaf or silver leaf letters and permanent decal transfers shall be considered as permanent signs.

HH. “Window sign” means a sign of a permanent nature which is placed or hung near a window and designed to be viewed from adjoining public streets or highway rights-of-way, including gold leaf or silver leaf letters and decals affixed to the window.

II. “Mural” means a picture or representation, in any type of medium, on an exterior surface of a structure that does not contain the name of the business, product, or service on the premises. Murals are only permitted in the TC-C, TC-P, and M-1 zones, and in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone as outlined in the CMC 17.74.061.

JJ. “Painted signs” means any on-premises sign painted or silk-screened onto a building wall. Painted signs are only permitted in the TC-C and TC-P zones, and in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.062.

KK. “Sidewalk sign” and “pennant/flag” means any sign not permanently attached to, mounted upon, or affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. Such signs may include, but are not limited to, A-frame signs, sandwich board signs, signs on wheels, signs on pedestals and flag signs. Sidewalk signs and pennant/flags are only permitted in the TC-C and TC-P zones and in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone as outlined in CMC 17.74.063. (Ord. 01-1879 § 7, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000; Ord. 1681 § 1(d), 1988; Ord. 1392 §§ 22, 23, 24, 1978; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.030 Permit – Required – Application.

It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, permit or maintain, unless otherwise excepted by this chapter, a sign upon any commercially zoned property without first obtaining a written sign permit from the planning department as required by this chapter. Application for such permit shall be made on a form provided by the planning department and shall set forth and contain the following information and material:

A. Three copies of a plan showing:

1. The location and size of any buildings or structures on the property, both existing and proposed;

2. The location of off-street parking facilities, including major points of entry and exit for motor vehicles where directional signs may be proposed;

3. The position of the proposed sign and its relation to adjacent buildings and structures;

4. The design and size, colors proposed and proposed location of the sign or sign structure on the property;

B. A statement showing the sizes and dimensions of all other signs existing on the property;

C. A statement showing the relationship of such sign or sign structure to the appearance and design of existing or proposed buildings and structures on the property;

D. Such other information as the planning department may reasonably require to secure compliance with this chapter and the ordinances of the city. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.040 Permit – Exceptions.

The following signs, if not illuminated, shall be allowed on all commercially zoned property without a sign permit being required:

A. One identification sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, and displaying only the address of the owner or the occupant;

B. Directional or safety signs as required; provided, that:

1. Each such sign has first been reviewed and approved by the planning department;

2. Such signs do not exceed 16 square feet per face;

C. Governmental flags or emblems or flags of nonprofit organizations;

D. Religious, charitable, educational, cultural or political posters not exceeding 16 square feet in area, temporary in nature, and conforming to the provisions of Chapter 17.75 CMC;

E. Governmental or other legally required posters, notices or signs;

F. Utility or telephone pay station signs;

G. Temporary real estate signs concerning the sale, rental or lease of the premises; provided, that:

1. Only one such sign is displayed per occupancy or street frontage on the property to which it refers;

2. Each sign does not exceed 16 square feet per face;

3. Each such sign is removed from the premises upon completion of the sale, rental or lease activity to which it pertains;

H. Temporary contractor’s signs not exceeding 16 square feet each, or one construction directory sign for all contractors not exceeding 32 square feet per face and eight feet in overall height. Each such sign must be removed upon completion of the work activities by such person or firm;

I. Sidewalk signs and pennant/flags, which are only allowed in the TC-C and TC-P zones and in the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone, require a sidewalk dining and display permit, but not a sign permit. (Ord. 01-1879 § 8, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000; Ord. 1681 § 1(c), 1988; Ord. 1392 §§ 25, 26, 1978; Ord. 1278 § 2, 1974; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.050 General requirements.

The following regulations shall apply to all signs for which a sign permit or review is required by this chapter:

A. Each sign shall be subject to review and approval by the planning department prior to its erection. In the case of new developments, a signing program shall be submitted as part of the site plan review procedure;

B. A coordinated signing program shall be required for properties where several businesses require signing;

C. The content or advertising which may be displayed on signs shall be limited to the following:

1. The identification of the building or its owners or the occupants of the premises;

2. Information concerning the activities conducted on the premises, or the goods and services offered in connection therewith;

3. Information concerning the sale, rental or lease of the premises;

4. Information providing safety or directional messages;

D. The content or advertising to be displayed on signs shall not cover more than 40 percent of the aggregate sign area. Where the background of that sign is the building itself, and the letters, words or figures are free from any encompassing sign structure, the copy area may be extended to 80 percent of the aggregate sign area;

E. The sign provisions apply only to on-premises signs. Off-premises (nonappurtenant) signs and billboards shall not be permitted;

F. No sign shall be allowed to obstruct the sight distance of motorists or pedestrians or be designed with flashing lights, moving parts, audible noises or other devices which tend to constitute a hazard;

G. Signs restricted to the use of blinking or scintillating lights shall be permitted when using frosted lamps no larger than 11 watts and when no individual lamp is set to blink on and off more than 15 times per minute;

H. Freestanding or unattached signs shall be allowed to rotate provided they do not exceed eight rpm;

I. No sign shall extend into the present or future right-of-way, except as specifically indicated. Signs may be located within a street setback as defined in CMC 17.74.020;

J. Temporary promotional signs and devices as provided for in CMC 17.74.055;

K. All signs, together with all supports, braces, anchors, etc., shall be kept in continual repair, including the replacement of defective parts, repainting, and cleaning, and otherwise in a presentable condition;

L. All signs or sign structures requiring utilities service shall be served by underground utilities only;

M. Except for copy changes and normal repair or maintenance, nonconforming signs shall not be allowed to be moved, altered, added to or replaced unless they are made to comply with the provisions of this title;

N. All lighted signs should have diffused or indirect lighting and have a maximum power of 15 watts per square foot at the sign face;

O. Tobacco product and alcoholic beverage advertising prohibited on billboards:

1. Except as herein stated, no person shall, after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section, place or cause to be placed or permit to remain in place any advertisement for tobacco products or alcoholic beverages on any billboard within any residential zone or within 1,000 feet of the premises of any school, park, recreational facility, youth center, or church.

2. The distances specified in this subsection shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest property line of a use listed above.

3. “Tobacco product” shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipes, tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, and dipping tobacco. (For purposes of this subsection, this definition supersedes all other “tobacco product” definitions under this title.)

4. “Alcoholic beverage” means any beverage in liquid form that contains not less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and is intended for human consumption. (For purposes of this subsection, this definition supersedes all other “alcoholic beverage” definitions under this title.)

5. “Billboard” shall refer to nonappurtenant advertising structures defined under CMC 17.14.020(D).

6. “School” shall include any public or private elementary or secondary school, attendance at which satisfies the compulsory education laws of the state of California, any private educational facility offering instruction or other activities to persons 17 years of age or younger, and any day care center with 15 or more children or juveniles, whether such use is within or outside the incorporated area of the city.

7. “Park” shall mean any park, playground, ball field, or grounds under the control, direction or management of a public entity, whether such use is within or outside the incorporated area of the city.

8. “Recreational facility” shall mean any recreational center or facility under the control, direction or management of a public entity, whether such use is within or outside the incorporated area of the city.

9. “Youth center” shall mean any designated indoor public, private or parochial facility, other than a private residence or a multiple-dwelling unit, that contains programs that provide, on a regular basis, activities or services for persons who have not yet reached the age of 18 years, including but not limited to community-based programs, after school programs, weekend programs, violence prevention programs, leadership development programs, vocational programs, substance abuse prevention programs, individual or group counseling, case management, remedial, tutorial or other educational assistance or enrichment, music, art, dance and other recreational or cultural activities, physical fitness activities and sports programs, whether such use is within or outside the incorporated area of the city.

10. “Church” shall mean a development or facility maintained and used exclusively for religious worship, including customary incidental education and social activities in conjunction therewith, whether such use is within or outside the incorporated area of the city.

11. This subsection may only be applied to or interpreted to have an effect on any contract executed after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this subsection. Absent proof of the existence of any contract, agreement, lease or the like, entered into before the effective date of this section, and the terms and conditions thereof, any advertisement in violation of any part of this subsection shall be removed within six months of the effective date of this section.

12. This subsection shall be administered and enforced by the department of community development/planning division. The department/division shall create and update a detailed map of the city, showing the location and boundaries of all schools, parks, recreational centers, youth centers, and churches, and the corresponding 1,000-foot radii within which tobacco product and alcoholic beverage advertising is prohibited. The department/division shall also develop guidelines, as appropriate, to ensure proper implementation and enforcement of this subsection. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be interpreted or enforced in such a manner as to constitute a compensable limitation on the use of any advertising display pursuant to Business and Profession Code Section 5412. The department/division may enter into agreements with appropriate city departments to enforce this subsection. (Ord. 98-1836 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1681 § 1(e), 1988; Ord. 1392 §§ 26, 27, 28, 1978; Ord. 1169 § 5, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.055 Temporary signs and attention-getting devices – Generally.

Temporary signs and advertising devices shall be permitted in all commercial and industrial zones subject to the following regulations:

A. Temporary signs are permitted for the following types of occasions:

1. Opening of new business;

2. Special or seasonal sales;

3. Promotional events.

B. The following types of temporary promotional devices shall be permitted:

1. Banners which are mounted flush against a building wall or suspended over a landscaped area;

2. Flags and streamers (attached to a standard or building);

3. Professional-quality window painting;

4. Window posters;

5. Nonmetallic balloons, not exceeding three and one-half cubic feet in volume;

6. Such other devices as the planning commission deems to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public welfare.

C. Quantity and Size. Temporary signs and banners shall comply with the following limits:

1. The total area of all banners, flags and streamers utilized shall not exceed 50 square feet, with the exception that businesses where the principle building frontage is wider than 100 feet shall be permitted to have a total area of 100 square feet of temporary signage.

2. No more than three banners per building shall be permitted.

3. Window painting and posters shall not exceed 50 percent of the window area on the building face on which the painting or poster is located. Window painting and posters may be used in combination with banners, flags, and streamers and do not count against the 50- or 100-square-foot limit previously stated.

4. No more than two balloons per lineal foot of building frontage.

5. One large balloon or inflatable figure shall be allowed for events with an administrative conditional use permit. The balloon shall not exceed the building height limit of the zone or 50 feet, whichever is least restrictive, nor shall the balloon be displayed for more than 30 total days per calendar year.

D. The following types of temporary attention-getting devices are expressly prohibited:

1. Hot air or helium balloons larger than three and one-half cubic feet in volume;

2. Pennants of any size (whether attached to a building or suspended from lengths of rope);

3. Flags and/or streamers suspended from lengths of rope;

4. Portable signs, including but not limited to A-frame signs and trailers;

5. Roof signs;

6. Fence signs;

7. Windblown devices (except building-attached flags and streamers);

8. Signs in the public right-of-way;

9. Light- or sound-emitting devices.

E. Conditions of Use. Temporary attention-getting devices permitted by this section shall comply with the following conditions of use:

1. All such devices shall be maintained in good repair.

2. No device shall be designed, installed or situated so as to constitute a potential hazard to the pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

3. All temporary attention-getting devices shall be of professional-quality printing, painting or manufacture and shall comply with all applicable ordinances, policies and design guidelines.

4. A sign permit shall be obtained from the chief planning official prior to the installation of any temporary attention-getting device. When the application for a sign permit is filed, a uniform fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid for defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings. The chief planning official may impose reasonable conditions as a condition of permit issuance.

5. No permit shall be issued for any business or site to utilize temporary attention-getting devices for a period in excess of 90 total days in any calendar year. (Ord. 01-1879 § 9, 2001; Ord. 95-1793 §§ 1, 2, 1995; Ord. 1681 § 1(F), 1988.)


17.74.056 Temporary signs and advertising devices – Outdoor uses.

A. Businesses which meet with the following criteria shall have the option, at their discretion, of complying with the standards of this section in lieu of those listed in CMC 17.74.055:

1. Located on sites exceeding 60,000 square feet of net site area;

2. Utilize visible outdoor merchandise display area(s) where such area(s) have been approved for display purposes by the city. Such display purposes include, but are not limited to:

a. Auto, motorcycle and boat sales or rental (new or used),

b. Building materials sales,

c. Plant nurseries,

d. Mobile home sales.

B. The following types of temporary signs and attention-getting devices shall be permitted by this section:

1. Building/wall-mounted banners, flags and/or streamers not to exceed 100 square feet per banner or two and one-half square feet per lineal foot of building or wall front, whichever is less (banners may be ground-mounted);

2. Window painting or posters not to exceed 50 percent of the window area on the building face on which the painting or poster is located;

3. Bunting, flags, streamers and/or banners attached to light standards, not to exceed a total of 50 square feet per light standard;

4. Pennants/small flags suspended from horizontal ropes;

5. Helium balloons not exceeding three and one-half cubic feet in volume per any one balloon which are tied to any vehicle(s) and approved by the chief planning official;

6. Large balloons and inflatable figures shall be allowed not to exceed the height limits of the zone or displayed over 60 days total per year.

C. The following types of attention-getting devices are expressly prohibited:

1. Hot air or helium balloons larger than three and one-half cubic feet in volume;

2. Light- or sound-emitting devices;

3. Signs in the public right-of-way;

4. Windblown devices except as permitted in subsection (B) of this section;

5. Roof signs;

6. Portable signs, including trailers and A-frame signs.

D. Conditions of Use. Temporary attention-getting devices and signs permitted by this section shall comply with the following conditions of use:

1. All temporary attention-getting devices shall be maintained in sound and attractive condition with no visible deterioration. Such devices shall be replaced or removed at intervals not exceeding six months.

2. All devices and advertising permitted by this section shall be of professional-quality design, construction and workmanship.

3. No device shall be constructed, located or situated so as to constitute a potential hazard to the public.

4. All temporary signs and attention-getting devices shall be located on a building or wall structure or within the city-approved display area.

5. An annual permit shall be obtained from the chief planning official prior to the installation of any device or temporary sign permitted by this section. When the application for the permit is filed, a uniform fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid for defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings. The chief planning official may impose reasonable conditions as a condition of permit issuance. (Ord. 01-1879 § 10, 2001; Ord. 95-1793 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1681 § 1(g), 1988.)


17.74.057 Enforcement of temporary sign regulations.

A. Any person violating any provision of CMC 17.74.055 or 17.74.056 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

B. Any person having been convicted of a violation of CMC 17.74.055 or 17.74.056 who thereafter commits another violation of the same section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1681 § 1(h), 1988.)


17.74.060 Requirements – Service stations.

Signs for service stations in any zone shall comply with all pertinent provisions of this chapter and, in addition, shall comply with the following requirements:

A. Freestanding or monument signs shall be permitted as follows:

1. No more than two monument signs. Monument signs are defined as fixed freestanding signs not exceeding a height of 10 feet, located entirely within a planting area and having a massive support element projecting from the planting area. Such sign or signs shall be limited to a maximum square footage per sign of 26 square feet per side; or

2. No more than two freestanding signs. A freestanding sign is defined as a fixed sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground. Such freestanding signs shall have a minimum clearance aboveground level of eight feet, a maximum clearance of 10 feet and a maximum height of 18 feet. Such sign shall not exceed 26 square feet per face and shall be limited to three faces. The commission may authorize the use of the square footage of two signs in one sign if such action results in a sign compatible to the existing structure. All structural support shall be treated in such a manner as to be aesthetically compatible with the buildings and improvements. Such signs shall be located within or over a planting area; or

3. One monument sign and one freestanding sign;

B. Each service station may have the following miscellaneous signs: price signs, wall signs, credit card signs, stamp signs, logo signs and signs denoting service and sales. Such signs, except temporary signs, and their support shall be architecturally compatible with the structure. All signs except price signs and temporary signs shall be parallel with the face of the building or an integral part of the design of the canopy or supporting members of the canopy. The total combined area of all such miscellaneous signs shall not exceed 100 square feet, except that signs required by law, directional signs and two logos placed upon each pump shall not be included in the calculation of the total square footage of miscellaneous signs. No individual miscellaneous sign shall exceed 20 square feet per face. Temporary signs may be permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter;

C. No advertising materials shall be displayed in windows or any building other than those advertising service or merchandise incidental to the operation of the automobile service station. (Ord. 1169 § 4, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.061 Requirements – Mural.

A. See CMC 17.74.020(II) et al.

B. No more than 15 percent of the mural may contain the name of the artist, sponsor, and/or product likeness.

C. If a mural is on the side of a building that would not normally qualify as an eligible wall for a sign under the design guidelines, the approval of a mural makes that side of the building eligible under the design guidelines. This does not increase the maximum signage allowed, and a new sign permit is still required.

D. Murals cannot be mere extensions or enlargements of a sign.

E. Murals become the property of the property owner, and mural maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner.

F. Written permission from the property owner along with an acknowledgment of the property owner’s responsibility to remove the mural if it is not maintained is required.

G. Murals must be maintained or the city has the right to require removal with 90 calendar days’ written notice to the artist (if available) and the property owner. If the mural is not repaired or removed within the 90-calendar-day period, the city can abate the mural at the property owner’s expense.

H. Murals shall be subject to review for approval by an ad hoc mural committee made up of the city manager or his or her designee, a representative from the redevelopment agency, a representative from the planning commission, a representative from the cultural arts committee, and the mayor or his or her representative. There would be a 10-day appeal period after the committee has approved or disapproved a mural during which time anyone can appeal the decision to the city council.

In considering murals for approval, the ad hoc committee must consider the significance of the project’s location, the artist’s ability, the ability of the artist to complete the project in a timely manner (typically within a two-month period of time), and the ability and willingness of the property owner to maintain the mural. In the TC-C and TC-P zones and the Shoppers Lane district of the C-3A zone a special emphasis on the history and heritage of Covina is encouraged, but not specifically required.

A sign permit must be completed for a mural to be forwarded to the ad hoc mural committee. The sign permit fee for public art commissioned by nonprofit organizations, service clubs, and/or governmental agencies, the city council, and their commissions or committees is waived. (Ord. 01-1879 § 11, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000.)


17.74.062 Requirements – Painted sign.

A. See CMC 17.74.020(JJ) et al.

B. Painted signs shall be limited to the name of the business, the type of business, and/or the principle product of the business, together with a logo or decoration(s) compatible with the architectural style and colors of the building.

C. Painted signs may be provided with exterior illumination provided the illumination satisfies all applicable city codes, including the electrical code.

D. Any painted signs shall be in lieu of conventional cabinet or channel letter signs (or principal wall signs).

E. Painted signs shall be professionally painted or applied.

F. Permanent painted window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window surface area.

G. A sign permit is required.

H. Written permission from the property owner along with an acknowledgment of the property owner’s responsibility to remove the sign if it is not maintained is required.

I. All applicable standards pertaining to wall signs shall apply.

J. Painted signs must be maintained or the city has the right to require removal with two-week written notice. If the sign is not repaired or removed within the two-week period, the city can abate the painted sign at the property owner’s expense. (Ord. 01-1879 § 12, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000.)


17.74.063 Requirements – Sidewalk sign.

A. See CMC 17.74.020(KK) et al.

B. Sidewalk signs and pennant/flags may be located upon the premises or public sidewalk along a street or alley adjacent to the business provided they do not obstruct any required walkway or entry, crosswalks, public seating areas, or impede the view of vehicular traffic.

C. Sidewalk signs and pennant/flags shall be subject to the provisions of the sidewalk dining and display application process, including the appropriate liability insurance and engineering-related encroachment permit requirements.

D. Only one sidewalk sign or pennant/flag may be approved per ground floor business. Only one sidewalk sign may be approved per building for businesses above or below the ground floor.

E. Sidewalk signs and pennant/flags shall be removed at the close of each business day.

F. Sidewalk signs shall not exceed six square feet in total area per side, shall not exceed five feet in height or be less than three feet in height, and shall include a minimum of 50 percent permanent copy. The remaining 50 percent may contain changeable copy provided visual quality is maintained. Pennant flags shall not exceed 15 square feet in area per side, shall be placed on poles no higher than nine feet (measured to top of pennant/flag), and shall meet all applicable safety and accessibility-related location requirements. Pennant/flag copy shall be comprised of business/institution (name) identification only (no product advertisements), though no copy area minimum or maximum standards shall apply. The design, style, and color of pennant/flag signage shall further (1) conform to a coordinated signing program for the appurtenant TC-C or TC-P zone areas (downtown district) or Shoppers Lane area and (2) complement surrounding buildings. Under CMC 17.74.050(B) and subsection VIII(F) of the design guidelines, said coordinated signing programs shall be developed by representatives of downtown area and Shoppers Lane area businesses and property owners and shall be approved by city staff.

G. Sidewalk signs and pennant/flags may not have attachments to them, such as banners, balloons, lights, streamers, or other attention-getting devices.

H. The use of chalk boards, white boards, or similar written-on devices are not acceptable except for restaurant, coffee/tea shop, and bakery menus.

I. The use of paper or cardboard signs is prohibited. Pennant/flags composed of plastic materials are further prohibited.

J. Originality is encouraged and professional quality is required for all signage.

K. All signage shall be maintained in good repair and in sound and attractive condition, with no visible deterioration. (Ord. 01-1879 § 13, 2001; Ord. 00-1860, 2000.)


17.74.070 Review criteria.

All signs which are regulated by this chapter shall be reviewed by the planning department. In approving, denying or approving with conditions a particular sign permit, the planning staff shall be subject to the following review criteria:

A. That the sign is necessary for the applicant’s enjoyment of substantial trade and property rights;

B. That the sign is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and this title;

C. That the sign does not constitute a detriment to public health, safety and welfare;

D. That the size, shape, color and placement of the sign is compatible with and bears a harmonious relationship to the building it identifies;

E. That the size, shape, color and placement of the sign is compatible with and bears a harmonious relationship to the neighborhood and other signs in the area;

F. That both the location of the proposed sign and the design of its visual elements (lettering, words, figures, colors, decorative motifs, spacing and proportions) are legible under normal viewing conditions prevailing where the sign is to be installed;

G. That the location and design of the proposed sign does not obscure from view or unduly detract from existing or adjacent signs;

H. That the location and design of the proposed sign, its size, shape, illumination and color, are compatible with the visual characteristics of the surrounding area so as not to detract from or cause depreciation of the value of the adjacent developed properties;

I. That the location and design of a proposed sign in close proximity to any residential district does not adversely affect the value or character of the adjacent residential district. When in the public interest, and agreed to by the sign applicant, the planning director may consider and render decisions on modifications of up to 10 percent of the provisions of this title pertaining to the size, height and copy area coverage of signs. In rendering such decisions, the planning director shall be subject to the same review criteria as set forth above and the criteria set for variances in this title. (Ord. 1169 § 3, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.080 Nonconforming signs.

A. Except for copy changes and normal repair or maintenance, no sign in existence upon the adoption of the ordinance codified herein shall be modified, altered, moved or replaced, unless it is made to comply with the provisions of this title.

B. Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth, canvas or other similar nondurable material, including painted wall signs or freestanding signs that are not affixed to a building or the ground, shall be removed within six months from the effective date of the ordinance codified herein.

C. Every lawfully established nonconforming sign of a permanent nature shall be removed or altered to comply with the provisions of this title on or before July 1, 1979.

D. Whenever a business use within any commercial zone is discontinued or sold, the sign owner, his agent or the property owner shall remove all temporary nonconforming signs from the premises and shall remove all permanent nonconforming signs from the premises. (Ord. 1428 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1979; Ord. 1392 § 29, 1978; Ord. 1169 § 3, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


17.74.090 Violations.

A. Any sign which has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of this code regulating signs shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the property on which the sign is displayed within 10 days after receiving notice to do so by the planning department.

B. The cost of removing any sign and any expense incidental to such action shall be paid by the sign owner, his agent or the manufacturer.

C. Any person, firm or corporation who constructs, erects, alters, maintains or causes to be erected, altered or maintained any sign which is in violation of this chapter or the provisions of this code regulating signs is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, is punishable as provided in CMC 1.16.010. Each such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for every day that the violation of this title is continued or permitted.

D. Any sign erected on or extending over public property in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of this code regulating signs, and any sign which is in violation of this title, is a public nuisance subject to abatement by the city in a civil action. The remedy provided herein is cumulative with any other remedy, civil or criminal, which the city may have. (Ord. 1169 § 3, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 11.50.)


Chapter 17.75 INCIDENTAL SIGNS

Sections:

17.75.010    Definition.

17.75.020    Posting prohibited.

17.75.030    Size.

17.75.040    Method of affixing.

17.75.050    Location.

17.75.060    Exceptions.

17.75.070    Removal.

17.75.080    Retrieval of signs.

17.75.090    Disposal of signs.

17.75.100    Cleanup deposit.


17.75.010 Definition.

An “incidental sign” (hereinafter “such sign or signs” or “the sign” or “a sign”) is any sign, handbill, or poster which is placed to advertise or announce a specific event, or which pertains to a particular event or occurrence, or which is not designed or intended to be placed permanently, or which relates to such events or occurrence that are not taking place on the premises on which the sign is located. Examples of such signs include, but are not limited to, signs, handbills, or posters relating to garage sales, political candidates or ballot measures, concerts, “swap meets” and the like. (Ord. 97-1816 § 4, 1997.)


17.75.020 Posting prohibited.

No person shall paint, mark, or write on, or post or otherwise affix, or erect, construct, maintain, paste, nail, tack or otherwise fasten or affix, any such sign or signs on any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, street lamppost, pole, bench, hydrant, tree, shrub, bridge, electric light or power or telephone wire pole, or wire appurtenance thereof, or upon any street sign or traffic sign, or upon any other object located within the public right-of-way which is not maintained for the purpose of communications by such signs by the general public. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.030 Size.

Regardless of the zone in which any such sign or signs are placed, the total area of any such sign or signs shall not exceed 32 square feet where the frontage is equal to or less than 100 linear feet. Where the frontage is greater than 100 linear feet the total area of any such sign or signs may be increased by one-half of one square foot for each linear foot of frontage in excess of 100 feet. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.040 Method of affixing.

No such sign or signs shall be affixed to any permanent building, structure or facility by use of glue, mastic, tape or tacks penetrating more than one-half inch in depth. This section shall not apply to signs affixed to portable or freestanding devices. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.050 Location.

No such sign or signs shall be constructed, located or situated within the public right-of-way, nor so as to constitute a potential hazard to the public, nor so as to obstruct the sight distances of motorists or pedestrians, nor less than five feet from any property line. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.060 Exceptions.

A. This chapter shall not prevent a public officer or employee from posting notices as required by law, such as notices of street abandonment or notices of proposed assessment district proceedings, as required by the Streets and Highways Code or other statutory authority.

B. This section shall also not pertain to:

1. Structures located within the right-of-way which by tradition or designation are used for the purpose of communication by the general public. Such structures shall include kiosks, bulletin boards, benches upon which advertisement is authorized, newspaper racks, and billboards as authorized by this code.

2. Events or activities sponsored by the city or redevelopment agency. (Ord. 01-1879 § 14, 2001; Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.070 Removal.

A. Any such sign or signs not prohibited by this chapter shall be removed within 14 calendar days after the event to which they relate occurs, whether the event is an individual activity or is one part of two or more activities. Any sign or signs located within the public right-of-way or located upon any property in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or risk to the public or so as to obstruct the sight distances of motorists or pedestrians may be removed immediately and without notice by any officer or employee authorized to enforce the municipal code under CMC 1.28.010.

B. Any sign or signs prohibited by this chapter may be removed by any officer or employee authorized to enforce the municipal code under CMC 1.28.010. If the owner of any such prohibited sign or signs, except for those set forth in subsection (A) of this section, can be reasonably ascertained from the sign itself, the officer or employee seeking to remove the sign shall reasonably attempt to notify the owner in accord with subsection (D) of this section. In cases where a sign contains the name of a printing firm, political group, or political candidate, the city officer or employee shall also reasonably attempt to notify such firm, group, or candidate.

1. If the owner refuses to remove the sign, the officer or employee may remove the sign immediately after that refusal. If the owner agrees to remove the sign, they shall have 72 hours to comply, after which the sign is deemed abandoned and may be removed without further delay.

2. If no response is received to the notice within 72 hours of mailing or personal delivery, the sign is deemed abandoned and may be removed without further delay.

3. If the owner of the prohibited sign cannot be reasonably ascertained from the sign itself, the sign is deemed abandoned. Signs deemed abandoned in this fashion may be removed without further notice 72 hours after they are deemed abandoned.

C. Any sign removed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be transported to the community development department for retrieval or disposal in accordance with CMC 17.75.080 and 17.75.090.

D. Notice of violation of this chapter and possible removal of the sign shall be made in writing, and shall be personally delivered or sent by first-class mail. Such notice shall contain, at a minimum, a statement of intention to remove the sign, a brief statement of the officer or employee’s reason for believing the sign is prohibited, the name and telephone number of the officer or employee seeking removal, and the procedure for and cost of retrieving the sign if it is removed. (Ord. 01-1879 § 14, 2001; Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.080 Retrieval of signs.

Any person desiring to retrieve a sign removed by city officers or employees may do so upon the payment of an administrative fee as determined by the community development director, not to exceed the actual cost of removing the sign. In lieu of paying such administrative fee, such person may retrieve a sign upon signing a promise to appear upon a citation issued to him or her for violation of this chapter. If a person wishes to contest the fact that a sign was placed in violation of this chapter prior to paying the fine or signing the citation, he or she shall have the right to an administrative hearing before the community development director. If the director finds that the sign was lawfully posted, he shall return the sign without an administrative fee or the issuance of a citation. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.090 Disposal of signs.

Any such sign or signs removed by city officers or employees may be considered abandoned if it is not retrieved within 15 calendar days after the date of such removal, and may be disposed of by the city without liability therefor to any person. (Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


17.75.100 Cleanup deposit.

A. Prior to posting any signs described by this chapter, the person posting such signs shall deposit, with the city clerk, the sum of $50.00 in cash, check, or money order. The city will issue a receipt, signed by the city clerk and noting the applicable event(s) and date(s). The receipt shall be proof of the making of the deposit described herein and shall be returned to the city clerk at such time as a refund of the deposit is requested. This deposit shall be used by the city to defray costs of removing signs not voluntarily removed by the person or organization originally posting them. At such time as the deposit has been exhausted, the city clerk shall send notification to the original depositor demanding further deposit in the amount of $50.00.

B. Within 30 days following the event for which such signs were posted, and following the city’s determination that no further cleanup of the signs is required, the city clerk shall refund the balance of the deposit. If the city is unable to contact or locate the person posting the signs within 90 days, the balance of the deposit shall be transferred to the general fund of the city.

C. The posting of any signs pursuant to this chapter prior to the making of the deposit as set forth above is prohibited. All of the duties imposed upon the city clerk as set forth in this chapter, and in this section, are ministerial in nature and shall not be construed as vesting in the city clerk discretionary authority to deny any person the right to post signs in the city except for failure to make a deposit as set forth herein. (Ord. 01-1879 § 14, 2001; Ord. 99-1844, 1999; Ord. 97-1819 § 1, 1997.)


Chapter 17.76 CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING

Sections:

17.76.010    Intent and purpose.

17.76.020    Application – Generally.

17.76.030    Review criteria.

17.76.040    Nonconforming buildings.

17.76.050    Application – Approval – Conditions.

17.76.060    Application – Approval – Time.

17.76.070    Appeal to planning commission.

17.76.080    Appeal to council.


17.76.010 Intent and purpose.

This chapter is intended to provide for a more orderly development of residential buildings, in commercial zones, proposing to convert to a nonresidential use; to bring the converted building in harmony with the immediate neighborhood; to protect the general welfare of the adjacent property owners and residents, as well as the citizens of Covina; and to do so by regulating and controlling the design, quality of materials, landscaping, color and maintenance of buildings and site. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.70.)


17.76.020 Application – Generally.

It is unlawful for any person to alter, remodel or maintain, unless otherwise excepted by this chapter, a residential building to a commercial use without first obtaining the approval of the architectural board of review. Application for such conversion shall be made upon a form provided by the building department and shall set forth and contain the information outlined in Chapter 17.64 CMC to enable the architectural board of review to make a finding that the proposed development is in conformity with both the intent and provisions of this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.70.)


17.76.030 Review criteria.

All developments regulated by this chapter shall be reviewed and approved by the architectural board of review. In approving, denying or approving with conditions a particular conversion, the board shall be subject to the following review criteria:

A. That the conversion is necessary for the applicant’s enjoyment of substantial use and property rights;

B. That the conversion is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and this title;

C. That the conversion does not constitute a detriment to public health, safety and welfare;

D. That design, color, use and quality of materials of the conversion are compatible with and bear a harmonious relationship to the neighborhood;

E. That the design, color, use and quality of materials of the conversion are compatible with the visual characteristics of the surrounding area so as not to detract from or cause depreciation of the value of adjacent developed properties. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.70.)


17.76.040 Nonconforming buildings.

A. Except for normal repair and maintenance, no Group B nonconforming building which has been converted and is existing upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be modified, altered or remodeled unless it is made to comply with the provisions of this title.

B. The provisions of Chapter 17.70 CMC shall apply. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.70.)


17.76.050 Application – Approval – Conditions.

If it is found that all of the following conditions exist, the architectural board of review shall approve the application, subject to such conditions as it may attach which are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, to secure a development which is in harmony with other buildings and property in the area, to minimize all undesirable or unsightly appearance and to provide an orderly and visually aesthetic development within the intent of this title:

A. That all provisions of all applicable ordinances, including the ordinance codified in this title, are complied with;

B. That the following are arranged so that traffic congestion is avoided, and pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected:

1. Building structures and improvements;

2. Vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation;

3. Setbacks;

4. Height of buildings;

5. Location of service;

6. Walls;

7. Landscaping;

8. Grading;

C. That all buildings possess a roof element compatible in design and materials with adjacent buildings;

D. That all buildings utilize wood, tile or masonry materials on the exterior walls. In the event that plaster or stucco walls are proposed, that the same are used in combination with one or more of the above-mentioned materials;

E. That all parking is prohibited from the front yard or the area between the building and the front property line;

F. That all outdoor utility equipment is screened with the same materials used on the main building with the exception of the gates;

G. That trash enclosures are to be provided for each building and constructed of a compatible masonry material and be at least six feet wide by eight feet long and six feet high. Solid durable gates shall also be provided to conceal the bin;

H. That all mechanical equipment is screened behind a permanent structure and not visible from ground surfaces or adjacent higher street elevations. Such screening shall be as high as the highest portion of any of the equipment;

I. That landscaping is incorporated in such a way as to complement the overall development to enhance visual interest and appeal and to soften bolder architectural features;

J. That the architectural character of the proposed structure is based upon the appropriate use of sound materials and colors and upon the principles of harmony and proportion in the elements of the structure;

K. That overall plan is in keeping with the existing quality improvements in the area and is in harmony with the future development of the area and in accord with the general plan;

L. That the development will not be detrimental to surrounding properties nor diminish their value thereof;

M. That any landscaping or architectural features which can be preserved to maintain the neighborhood character or style shall be protected and maintained.

If it is found that any of the above is not true or do not exist, the board of review shall disapprove the application. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.71.)


17.76.060 Application – Approval – Time.

The board shall approve the application and site plan together with any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto, and shall date and sign the same. Disapproval may be by letter to the applicant. The board shall render its decision within 35 days after submission of the application. Failure of the board to act within such time shall be considered a disapproval as of the thirty-fifth day. The board decision, together with the conditions attached to any approval, shall be final unless appealed as provided for in this chapter. If the board’s decision is appealed, such decision shall be vacated. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.71.)


17.76.070 Appeal to planning commission.

The applicant may appeal the decision of the board to the planning commission by filing an appeal in writing accompanied by a fee of $25.00 with the planning director within 10 days after the board’s decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission’s next regular meeting and the commission shall review the application and make its decision in the same manner, subject to the same criteria, and within 35 days after the regular meeting at which such review is first considered. Failure of the planning commission to act within such time shall be considered a disapproval as of such thirty-fifth day. The decision of the planning commission, together with the conditions attached to any approval, shall be final unless appealed as provided for in this chapter. If the planning commission decision is appealed, such shall be vacated. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.71.)


17.76.080 Appeal to council.

The applicant or the planning director may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council by filing an appeal in writing with the city clerk within 10 days after the planning commission’s decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the city council’s next regular meeting and the city council shall review the application in the same manner. (1964 Code Appx. A § 11.71.)


Chapter 17.78 VARIANCES

Sections:

17.78.010    Generally.

17.78.020    Grant conditions.

17.78.030    Application – Filing.

17.78.040    Application – Form and contents.

17.78.050    Application – Not in scope.

17.78.060    Application – Filing fee.

17.78.070    Departmental investigation.

17.78.080    Commission public hearing – Date and notice.

17.78.090    Commission public hearing – Decision.

17.78.100    Time limit for development.

17.78.110    Appeal from commission decision.

17.78.120    Council public hearing – Date and notice.

17.78.130    Council public hearing – Decision.

17.78.140    Voiding of variances.

17.78.150    Prior ordinance status.

17.78.160    Variance for minor deviations.

17.78.170    Application fee.


17.78.010 Generally.

When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of this title occur by reason of the strict interpretation of any of its provisions, any property owner may initiate proceedings for consideration of a variance from the provisions of this title. A variance will not be granted to permit a use not permitted in the zone by this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.020 Grant conditions.

The commission, before it may grant a variance, shall make a finding that in the evidence presented all four of the following conditions exist in reference to the property being considered:

A. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved which do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity and zone;

B. Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, which right is possessed by other property owners under like conditions in the same vicinity and zone, and the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity and zone;

C. The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare or injurious to property and improvement in the same vicinity and zone in which the property is located;

D. The granting of such a variance will not be contrary to the objectives of the general plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.030 Application – Filing.

Application for a variance shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the variance is sought, or by the authorized representative of the owner. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.040 Application – Form and contents.

Application shall be made to the planning commission on forms furnished by the planning department and shall set forth in detail the reasons for the requested variance, indicating how the conditions set forth in CMC 17.78.020 are satisfied, and shall provide other information as may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request. The applicant shall verify the petition and the date of verification shall be noted on the petition. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.050 Application – Not in scope.

In cases where the planning department considers the reasons as set forth on the application not all within the scope of the variance or that the application is incomplete, the applicant shall be so informed; whereupon, if the application is filed and the fees are accepted, the application shall be signed by the applicant to the effect that he was so informed. Acceptance of an application does not constitute an indication of approval. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.060 Application – Filing fee.

When the application for a variance is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

When the application for a variance is filed, a uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.070 Departmental investigation.

The planning department shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent and purpose of this title. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.080 Commission public hearing – Date and notice.

A. After an application for a variance is deemed complete, the planning director shall set the matter for a public hearing to be held by the planning commission.

B. Notice of public hearing shall be given in all the following ways, and shall contain the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use of the subject property:

1. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 10 days before the date set for the hearing;

2. Not less than 10 days prior to the date of any hearing, the planning director shall cause a copy of a notice, containing the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use of the subject property, to be mailed to the applicant and to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest available assessment roll of the county, or are known to the planning director, as owning property within a distance of 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the subject property. (Ord. 16-2061 § 9, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1388 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1228 § 2, 1973; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.090 Commission public hearing – Decision.

A. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice.

B. The planning commission shall announce its decision at a regular meeting or scheduled special meeting within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application, and shall set forth findings in support of the decision. For approval, the conditions listed in CMC 17.78.020 shall be found.

C. The decision shall within 20 days be filed with the council and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. (Ord. 16-2061 §§ 10, 11, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.100 Time limit for development.

The commission, in approving a variance, may set forth in its decision reasonable conditions which shall assure the intent and purpose of this title.

A time limit of 180 days for occupancy or construction shall be assumed unless some other period is established. The commission may grant one extension of time, not to exceed one year from the time limit specified, without a public hearing. Any additional request for an extension of the time limit shall be treated as a new application for a variance. (Ord. 1184 § 1, 1972; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.110 Appeal from commission decision.

The decision of the commission shall become final at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day next succeeding the date of decision unless, prior to that hour, an appeal to the council is filed in writing in the office of the city clerk.

Appeals may be initiated by:

A. The applicant;

B. An owner of real property, any part of which is located within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the subject property;

C. A member of the city council. If the appeal is initiated by a member of the council, not an applicant or an owner within the meaning of subsection (B) of this section, such initiation of appeal shall not be effective unless approved by a majority of the elected members of the council acting at the next regular meeting of the council following the date of filing such appeal. Such initiation of appeal shall be considered without public hearing or discussion of the merits of the matter by the council;

D. The filing of an appeal within the time limit herein specified shall stay the order of the commission and the issuance of any permits predicated thereon until the council has either acted thereon, as provided in CMC 17.78.130, or until a majority of the council has failed to approve an appeal by a member of the council, whichever date first occurs;

E. The fee for an appeal of the planning commission’s decision shall be 90 percent of the current application fee for a variance, except in subsection (C) of this section, in which case there will be no fee;

F. If the appeal of the permits is approved in whole or part by the city council, the appeal fee will be reimbursed in full. (Ord. 1612 § 2, 1986; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.120 Council public hearing – Date and notice.

A. The hearing date shall be set by the city clerk and shall be held not more than 30 days after the expiration date for the filing of an appeal.

B. Notice shall be given as provided in CMC 17.78.080(B). (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.130 Council public hearing – Decision.

A. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice. The appellant shall present at the hearing information and data in support of the appeal.

B. The council shall, within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, sustain, reverse or modify the commission decision by resolution, setting forth the findings listed in CMC 17.78.020.

C. Notification of the council action shall be mailed to the appellant at the address shown on the application. (Ord. 16-2061 § 12, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.140 Voiding of variances.

A. The council, with or without a recommendation from the commission, may by resolution, upon notice and hearing as specified herein, void any variance for noncompliance with the conditions set forth in granting the variance. Notice of intent to void specifying the reasons therefor and containing the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the holder of the variance not less than 20 days before the specified hearing date. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in CMC 17.78.080(B).

B. Notification of the council action shall be mailed to the holder of the variance and shall include a copy of the council resolution specifying the reasons for voiding the variance.

C. Each variance granted under the provisions of this chapter shall become null and void unless:

1. The construction authorized by the variance has been commenced within 180 days, or such other period as may be established, after the granting of the variance and pursued diligently to completion; or

2. The occupancy of the land or buildings authorized by such variance has taken place within 180 days, or such other period as may be established, after the granting of such variance. (Ord. 1356 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.150 Prior ordinance status.

Any variance granted pursuant to any zoning ordinance enacted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall be construed to be a variance under this title, subject to all conditions imposed in such variance. Such variance may be voided as provided in CMC 17.78.140. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.160 Variance for minor deviations.

A. When in the public interest and agreed to by the applicant, the designated planning official may, without publishing, posting or mailing of notice and without public hearing, consider and render decisions on variances involving slight modifications in the provisions of this title including, but not limited to, the following:

1. Applications for reduction of lot area, minimum floor area requirements, reduction of size of yards, courts, open areas or landscaped areas by not more than 10 percent of the area required by ordinance;

2. Applications for the increase in the height of fences or walls by not more than 18 inches, except when such fence or wall is located in the required front yard or corner cutback areas;

3. Applications to permit the encroachment of structures or buildings, classified as main buildings, into required yards by permitting such structures or buildings to occupy not more than 20 percent of the required yards if such proposed encroachment is not more than one story in height and does not extend closer than 20 feet to the front lot line, 15 feet to the rear lot line and five feet to a side lot line. If, however, the encroachment is an existing main building, such encroachment may be permitted to a distance no less than three feet from a side lot line;

4. Applications for the increase in sign area or height or sign location by not more than 10 percent of the requirements of this code;

5. Applications to modify development standards in RD multiple-family residential zones as provided in CMC 17.28.475.

B. In granting a minor variance, the designated planning official shall find that all of the conditions listed in subsection (A) of this section exist in reference to the subject property. The designated planning official may impose reasonable conditions and requirements as terms of approval. (Ord. 95-1797 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1532 § 1, 1983; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.00.)


17.78.170 Application fee.

When the application for a minor variance is filed, a uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 1977.)


Chapter 17.80 ZONING AMENDMENTS AND ZONE CHANGES

Sections:

17.80.010    Amendment – Generally.

17.80.020    Amendment – Proceedings initiation.

17.80.030    Amendment – Department investigation.

17.80.040    Amendment – Notice of commission public hearing.

17.80.050    Amendment – Commission public hearing – Recommendation and notice.

17.80.060    Amendment – Notice of council public hearing.

17.80.070    Amendment – Council public hearing – Referral and decision.

17.80.080    Zone change – Generally.

17.80.090    Zone change – Procedure initiation.

17.80.100    Zone change – Filing fee.

17.80.110    Zone change – Department investigation.

17.80.120    Zone change – Notice of commission public hearing.

17.80.130    Zone change – Commission public hearing – Recommendation and notice.

17.80.140    Zone change – Notice of council public hearing.

17.80.150    Zone change – Council public hearing – Decision and notice.


17.80.010 Amendment – Generally.

Any amendment to the text of this title which imposes any regulation not theretofore imposed or removes or modifies any such regulation theretofore imposed shall be made according to the procedure set forth in CMC 17.80.020 through 17.80.070. For changes in the zoning map, see CMC 17.80.080 through 17.80.150. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.020 Amendment – Proceedings initiation.

A. The planning commission may initiate proceedings by motion and then hold public hearings and make a recommendation as provided below.

B. The city council may initiate proceedings by motion and then submit the matter to the commission for public hearings. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.030 Amendment – Department investigation.

The planning department shall study the proposed ordinance amendment and shall provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.040 Amendment – Notice of commission public hearing.

A. After the planning commission or the city council initiates proceedings by motion, the planning director shall give notice of a public hearing in accordance with this section.

B. Notice of the required public hearings shall be given in the following manner and shall contain the time and place of the hearing and the general purpose of the proposed amendment.

C. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 10 days before the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 16-2061 § 13, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.050 Amendment – Commission public hearing – Recommendation and notice.

A. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice.

B. Any recommendation by the commission for ordinance amendment shall require the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the total voting members after at least one public hearing.

C. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall file its recommendation with the council, together with a report of findings, hearings and other supporting data. (Ord. 16-2061 § 14, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.060 Amendment – Notice of council public hearing.

A. The hearing date shall be set by the city clerk for not more than 30 days after the filing of the commission’s recommendation.

B. Notice shall be given as provided in CMC 17.80.040(B). (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.070 Amendment – Council public hearing – Referral and decision.

A. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice.

B. The council may adopt by ordinance the amendment recommended by the commission after holding at least one public hearing thereon. The council may modify the amendment recommended by the commission, provided the proposed modification has been referred back to the planning commission for a report, pursuant to subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

C. The commission shall review the changes proposed and referred to it by the council and shall report its recommendations back to the council, the report to be filed with the council not more than 40 days after the referral by the council.

D. In the event the report back from the planning commission is adverse to or opposed to the proposed change referred to it, or in the event the council desires to enact any change or amendment contrary to a recommendation of the planning commission filed with the council, then any ordinance affecting such change or amendment shall be adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than three members of the council. (Ord. 16-2061 § 15, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.10.)


17.80.080 Zone change – Generally.

A change in the zoning map changing any property from one zone to another shall be made according to the provisions of CMC 17.80.090 through 17.80.150. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.090 Zone change – Procedure initiation.

A. The planning commission may initiate proceedings by motion and then hold public hearings.

B. The city council may initiate proceedings by motion and then submit the matter to the commission for public hearings.

C. The owner of property proposed for rezoning or the authorized representative of the owner may initiate proceedings by filing a petition with the planning department on forms provided. The petition shall be full and complete and shall include such data and information as may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request. The applicant shall verify the petition and the date of verification shall be noted on the petition.

D. Change of Zone to R-TP, R-R, C-2, C-3A, C-R or M-1.

1. When a change of zone to R-TP, R-R, C-2, C-3A, C-R or M-1 is requested, the petitioner shall submit, in addition to the petition, a site plan as required in those zones and as provided in Chapter 17.64 CMC.

2. In addition, the applicant for C-2, C-3A or C-R shall provide such data and information as will assist the commission to justify its recommendations to the council as to location and size of the proposed rezoning. Such data may include:

a. Economic studies and surveys;

b. Traffic studies;

c. Population studies;

d. Any other information deemed pertinent by the planning director. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.100 Zone change – Filing fee.

When a petition for a change of zone is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid by the applicant for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

When the application for a zone change is filed, a uniform nonrefundable fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the cost incidental to the proceedings.

Such charges and fees to be rendered shall be those which the city council may from time to time determine, fix, and establish by resolution duly and regularly adopted by it. Such charges may be changed by the city council from time to time by resolution and shall respectively be applicable for the respective periods designated or governed by such respective resolutions. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 1977; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.110 Zone change – Department investigation.

The planning department shall investigate the facts bearing on the proposed zone change to provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent of this title and the general plan. (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.120 Zone change – Notice of commission public hearing.

A. After the zone change application is deemed complete, or after the planning commission or the city council initiates proceedings by motion, the planning director shall give notice of a hearing in accordance with this section.

B. Notice of required public hearing shall be given in the following ways and shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a general description of the area proposed for change:

1. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 10 days before the date set for the hearing;

2. Not less than 10 days prior to the date of any hearing, the planning director shall cause a copy of a notice, containing the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use of the subject property, to be mailed to the applicant and to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest available assessment roll of the county, or are known to the planning director, as owning property within a distance of 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the subject property;

3. In the event that the number of owners to whom notice would be sent pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section is greater than 1,000, the city, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice required under subsection (B)(2) of this section, may provide notice by placing a display advertisement at least one-eighth page in the newspaper having the greatest circulation within the area affected by the proposed ordinance or amendment, at least 10 days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 16-2061 §§ 16 – 18, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1388 §§ 1, 2, 1978; Ord. 1228 § 3, 1973; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.130 Zone change – Commission public hearing – Recommendation and notice.

A. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice.

B. The commission shall announce its decision within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall recommend either approval or disapproval of the proposed zone change and shall set forth findings in support of the recommendation. It shall not enlarge the area of the proposed zone change in any way.

C. The decision shall immediately be filed with the council and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the petitioner at the address shown on the petition. (Ord. 16-2061 § 19, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.140 Zone change – Notice of council public hearing.

The hearing date of the council public hearing shall be set by the city clerk for not more than 60 days after the filing of the commission’s resolution with the council.

Notice shall be given as provided in CMC 17.80.120(B). (1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


17.80.150 Zone change – Council public hearing – Decision and notice.

A. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the date and at the time and place specified in the notice.

B. The council may adopt by ordinance the zone change recommended by the commission after holding at least one public hearing thereon. The council may modify the change of zone recommended by the commission, provided the proposed modification has been referred back to the planning commission for a report, pursuant to subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

C. The commission shall review the changes proposed and referred to it by the council and shall report its recommendations back to the council, the report to be filed with the council not more than 40 days after the referral by the council.

D. In the event the report back from the planning commission is adverse to or opposed to the proposed change referred to it by the council, or in the event the council desires to enact any change of zone contrary to a recommendation of the planning commission filed with the council, then any ordinance affecting such change of zone shall be adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than three members of the council. (Ord. 16-2061 § 20, 2016; Ord. 1471 § 1, 1980; 1964 Code Appx. A § 12.20.)


Chapter 17.81 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Sections:

17.81.010    Purpose and intent.

17.81.020    Definitions.

17.81.030    Administration.

17.81.040    Power and duties.

17.81.050    Historic designation criteria.

17.81.060    Historic structure modification certificate.

17.81.070    Emergency demolition.

17.81.080    Maintenance and care.

17.81.090    Historic preservation participation incentives.

17.81.100    Delay of demolition permit.

17.81.110    Enforcement and penalties.


17.81.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve, conserve and maintain the city of Covina’s cultural, architectural and archaeological and historical heritage and resources as living parts of community life by encouraging the voluntary designation of such properties and resources for protection, which will benefit and enrich the lives of its present and future residents and visitors. To these ends, this chapter’s intent is to improve the quality of the city’s environment through preservation, conservation and maintenance of its neighborhoods as follows:

A. Preserve the city of Covina’s architectural history and encourage complementary development and use on surrounding property.

B. Build and strengthen civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past and promote their continued use today.

C. Protect, enhance and perpetuate the city’s historic attractions for residents desiring a pleasant way of life, as well as tourists and visitors seeking a pleasant shopping and recreational experience.

D. Strengthen the economy of the city, stabilize and improve property values, and increase community vitality by encouraging adaptive reuse, increased social activity and increased community awareness of the attractions associated with historic resources.

E. Promote the private and public use and preservation of designated structures or areas for the education, appreciation and general welfare of the people. (Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Alteration” means any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, to the character-defining or significant physical features of designated properties affected by this chapter. Such changes or modifications may be made to structures, fixtures, architectural details, or visual characteristics, grading or surface paving.

B. “Archaeological site” is an area of land formerly occupied by ancient people upon which are found evidence of their existence and customs evidenced by monuments, sites, tools, artifacts, and relics.

C. “Certificate of economic hardship” is a certificate authorizing work described in the accompanying historic structure modification permit granted by the planning commission because of extreme financial impact or adversity and in accordance with the procedures and findings of this title.

D. “Demolition” is the act or process of dismantling, wrecking, or destroying all or part of a structure.

E. “Design guidelines” are principles contained in a document which illustrate appropriate and inappropriate methods of rehabilitation and construction. The purpose of using design guidelines is to establish standards and aid design and decision-making with regard to retaining the integrity of scale, design intent, materials, image, patterns of development, and historical character of a historic structure. These principles are provided in the “Covina Design Guidelines,” the “Downtown Design Plan and Implementation Guidelines,” and any similar guidelines which may be adopted by the Covina city council.

F. “Designation statement” shall mean a document prepared by the planning commission and approved by the city council which contains a specific description of the designated historic landmark or structure of merit, its assessor’s parcel number(s), its site address(es), and the prescriptive standards or design guidelines (the minimum being the Secretary of the Interior Standards) adopted for that resource.

G. “Economic hardship” shall mean a substantial burden placed by this chapter as it relates to some aspect of a historic property on the owner of the property and is unreasonable in comparison to the benefit conferred in the community.

H. “Fixture” is something attached as a permanent appendage, apparatus, or appliance to a structure.

I. “Historic landmark” shall mean any improvement, archaeological site, natural feature or property that has special historical, cultural, aesthetic, or architectural character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or history of the city of Covina, the state of California, or the nation and that has been nominated and designated by the city council with owner consent pursuant to CMC 17.81.050. The designation statement shall specify the significant exterior and interior elements and natural features which are expressly found by the planning commission to contribute to the historic landmark’s significance. Unless otherwise stated in the designation statement, the protection afforded an historic landmark shall encompass the entire parcel and any adjoining parcels under the same ownership.

J. “Historic structure modification certificate” is a certificate issued by the planning commission or chief planning official authorizing significant exterior alteration, restoration, rehabilitation, construction, removal, relocation, or demolition, in whole or in part, of or to a designated resource.

K. “Improvement” shall mean any building, structure, plan, fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking facility, work of art, or other object constituting a physical feature of real property or any part of such feature.

L. “Ordinary upkeep, maintenance and repair” shall mean the routine care of a structure and its grounds in a fashion that discourages neglect and encourages a quality appearance and does not significantly alter the architectural character of a structure.

M. “Owner” shall mean, in the case of nomination and designation, the majority representative’s owner or owners as established by deed or contract of the subject property or properties. The planning commission may rely on notarized affidavits to establish ownership; in the case of hearing notification, the person, persons or entity appearing as owner on the last equalized assessment roll of the county.

N. “Preservation” shall include the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation and/or acquisition of cultural resources.

O. “Rehabilitation” shall mean the act or process of returning an improvement or site to a condition of utilization through repair, remodeling, or alteration that makes possible an efficient, contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the improvement or site that are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values.

P. “Relocation” shall mean change of the location of an improvement in its present setting, or to another setting.

Q. “Restoration” shall mean the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of an improvement or natural feature and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later additions to, or by the replacement of missing, earlier portions of the feature.

R. “Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation” shall mean the guidelines prepared by the National Park Service for rehabilitating historic buildings and the standards for historic preservation projects prepared by the National Park Service with guidelines for applying the standards.

S. “Structure of merit” is a building or structure which contributes to the broader understanding of the historical, archaeological, cultural, architectural, community, aesthetic, or artistic heritage of the city and which has been individually designated by the city council pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.030 Administration.

Implementation of this chapter shall be the direct responsibility of the planning commission with support from the department of community development, planning division, and any societies or organizations promoting historic preservation and any volunteer professionals with appropriate expertise selected by the planning commission. The planning commission shall establish rules of order and regular meeting requirements and procedures, which may be amended from time to time as needed. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.040 Power and duties.

The planning commission shall carry out activities required by city ordinances relating to the administration of this chapter and shall have the following powers and duties:

A. To increase public awareness of the value of historic, architectural and cultural preservation by developing and participating in public information programs. The program format may include lectures, tours, walks, reports or publications, films, open houses, and special events.

B. Establish and/or recommend to the city council specific design guidelines for the alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of historical landmarks and structures of merit.

C. To review applications for permits to rehabilitate, construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, demolish, remove or significantly affect any structure over which the planning commission has approval authority.

D. To compile or cause to be compiled and maintained a current inventory of all designated historic landmarks and structures of merit.

E. To review and make recommendations on applications for conditional use permits, zoning amendments, or zoning variances for historic landmarks and structures of merit.

F. To seek means and sources for the protection, retention and preservation of historic resources through financial support from individuals and public and private entities.

G. To recommend grants, tax incentives, and benefits to encourage redevelopment of historically significant structures or neighborhoods.

H. To encourage public participation in the nomination, review and permitting processes for historic resources.

I. To adopt and make available nomination, application and review procedures to designate historic landmarks or structures of merit.

J. To implement the Secretary of the Interior’s standards. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.050 Historic designation criteria.

A. The following criteria shall be used by the planning commission and city council in designating any property as a historic landmark or structure of merit:

1. It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, architectural or natural history; or

2. It is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history; or

3. It represents the work of a notable builder, designer, or architect; or

4. It embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period, or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or

5. It contributes to the significance of an historic area, being a geographically definable area possessing a concentration of historic or scenic properties or thematically related grouping of properties which contribute to each other and are unified aesthetically by plan or physical development; or

6. It is one of the few remaining examples in the city of Covina, region, state, or nation possessing distinguishing characteristics of an architectural or historic type or specimen.

B. Nomination for historic designation shall be considered in accordance with the following procedures:

1. Nominations may be filed by the city council and planning commission, any property owner, the Covina historical society, any community or ethnic association, or any Covina citizen.

2. With respect to nominations for individual historic landmarks or structures of merit, no application shall be accepted without the written consent of the owner of the property to which the nomination pertains. The owner may withdraw this consent prior to the city council’s final determination. Such withdrawal shall terminate the nomination proceedings for the subject property.

3. Nomination shall be made to the planning commission on a form provided by the planning division. The nomination shall provide sufficient documentation and information indicating how the proposal meets the designation criteria. The chief planning official shall establish a nomination form and minimum information requirements.

4. Written notice shall be sent by mail to each property owner within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property upon which is located the proposed structure of merit or historic landmark that is the subject of the hearing, which shall be set within 60 days of when the application is found to be complete. The notice shall indicate the date, place, time, and purpose of the hearing to consider such designation and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 10 days prior to hearing. The chief planning official shall send notice by certified mail to the owner(s) of all properties proposed for nomination as historic landmarks or structures of merit. The notice shall include a written summary of application of the nomination and seek a written statement of consent or opposition.

5. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing at which all evidence and testimony shall be considered. Recommendations may be for approval, or approval with conditions, or denial. The recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council within 60 days for action in the form of a nomination statement.

6. Upon receipt of nomination, city council shall set a hearing within 45 days for consideration and provide notice in the manner presented in this section. The city council shall render its decision within a timely period of time.

7. The city shall notify the affected owners of designation by certified mail within 10 days.

8. Failure to send notice by certified mail to any affected owner where the address of such owner is not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation.

9. Upon designation by the city council, the city clerk shall record the city council’s decision in the office of the county recorder of the county of Los Angeles in the form of a designation statement, in fact or by reference.

10. No deliberate action may be taken which is inconsistent with CMC 17.81.060(C)(3)(a) which would deface or destroy the proposed historic landmark or structure of merit and no permits shall be issued while the nomination process, including public hearing, is pending.

C. An application to repeal a historical designation may be considered in the same manner provided by this chapter if the resource no longer meets designation criteria for reasons such as the subsequent discovery of substantial information on the significance of the resource or destruction of the resource by a catastrophic event. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.060 Historic structure modification certificate.

A. No alteration or demolition may be conducted on a designated historic landmark or structure of merit without first obtaining a historic structure modification certificate from the city.

B. Application. An application for a historic structure modification certificate shall be filed with the city by the applicant. The chief planning official shall be responsible for reviewing an application for compliance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards as well as all local standards and criteria. Where practical, the historic structure modification certification may be combined with the existing permit process for construction and demolition of structures and buildings.

C. Approval authority for a historic structure modification certificate application shall be divided into two categories as follows:

1. Minor projects shall be administratively reviewed by the chief planning official who shall have approval authority. These include but are not limited to:

a. Replacement of an element of a historic landmark or structure of merit with similar elements or additional elements which do not significantly impact the character, history, or architectural style of the structure.

b. Room and patio additions to structures of merit where the architectural design is compatible with the original building and the surrounding area and the project does not otherwise require review by the planning commission.

c. The demolition or construction of accessory structures where the accessory structure proposed for demolition is not a landmark structure and any new structure is of a style, architecture and color that is compatible with the main building.

d. Room additions to a historic landmark that are less than 500 square feet in area and do not alter the architectural character of the building or structure.

e. Interior construction and/or remodeling where such work does not adversely impact a significant historical feature of the house.

2. Major projects shall be reviewed by the planning commission who shall have approval authority and include but are not limited to:

a. Any changes which significantly alter the architectural character, height, proportion, the relationship of the building mass and space, roof shape, scale, or distinctive facades of a structure of merit or a historic landmark.

b. Demolition or relocation of an historic landmark or a structure of merit and/or the construction of new primary use buildings.

c. Room additions to a historic landmark which exceed 500 square feet in area.

3. Notice and Hearing. No notice is required for a minor project. The procedures and public notice to consider a major project shall be the same as CMC 17.81.050(B).

a. Findings. The consideration of a historic structure modification certificate shall be directed by the following criteria:

i. Height. Any proposed construction shall be compatible with the height and bulk of contemporary historical development in the vicinity and with maximum conformance for the applicable zoning district.

ii. Proportions of Windows and Doors. Proportions and relationships between doors and windows shall be compatible with the architecture and character of the contemporary historical development in the vicinity, and be of an appropriate material.

iii. Relationship of Building Masses and Open Spaces. The relationship between proposed structures and open spaces or between remodeled structures and created spaces shall be consistent with shapes and setbacks of contemporary historical development in the vicinity.

iv. Roof Shape. Design shall be compatible with the architectural character and style of surrounding structures, gables, turrets, and other roof forms.

v. Scale. Structure shall be compatible with the architectural character and style of contemporary historical development in the vicinity. New architecture shall be sensitive through proper scale and materials.

vi. Architectural Details. Architectural details, including materials and textures, shall be treated so as to make any new construction compatible with the architectural style and character of contemporary historical development in the vicinity.

vii. Architectural Rhythm and Articulation. All proposed structure or facade remodeling shall show sufficient and rhythmic repetition of details to be compatible with facade articulation of contemporary historical development in the vicinity.

viii. New additions and adjacent related new construction shall be undertaken so that it will not impair essential form and integrity of the historic property if the addition or construction is removed in the future.

ix. All exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from view with acceptable and appropriate screens, parapet walls, landscaping, or other screen forms. Design, style, color and texture shall be compatible with the existing or proposed building/facade design.

b. Findings to approve demolition of over 40 percent of a historic landmark or structure of merit:

i. That retention of the historic building or structure will constitute a significant economic hardship as defined in this chapter; and/or

That demolition of the historic structure is necessary to allow development of a project which is of overriding community importance.

ii. The applicant fully intends to construct a replacement structure, has obtained the necessary financial commitment, and has obtained site plan approval pursuant to this title; or

If the applicant does not intend to develop a replacement structure, that the existing historic structure constitutes a substantial threat to the public health, safety and welfare which cannot be reasonably mitigated by measures other than demolition.

4. Appeal Procedure. The decision on a historic structure modification certificate may be appealed as follows:

a. The chief planning official’s determination may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission’s decision may be appealed to the city council.

b. All appeals shall be in writing stating the reasons for appeal and filed with the planning division within 10 days from the decision. An appeal shall stay all actions, abeyances, or other discretionary approvals.

c. Appeals shall be scheduled for the earliest regular meeting and consistent with the agenda procedures of the planning commission and city council. There shall be no fee charged for the appeal.

d. Notice of the appeal shall be provided in accordance with CMC 17.81.050(B).

5. Certificate of Economic Hardship. The planning commission shall not deny a historic structure modification certificate if such action would result in a significant economic hardship that would deny the property owner reasonable use and economic return on the property. In such case the planning commission shall issue a certificate of economic hardship along with the historic structure modification certificate. The procedures and standards for considering economic hardships shall be as follows:

a. The owner of an historic landmark or structure of merit may request that an alteration, demolition or relocation be conducted even though it does not meet the findings for such certificate if the owner can substantiate the suffering of significant economic hardship that denies the owner reasonable use or economic return.

b. The applicant presents facts and clear evidence demonstrating immediate and substantial economic hardship if the planning commission fails to approve the historic structure modification certificate.

c. Economic hardship shall mean a substantial burden to the owner of the property and is unreasonable in comparison to the benefit conferred to the community. To approve a certificate of economic hardship, the planning commission must make the following findings:

i. Denial will significantly diminish the value of property.

ii. Sale or rental is not practical when compared to the zoning or permitted uses. This pertains to commercial properties only.

iii. Utilization of the property for adaptive reuse is impractical.

iv. Rental at a reasonable rate is not feasible. This pertains to commercial properties only.

v. All means involving city-sponsored incentives, such as tax abatement, financial assistance, building code modifications, amendments to the zoning ordinance, loans, grants, and reimbursement have been explored to relieve possible economic hardship and have been found to be inadequate to reasonably mitigate the impact.

d. When requested by the planning commission, the applicant shall furnish adequate evidence supporting the claim of economic hardship. The planning commission may request any of the following information when reasonably necessary to render a decision:

i. Cost estimate of proposed work and additional costs that would be incurred by complying.

ii. Report on structural soundness and rehabilitation feasibility from a licensed engineer or architect experienced in rehabilitation.

iii. A fair market appraisal from an appraiser of current and estimated value after completion of proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal.

iv. Proposed demolition requires an estimate from an architect, appraiser, or other professional experienced in rehabilitation stating that it is economically unreasonable to rehabilitate, relocate, or reuse existing structure on the property.

v. For income-producing properties, information on annual gross income, operating and maintenance expenses, depreciations and annual cash flow after debt service, and real property.

vi. Any other information that the planning commission finds is necessary to render a decision.

e. Staff shall prepare a report analyzing evidence and shall include, where possible, a hardship relief plan, with recommendations such as property tax relief, loans, or grants, acquisitions of property, use of the State Historic Building Code, changed zoning regulations, and redevelopment funds.

f. Planning commission shall review evidence and staff’s relief plan and determine whether denial of historic structure modification certificate has or will deprive owner of reasonable use or reasonable economic return.

g. If facts and clear evidence demonstrate the applicant’s claim for economic hardship and that the proposed relief plan cannot provide sufficient mitigation, then the planning commission may recommend to the city council to approve or conditionally approve such certificate. The final decision shall be made by the city council.

h. In the matter of the issuance of the historic structure modification permit, the above entitled procedure shall be implemented. If the planning commission recommends to the city council denial of the request and the council concurs, then the applicant will be notified by certified mail of the historic structure modification certificate and certificate of economic hardship denials.

i. If a historic structure modification certificate and certificate of economic hardship would result in the demolition of a historic landmark or structure of merit the applicant shall provide the following documentation:

i. Photographs of exterior and interior of the structure;

ii. Site plan(s), floor plan(s) and any significant exterior elevations;

iii. Scale drawings;

iv. Archaeological survey (where applicable); and

v. Other reasonable documentation to preserve historical knowledge as required by the planning commission. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.070 Emergency demolition.

Historic landmarks and structures of merit that have been severely damaged because of an emergency declared by the President of the United States, Governor of California or the mayor of Covina and present an imminent threat to public safety and cannot be secured against intrusion or entry shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. A determination for demolition shall be made by one of the following: building safety officer, city manager, or disaster chairman in conjunction with planning division and, when practical, the planning commission. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.080 Maintenance and care.

A. The owner or other person in charge of a historic landmark or structure of merit shall keep in good repair all of the exterior and interior portions specified in the designation statement and all interior portions necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any/all architectural features.

B. Ordinary Upkeep, Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance, upkeep and repair, nor does this chapter prevent construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal when certified by the planning commission that action is required for the public safety due to unsafe conditions which cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historical Building Code. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.090 Historic preservation participation incentives.

In order to foster preservation of Covina’s cultural heritage and built urban history environment, the following incentives for participation are only available to historic landmarks or structures of merit:

A. State Historic Building Code. Any alteration made for preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or relocation of an historic landmark or structure of merit shall be allowed to comply with the requirements of the State Historical Building Code pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code Section 18950 et seq. rather than the otherwise applicable building and safety codes. This section does not apply to requirements for fire sprinkler systems as provided for elsewhere in the municipal code.

B. Mills Act Contracts. The city council authorizes the use of contracts pursuant to California Government Code Section 50280 et seq. Such contracts, which shall be administered by the community development department, planning division may be entered into at the sole discretion of the city council based on the recommendations of the planning commission in a form to be approved by the city attorney. The intent of such contracts shall be the continued preservation of historic properties. The subject property must be a historic landmark or structure of merit.

C. Fee Relief. The applicable building construction or planning review permit fees shall be 30 percent of the actual permit fee at time of issuance. This shall not apply to the historic structure modification certificate.

D. Setback Flexibility. Room additions may be constructed at a setback less than provided for under the zoning chapter of this code provided it is no closer than the existing structure and the addition complies with Uniform Building Code.

E. Relief from Nonconforming Parking Requirements. Additions to single-family residences with an additional floor area that does not exceed 50 percent of the existing floor area in any 12-month period shall not be required to provide additional parking according to current standards. Multiple-family dwellings adding additional dwelling units within existing zoning standards shall not be required to bring the existing unit(s) into compliance with current parking standards.

F. Recognition. The planning commission shall establish a program to recognize historic properties with special plaques, signage and other appropriate forms of recognition.

G. Financial Benefits. Owners of such properties are eligible to apply for private, local, state and federal financial benefits as available. (Ord. 16-2060 § 1, 2016; Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.100 Delay of demolition permit.

A committee comprised of the city manager, community development director, public works director and parks and recreation director may vote to delay for up to 30 days the approval of a permit to demolish a potential historic landmark when the following apply:

A. The structure is of exceptional historical significance and age and occupies a prominent site in the community.

B. The city council has not previously declined to designate the structure as a historic landmark or structure of merit. (Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


17.81.110 Enforcement and penalties.

A. Any person, whether owner, agent, or otherwise, who violates a requirement of this chapter or fails to comply with a condition of approval of any certificate or permit issued shall be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and subject to provisions of Chapter 1.28 CMC.

B. Any person or entity who unlawfully constructs, alters, demolishes, relocates or removes an historic landmark or structure of merit may be required to restore the building or structure to its original setting prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this provision shall be implemented by the city of Covina or any other entrusted party. This civil remedy shall be in addition to any criminal prosecution and penalty and any other remedy provided by law.

C. Demolition of a historic landmark or structure of merit in violation of this chapter may result in the denial of building or construction-related permits or permits for use as a parking area. The question of denial and the period of its duration shall be based on the significance of the lost building or structure and the nature of the violation. (Ord. 97-1812 § 1, 1997.)


Chapter 17.82 WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.82.010    References to water-efficient landscape regulations.

17.82.020    Definitions.

17.82.030    Purpose and intent.

17.82.040    Applicability of water-efficient landscape regulations.

17.82.050    Implementation procedures.

17.82.060    Landscape water use standards.

17.82.070    Enforcement and administration.

17.82.080    Guidelines for implementation of the water-efficient landscape regulations.

17.82.090    Violation.

17.82.100    Conflicting provisions.

17.82.110    Adoption of guidelines for implementation. 


17.82.010 References to water-efficient landscape regulations. 

All references to this chapter shall include CMC 17.82.020 through 17.82.100, as appropriate. The following special regulations and minimum requirements shall apply to landscape projects. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.020 Definitions.

Except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction, the following words, terms, and phrases, whenever used in this chapter or in resolutions of the council adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.

“Applied water” shall mean the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Association” shall mean a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

“Certificate of completion” shall mean the certificate required to be completed and submitted to the city certifying that the landscape project has complied with the provisions of the water-efficient landscape regulations contained in this chapter and the guidelines.

“Common interest development” shall mean a community apartment project, condominium project, planned development, and stock cooperative pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1351.

“Ecological restoration project” shall mean a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Enforcement officer” shall mean any employee or agent of the city authorized to enforce the provisions of the municipal code as designated in writing by the city. 

“Estimated applied water use” shall mean the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system. 

“ET adjustment factor or ETAF” shall mean the factor that is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this chapter and the guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscaped area shall not exceed 1.0.

“Guidelines” shall mean the Guidelines for Implementation of the City of Covina Water Efficient Landscape Regulations, which describe procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this chapter.

“Hardscape” shall mean any durable material or feature (pervious and impervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscape for purposes of this chapter.

“Homeowner installed” shall mean any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a landscape professional hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns or rents. This definition excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings and which are subject under CMC 17.82.040(A)(2) to the requirements applicable to developer-installed single-family and multifamily residential landscape projects.

“Hydrozone” shall mean a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and typically irrigated by one valve/controller station. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.

“Impervious” shall mean any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Irrigation efficiency” shall mean the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems.

“Landscape documentation package” shall mean the package of documents that a project applicant is required to submit to the city for review and approval of landscape projects, as described in the guidelines.

“Landscape professional” shall mean a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape professional, or any other person authorized to design a landscape pursuant to Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the California Food and Agriculture Code. 

“Landscape project” shall mean the total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the requirements under CMC 17.82.040(A).

“Landscaped area” shall mean all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or impervious hardscape, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces, artificial turf in compliance with the city’s design guidelines, and existing native vegetation).

“Local agency” shall mean a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized by the city to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, site plan review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project. 

“Local water purveyor” shall mean any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service within the city.

“Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” shall mean the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 

“Mined-land reclamation projects” shall mean any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“Model ordinance” shall mean the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance adopted by the California Department of Water Resources in accordance with California Government Code Section 65591 et seq.

“New construction” shall mean a new building with landscaping or a landscape-dominated project, such as a park, playground, playing field, or greenbelt or other new landscape, which may or may not have an associated building or structure.

“Permit” shall mean an authorizing document, whether discretionary or ministerial, issued by local agencies for new construction or a rehabilitation project.

“Pervious” shall mean any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” shall mean a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for low-water-use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate-water-use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high-water-use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.”

“Project applicant” shall mean the person submitting a landscape documentation package pursuant to Section 2.1 of the guidelines, to request a permit, plan check, or site plan review from the city for the installation of landscape. 

“Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” shall mean treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features, and which is not intended for human consumption.

“Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” shall mean a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix B of the guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four-to-seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.

“Rehabilitation project” shall mean a landscape project that results in the substantial removal and replacement of, and/or modifications to, existing landscaping and meets the requirements under CMC 17.82.040(A)(3) and (5). 

“Special landscaped area” shall mean an area of landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and areas where turf provides a playing surface.

“Turf” shall mean a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. “Turf” does not include artificial turf installed in compliance with the city’s design guidelines.

“Valve” shall mean a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

“Water feature” shall mean a design element where water is artificially supplied and where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include artificial ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools. The surface area of water features is included in the high-water-use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

“Watering window” shall mean the time of day irrigation is allowed pursuant to any applicable city, regional, state, or local water purveyor water conservation or drought response laws, rules, policies, or regulations. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.030 Purpose and intent.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource.

B. The intent of this chapter is to establish alternative regulations that are at least as effective as the model ordinance. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.040 Applicability of water-efficient landscape regulations.

A. The water-efficient landscape regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the following landscape projects:

1. New construction projects by public agencies or private developers of nonresidential projects which have a proposed landscaped area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, and are otherwise subject to:

a. A discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or 

b. A ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature;

2. New construction projects by private developers, associations, or property managers of residential projects which have a proposed landscaped area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, and are otherwise subject to:

a. A discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or 

b. A ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature;

3. Landscape rehabilitation projects by public agencies, private developers, associations, or property managers of residential or nonresidential projects which: 

a. Have a proposed landscaped area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet,

b. Propose to rehabilitate 50 percent or more of the existing landscaped area, 

c. Will be completed within one year, and 

d. Are otherwise subject to: 

i. A discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or

ii. A ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature; 

4. Homeowner-installed landscape for new construction of single-family or multiple-family residential property, which have a proposed landscaped area equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet, and are otherwise subject to:

a. A discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or

b. A ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature;

5. Homeowner-installed landscape rehabilitation projects for single-family or multiple-family residential property, which:

a. Have a proposed landscaped area equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet, 

b. Propose to rehabilitate 50 percent or more of the existing landscaped area, 

c. Will be completed within one year, and

d. Are otherwise subject to: 

i. A discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or

ii. A ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature. 

B. This chapter does not apply to:

1. Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;

2. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3. Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 

4. Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public; 

5. Cemeteries; and

6. Any other new landscape installation project and landscape rehabilitation project not listed in subsection (A) of this section.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, Sections 2.8 and 2.9 of the guidelines shall apply to cemeteries.

D. A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas and fuel modification zones shall comply with any applicable fire safety requirements. When conflicts between the provisions of applicable fire safety requirements and fire safety design elements exist, the fire safety requirements shall have priority. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.050 Implementation procedures.

A. Prior to the issuance of any permits, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the city for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the city shall comply with the provisions of the guidelines and shall include payment of a plan check fee as set by the city council by resolution. 

B. The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a landscape professional appropriately licensed in the state stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of such licensed landscape professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the guidelines. 

C. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the city for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations as set forth in the guidelines.

D. Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the guidelines.

E. Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certificate of completion as provided in the guidelines and, where applicable, in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.060 Landscape water use standards.

A. For new landscape installation or rehabilitated landscape projects subject to CMC 17.82.040(A), the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the city, as provided in the guidelines.

B. Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules, regulations, and requirements, including any established watering windows, and shall be subject to the penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the applicable local water purveyors or as mutually agreed by the local water purveyors and the city.

C. All irrigation controllers installed on or after January 1, 2012, within the city shall be smart controllers. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.070 Enforcement and administration.

A. The city manager is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and the guidelines. Any city-authorized personnel or enforcement officers may exercise any enforcement powers as set forth in the municipal code. 

B. The city may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency or other person to implement and administer any of the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.080 Guidelines for implementation of the water-efficient landscape regulations.

The city shall adopt guidelines for the implementation of this chapter. Such guidelines may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may establish any forms or other related documents to administer compliance with the guidelines as he or she deems appropriate and in furtherance of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.090 Violation. 

This chapter may be enforced by the city through pursuing any and all remedies provided in this code, at the city’s sole discretion, including but not limited to the following:

A. Criminal and administrative enforcement under Chapter 1.16, 1.26, or 1.28 CMC; or

B. The installation of a flow restrictor device to prevent waste of water, pursuant to CMC 13.06.100(B)(5); or

C. The disconnection of a customer’s water service for willful violations of the mandatory water efficiency regulations contained within this chapter. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.100 Conflicting provisions.

If provisions of this chapter are in conflict with each other, other provisions of the municipal code, the city’s general plan, any city adopted specific plan or master plan, any resolution or ordinance of the city, or any state law or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 10-1979 § 2, 2010.)


17.82.110 Adoption of guidelines for implementation.

The city council hereby approves and adopts the Guidelines for Implementation of the City of Covina Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (the “guidelines”), attached as Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified in this chapter and by this reference incorporated herein, for implementation of this chapter. The guidelines describe the procedures, calculations, design requirements, and verification process for landscape projects subject to this chapter. Any amendments, modifications or any other type of change to guidelines may be adopted and effectuated by resolution of the city council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager is hereby authorized to establish any forms or other related documents to administer compliance with the guidelines as he or she deems appropriate and in furtherance of this chapter. (Ord. 10-1979 § 3, 2010.)


Chapter 17.83 TREE PRESERVATION

Sections:

17.83.010    Purpose and intent.

17.83.020    Definitions.

17.83.030    Prohibition and permit required.

17.83.040    Exemptions.

17.83.050    Approval authority.

17.83.060    Application and contents.

17.83.070    Notification.

17.83.080    Findings.

17.83.090    Conditions of approval.

17.83.100    Permit effective date and expiration.

17.83.110    Appeal.

17.83.120    Tree preservation and propagation fund.

17.83.130    General requirements.

17.83.140    Exemption from the Solar Shade Control Act.

17.83.150    Designation of heritage trees.

17.83.160    Fees.

17.83.170    Penalties.


17.83.010 Purpose and intent.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect mature trees that represent a significant resource to the community. Large mature trees, particularly those of native species, provide habitat for birds and wildlife, moderate climatic extremes, add beauty to the community, increase property values, improve air quality, and represent a historic resource.

The intent of this chapter is to assure that new development addresses the preservation of significant healthy and mature trees to the greatest extent which is reasonable and that activities on properties with existing development are conducted in a manner that minimizes harm and destruction of such trees.

B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability for damage or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees. The person in possession of public property or the owner of any private property shall have duty to keep any tree upon the property or under their control in a safe, healthy condition. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.020 Definitions.

For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Damage” shall mean any action to destroy, remove, relocate, or otherwise inflict harm or injury to a tree. Damage shall include any act causing injury to the root system or other parts of a tree including burning, applications of toxic substances, operation of equipment or machinery within the dripline, paving within the dripline, change of the natural grade within the dripline, trenching or excavation within the dripline, excessive watering or any act of a similar nature.

B. “Diameter at standard height” is the diameter of a tree trunk as measured four and one-half feet above the mean natural grade of the ground in which it is growing.

C. “Dripline” shall mean an imaginary line on the ground at the furthest extension of the canopy around the circumference of the tree.

D. “Heritage trees” are protected trees that meet one or more of the following criteria:

1. Trees of the following species with a trunk diameter, as measured at standard height, of at least 10 inches for a single-trunk tree or with a combined diameter of at least 22 inches for multiple-trunk trees:

a. Quercus, all species (oaks).

2. Individual trees or groups of trees designated as heritage tree(s) by the city council pursuant to CMC 17.83.150.

E. “Tree preservation permit” means a permit to damage one or more heritage trees. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.030 Prohibition and permit required.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall damage any heritage tree located on any lot or parcel of land within the city unless a tree preservation permit is first obtained as provided herein. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005.)


17.83.040 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A. Street trees maintained by the city and located within any public right-of-way as described in Chapter 11.36 CMC.

B. Routine maintenance designed to assure the continued health of the tree. Routine maintenance does not include removal in any one year of branches that would bear over 10 percent of the tree’s live foliage or any reduction in more than 25 percent of the tree’s height. All such maintenance shall be undertaken in a manner that conforms with the standards of the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture.

C. An emergency caused by the tree’s dead, deceased, or hazardous conditions as determined by visual inspection by a licensed forester, certified arborist, the chief planning official, or his/her designee.

D. Emergency or routine maintenance by a public utility necessary to protect or maintain an electrical power or communication line and structures appurtenant thereto.

E. Trees planted, grown and/or held for sale by a licensed nursery.

F. Repair and maintenance of existing parkways, highways and streets and/or other public facilities. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.050 Approval authority.

The chief planning official shall have authority to approve, deny or approve subject to conditions any tree preservation permit to damage not more than one heritage tree located on a property zoned and used as a single-family residence. The planning commission shall have authority to approve, deny or approve subject to conditions any tree preservation permit to damage heritage trees for which the chief planning official does not have approval authority. Prior to approving a tree preservation permit to damage a heritage tree, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing held pursuant to the provisions of CMC 17.62.100. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.060 Application and contents.

A. Any person desiring a tree preservation permit shall file an application with the chief planning official.

B. An application for a tree preservation permit shall include the following information and documentation:

1. The name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any or all of the property on which the subject tree or trees is/are situated.

2. Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved, or has the written permission of the owner or owners to make such application.

3. The location of the subject property (street address or vicinity).

4. A photograph of the subject tree or trees.

5. A site plan drawn to a scale satisfactory to, and in the number of copies prescribed by, the Chief Planning Official indicating the location and dimension of existing and proposed features on the subject property, including lot lines, streets, highways, access and other major public or private easements, building or other structures, yards, walls and fences, parking and other paved areas, proposed areas to be landscaped, and proposed construction, including excavation, grading, and landfill, if any. The site plan shall also indicate the location of all heritage trees proposed to be damaged or within 100 feet of proposed construction activity, if any.

6. Mailing list and two sets of self-adhesive labels indicating the owner of all properties falling within a 300-foot radius of the property on which the subject tree(s) is/are located.

7. A report prepared by a certified arborist or licensed forester with qualifications satisfactory to the chief planning official which:

a. Evaluates the heritage tree(s) subject to the tree preservation permit application and addresses all pertinent issues including the size, species, health, aesthetics, monetary value and condition of the tree(s).

b. Provides recommendation of preserving the health of the subject heritage tree(s), mitigation of the impact of the permit request, and future maintenance measures when required and the effectiveness thereof.

8. The chief planning official may waive the requirement for a tree report for damage in conjunction with the use of an existing single-family residence as a permitted use in the zone. The chief planning official may waive any other information which is deemed unnecessary for processing the application.

9. The chief planning official may deny without further action any application which does not contain the information required herein, or permit the applicant to amend the application. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.070 Notification.

A. No public notice is required for consideration of a tree preservation permit for which the chief planning official has approval authority.

B. For applications for a tree preservation permit that are presented to the planning commission, the chief planning official, not less than 10 days before the date of the public hearing on the application, shall cause notice of the filing of a tree preservation permit application to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall include the statement “Notice of Tree Preservation Permit Filing.” Also included shall be information indicating the location of the subject property, the applicant’s request and the time and place of the proposed public hearing. The notice shall also provide the address and telephone number of the chief planning official and state that the official may be contacted for further information.

C. When an application for a conditional use permit, variance, planned community development (PCD), zone change or tentative map for a subdivision is concurrently filed, notice that a tree preservation permit application will also be considered shall be included in the required legal notices for such conditional use permit, variance, planned community development (PCD), zone change or tentative map. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.080 Findings.

A. Prior to approving a tree preservation permit for which he/she has approval authority, the approval authority must determine that at least one of the following provisions apply:

1. The subject tree(s) are naturally damaged and diseased to a degree that cannot be reasonably corrected or restored to health.

2. The action is necessary to maintain the health and viability of the subject tree(s) or other nearby trees.

3. The subject tree(s) represent a substantial threat to existing structures and significant improvements on the property.

4. There is no reasonable development alternative and retention of the subject tree(s) would constitute a substantial economic hardship.

B. In the case of tree preservation permits for which the planning commission has approval authority, in addition to the above at least one of the following applies:

1. That the damage proposed is necessary to avoid frustration of the planned improvement or proposed use of the subject property to such a degree that alternative development plans cannot achieve the same result, or the cost of such alternative plans is prohibitive, or placement of the subject tree(s) precludes the reasonable and efficient use of such property for a use otherwise authorized.

2. That the subject tree(s) proposed to be damaged interfere(s) with utility services or streets and highways either within or outside of the subject property and no reasonable alternative to such interference exists other than damaging the subject tree(s).

3. That the condition of the subject tree(s) with regard to debilitating disease or danger of falling is such that the danger or disease cannot be remedied through preservation procedures and practices other than damaging the tree(s).

C. In rendering a decision, the approval authority shall consider shade, scenic beauty, forest cover diminishment, wildlife preservation, historic value, aesthetics and general community welfare. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.090 Conditions of approval.

In rendering a decision on a tree preservation permit application, the approval authority may impose conditions of approval including but not limited to:

A. Replanting of a replacement tree of equivalent value and species.

B. Relocation of the subject tree(s) to an alternative location.

C. Payment of in-lieu mitigation fees to plant and/or preserve the subject tree(s) on property or sites where the city can assure the long-term viability of the subject tree(s).

D. Preparation of a monitoring and/or mitigation program by a city-approved certified arborist or licensed forester and provision of adequate financial security to assure implementation of the program.

E. Such other conditions as may be necessary to assure the tree preservation permit is consistent with the findings and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.100 Permit effective date and expiration.

A. If a tree preservation permit is issued for a development project requiring a land use entitlement (conditional use permit, variance, zone change, planned community development (PCD), or tentative subdivision map), grading permit, building permit, or any other city development permit, no tree preservation permit shall be effective and the permittee shall not damage a heritage tree until all required land use entitlements and city development permits have been obtained so that the permittee may commence with development of the project.

B. Unless otherwise specifically provided by the approval authority, any tree preservation permit granted under this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. Any damage authorized by a permit must commence prior to the permit’s expiration and thereupon be diligently pursued to timely completion. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.110 Appeal.

The decision of the chief planning official may be appealed to the planning commission within 10 calendar days of the date on which the decision is rendered. No public hearing is required for the planning commission to consider the appeal. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council within 10 days of the date on which it is rendered. The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal in the manner provided under CMC 17.62.130 when the initial tree preservation permit application was subject to a public hearing before the planning commission. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.120 Tree preservation and propagation fund.

The city shall establish a tree preservation and propagation fund using moneys collected as civil penalties, in-lieu mitigation fees, and other penalties related to this chapter. These funds shall be used exclusively to cover the costs of planting replacement trees or preserving native trees on property or sites where the city has reasonable assurance of the long-term viability of the trees. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.130 General requirements.

The following standards shall apply citywide:

A. At the time of planting, any heritage tree provided pursuant to this chapter shall be of a health, size, height and trunk caliper that conforms with the current edition of “Horticultural Standards” for number one grade nursery stock as adopted by the American Association of Nurserymen.

B. Utility companies shall practice good arboricultural practice.

C. Heritage trees shall only be trimmed in a manner consistent with the standards of the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture.

D. It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain all heritage trees in a sound, healthy and attractive manner. This shall include but is not limited to the provision of adequate water, trimming to prevent excessive overgrowth and entanglement, removal of dead or dangerous branches, and the avoidance of practices which endanger the tree(s).

E. Trenching and excavation under the dripline of a heritage tree shall only be undertaken using hand tools.

F. Protective fencing shall be provided around the dripline of all heritage trees during construction.

G. Utility trenches and footings shall not be placed under the dripline of a heritage tree without prior city approval.

H. Irrigation systems shall be designed to suit the needs of the tree(s) located on the property.

I. Prior to issuance of building, grading, demolition, and construction permits, the applicant shall:

1. Obtain a tree preservation permit if subject to this chapter.

2. Submit final tree report to the chief planning official, unless waived by the chief planning official, pursuant to CMC 17.83.060(B)(8).

3. Submit all required security deposits and agreements.

4. A copy of the city-approved final tree report shall be kept on the site at all times and the developer shall follow all recommendations therein. (Ord. 07-1938 § 1, 2007; Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.140 Exemption from the Solar Shade Control Act.

This city is exempt from the provisions of Chapter 12 (commencing with Public Resources Code Section 25980), Division 15 of the Public Resources Code which chapter is known as the Solar Shade Control Act. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.150 Designation of heritage trees.

A. The city council, planning commission or any property owner or concerned citizen of Covina may nominate a tree or cluster of trees for heritage status that are not otherwise defined as heritage tree(s) by this chapter.

B. Prior to the planning commission’s consideration of a heritage tree status nomination, there shall be on file with the planning department a signed written document indicating that the owner of the nominated tree(s) consents to the tree(s) being designated for heritage tree status under this chapter, and that, if the tree(s) is/are ultimately designated for heritage tree status, the owner fully understands the restrictions and covenants set forth in this chapter.

C. Not later than 60 calendar days following the planning department’s receipt of a complete application to nominate a tree for heritage status, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the nomination. At least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing, written notice shall be mailed to the owner(s) of the property on which the nominated tree(s) is/are located, along with any other interested parties as the chief planning official may deem appropriate. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation on the nomination, which shall be forwarded to the city council not later than 60 calendar days following the date of the public hearing at which the planning commission made its recommendation. Not later than 45 calendar days following the date of the city council’s receipt of the planning commission’s recommendation, the commission’s recommendation on the nomination shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing to which comparable written notice shall be provided. Following the public hearing, the city council shall render a decision to approve or deny designation as heritage tree(s). Hearings by either the planning commission or city council may be continued from time to time as necessary.

D. In evaluating a nomination for heritage status, the decision-making body shall consider:

1. The age, history, species and location of the tree(s) along with its relative importance to the community.

2. Whether the tree(s) occupies a location of significant aesthetic importance to the image of the community or a neighborhood thereof.

3. Unique or special characteristics and the image created by the planting and spacing of a group of trees.

4. The environmental value of the tree(s) as wildlife and biotic habitat and for erosion prevention.

5. The economic and social impact on the owner of the property or properties on which the tree(s) are located. (Ord. 07-1938 § 2, 2007; Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.160 Fees.

The city council shall from time to time adopt fees to recover the full cost to evaluate, monitor and enforce the various permits, applications, appeals, and penalties provided in this chapter. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


17.83.170 Penalties.

A. Each separate violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense. Inflicting damage to or removing multiple trees in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each tree.

B. In addition to or in lieu of criminal penalties, the city may pursue civil or private remedies including but not limited to:

1. Development moratoria of up to 10 years for any deliberate and egregious violation involving heritage trees.

2. Recovery of all reasonable costs and overhead expenses associated with enforcement and correction to the standards of this chapter.

3. Payment into tree preservation and propagation fund in an amount equivalent to the value of the tree(s) illegally damaged.

4. The ability to enter property and correct violations at owner’s expense.

5. Require planting of alternative trees in locations on or off of the subject site.

C. The city shall have the authority to assess liens on property to recover costs and penalties associated with violations of this chapter. (Ord. 05-1925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 96-1807, 1996.)


Chapter 17.84 CANNABIS PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.84.010    Purpose.

17.84.020    Definitions.

17.84.030    Prohibitions.

17.84.040    Exceptions.

17.84.050    Indoor cultivation – Compliance standards.

17.84.060    Prohibition in public places.

17.84.070    Violations and penalties.


17.84.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit commercial cannabis activity within the city limits. Under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, cannabis is classified as a “Schedule 1 Drug” which is defined as a drug or other substance that has a high potential for abuse and no medical benefit. Furthermore, the Federal Controlled Substances Act makes it unlawful for any person to cultivate, or dispense cannabis. The Federal Controlled Substances Act contains no statutory exemption for the possession of cannabis for any purpose. Nothing in this chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any provision of state or federal law.

In addition, the prohibition of all commercial cannabis activity within the city limits will help protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and its residents. There is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary impacts in locations associated with cannabis dispensaries, cultivation of cannabis and the mobile delivery of cannabis which is contrary to policies that are intended to promote and maintain the public’s health, safety and welfare. This chapter will help preserve the city’s law enforcement services, in that monitoring and addressing the negative secondary effects and adverse impacts will likely burden the city’s law enforcement resources. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


17.84.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter: 

A. “Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, packaging, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products for nonmedical, medical or any other purpose, and includes the activities of any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code or any other provision of state law that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses.

B. “Concentrated cannabis” means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this chapter.

C. “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

D. “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.

E. “Edible cannabis” means food or ingestible items made with cannabis or infused with cannabis oils.

F. “Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors. The fully enclosed and secure structure must have valid electrical, plumbing, and building permits, if required by other provisions of this code.

G. “Indoors” means within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

H. “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.

I. “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis, and any product containing cannabis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis that is used for medical, nonmedical, or other purposes. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.

J. “MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as codified in Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

K. “Outdoors” means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

L. “Operation” means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply, allow to be operated, or aid, abet or assist in the operation of commercial cannabis activity.

M. “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, collective, cooperative, nonprofit, trust, estate, association, club, receiver, syndicate, society, or other organization. The term “person” shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson.

N. “Possession” means to have, own, control, or possess.

O. “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully permitted to be used as a residence. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


17.84.030 Prohibitions.

A. The delivery of cannabis within city limits by any means is prohibited.

B. Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is expressly prohibited in all zones, all specific plan areas, and all overlay zones in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct or allow commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city. No application for a building permit, conditional use permit, business license, or any other entitlement authorizing the establishment, operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any use that allows for commercial cannabis activity shall be approved.

C. Subsection (B) of this section shall prohibit all activities for which a state license is required pursuant to MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any city permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a state license is required under MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. The city shall also not issue any temporary local license to a nonprofit pursuant to provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 26070.5.

D. The outdoor cultivation of cannabis by any person, including a primary caregiver, qualified patient or person with identification card as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, is prohibited within the city limits.

E. Indoor cannabis cultivation that does not meet the standards set forth in CMC 17.84.050 is prohibited. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


17.84.040 Exceptions.

A. To the extent that the following activities are permitted by state law, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person 21 years of age or older from:

1. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or older, without compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis not in the form of concentrated cannabis;

2. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or older, without compensation whatsoever, up to eight grams of cannabis in the form of concentrated cannabis;

3. Smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis products in a manner consistent with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3;

4. Possessing, transporting, purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away cannabis accessories to persons 21 years of age or older without compensation whatsoever; or 

5. Engaging in the indoor cultivation of six or less live cannabis plants within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured, to the extent such cultivation is authorized by California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, and to the extent that such cultivation complies with CMC 17.84.050.

B. This chapter shall not prohibit any person from transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the city.

C. This chapter shall also not prohibit any commercial cannabis activity that the city is required by state law to permit within its jurisdiction pursuant to the MAUCRSA. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


17.84.050 Indoor cultivation – Compliance standards.

The indoor cultivation of seven or more cannabis plants in a private residence is prohibited. The indoor cultivation of six or fewer cannabis plants in a private residence shall be permitted to the extent permitted by state law, and subject to the following standards:

A. A person may not cultivate cannabis without first registering on forms available at the Covina police department, and paying the registration fees that shall be set by resolution of the city council. The registration form shall contain language stating that the registrant shall acknowledge that he or she will cultivate cannabis in conformity with the standards set forth herein, and shall allow, with reasonable notice, access by the city and/or the police department to his or her private residence to confirm compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter, and all applicable local and state laws.

B. The maximum number of cannabis plants that may be cultivated per private residence is limited to six, regardless of the number of persons that reside in the private residence. Only one person may register for each private residence, and a person may not register at more than one private residence in the city.

C. The cultivation shall only occur either inside of a private residence, or inside of a fully enclosed and secure structure located upon the grounds of a private residence.

D. Cultivation lighting shall not exceed 600 watts. The cultivation shall not draw more power than the structure and electrical service is designed to handle and shall not constitute a fire hazard.

E. The use of compressed gases, including but not limited to carbon dioxide and butane, for cultivation or processing is prohibited.

F. The property shall remain at all times a private residence with a legal and functioning kitchen, bathrooms and bedrooms for their intended use and such cultivation shall not prevent the property’s primary use as a residential use. The cultivation activities shall be conducted in a manner that maintains a clear and unobstructed path to outdoor window(s) and interior door(s) at all times.

G. If cultivation occurs in a garage, it shall be conducted in a manner that does not reduce required off-street parking.

H. The cultivation area shall include an adequate ventilation and filtration system to ensure that odors from cultivation are not detectable beyond the subject property, and shall be designed to prevent mold and moisture in order to protect the health and safety of persons inhabiting the residence.

I. Any chemicals used for cultivation shall be properly and safely stored outside the habitable area of the residence.

J. The cultivation shall not use more water than is reasonably required to cultivate the maximum number of permitted cannabis plants.

K. The cultivation area shall comply with all applicable provisions of the building and fire codes.

L. The cultivation area shall not adversely affect the health or safety of nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration or other impacts and shall not be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes, or from other actions related to the cultivation.

M. The maximum plant height of any indoor cultivated cannabis plant shall not exceed six feet, as measured from the base of the floor to the highest point of the cannabis plant(s).

N. The fully enclosed structure where the cannabis cultivation is occurring must have valid building, electrical, and plumbing permits, if applicable.

O. Any cannabis cultivation that does not meet the requirements set forth in this section is prohibited, is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


17.84.060 Prohibition in public places.

The smoking, consumption, and use of cannabis in any and all forms shall be prohibited in all public places. “Public places” is defined herein to include, but is not limited to, all public parks, buildings and other facilities owned, leased or operated by or on behalf of the city. “Public places” shall include, but is not limited to, all municipal parking lots, public sidewalks, trails, and streets and roadways. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


17.84.070 Violations and penalties.

In addition to any other enforcement permitted by Chapter 17.85 CMC, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Chapter 17.85 CMC, this chapter does not authorize a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq. or 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Chapter 17.85 CMC and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. (Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017.)


Chapter 17.85 COMPLIANCE AND PENALTIES

Sections:

17.85.010    Interpretation – Purpose – Conflict.

17.85.020    Permits and licenses – Compliance.

17.85.030    Violation – Penalty.


17.85.010 Interpretation – Purpose – Conflict.

In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. Where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 17-09 § 3, 2017; 1964 Code Appx. A § 13.00. Formerly 17.84.010.)


17.85.020 Permits and licenses – Compliance.

All departments, officials or public employees vested with the duty of authority to issue permits or licenses, where required by law, shall conform to the provisions of this title. No such license or permit for uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be issued. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be null and void.

No premises shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the secretary of the city planning commission; provided, that such certificate of compliance shall be required only within those areas mapped under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 17-09 § 3, 2017; 1964 Code Appx. A § 13.10. Formerly 17.84.020.)


17.85.030 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless otherwise specifically provided, and upon conviction thereof is punishable as provided in CMC 1.16.010. Each such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and is punishable therefor as provided for in this title, and any use, occupation or building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions hereof constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 17-09 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1681 § 1(i), 1988; 1964 Code Appx. A § 13.20. Formerly 17.84.030.)



-----------------------------

The Covina Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 19-07, passed May 7, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Covina Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.covinaca.gov/ City Telephone: (626) 384-5430

Code Publishing Company