Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 17 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.06 CITY RECORDS
Chapter 1.08 ORDINANCES
Chapter 1.10 CLAIMS
Chapter 1.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION
Chapter 1.14 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURES
Chapter 1.16 NUISANCE
Chapter 1.18 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.20 OFFICIAL NOTICES
Chapter 1.24 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.28 ARREST PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.32 JUDICIAL REVIEW PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.36 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
TITLE 1 ENDNOTES

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding the codification of city ordinances, see Gov. Code §§ 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10.

 

1.01.010 Adoption.
        Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the “El Cajon Municipal Code”, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of this code. (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 2994 § 1, 1976.)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
        This code shall be known as the “El Cajon Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the El Cajon municipal code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of this code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of this code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 2994 § 2, 1976.)

 

1.01.030 Codification authority.
        This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of El Cajon, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 2994 § 3, 1976.)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
        The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 2917, adopted December 2, 1975. The following ordinances, adopted subsequent to Ordinance 2917, but prior to the adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 2923, 2924, 2935, 2936, 2939, 2948, 2951, 2952, 2954, 2956, 2967, 2970, 2973, 2974, 2983, and 2988. (Ord. 2994 § 4, 1976.)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
        Whenever a reference is made to this code as the El Cajon municipal code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 2994 § 5, 1976.)

 

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
        Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 2994 § 6, 1976.)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
        The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 2994 § 7, 1976.)

 

1.01.080 Repeal of prior adopting ordinance and general provisions.
        Ordinance No. 1768, adopted August 16, 1975, is repealed. Prior code Sections 1-1, 1-3, 1-4, 1-5 and 1-6 are repealed. (Ord. 2994 § 8, 1976.)

 

1.01.090 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
        Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any matter affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2994 § 9, 1976.)

 

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code is declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 2994 § 10, 1976.)

 

1.01.110 Effective date.
        This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “El Cajon Municipal Code” becomes effective. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective September 9, 1976. (Ord. 2994 § 11, 1976.)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Rules of construction generally.
        In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules in this chapter shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise. (Ord. 2893 § 1, 1975: prior code § 1-2.)

 

1.04.020 Definitions.
A.    The following words as used in this code shall be defined as follows:

1.     “The city” or “this city” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of El Cajon.”

2.     “The code” or “this code” means the code of the city of El Cajon, California.

3.     Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded.

4.     “Council” means the city council of the city of El Cajon.

5.     “The county” or “this county” means the county of San Diego.

6.     A “day” means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

7.     “Daytime” means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” means the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

8.     “In the city” means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

9.     Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

10.   “May” is permissive.

11.   “Month” means a calendar month.

12.   “Oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

13.   Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this code mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

14.   Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean Pacific standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city.

15.   “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.

16.   “Owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

17.   “Person” includes any natural person, corporation, company, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, trust, business trust, syndicate, estate, receiver, social club, fraternal organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes any officer, agent, employee and servant of any of the foregoing.

18.   “Personal property” includes every species of property, except real property as defined in this section.

19.   The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

20.   “Process” includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

21.   “Property” includes real and personal property.

22.   “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

23.   “Shall” and “must.” Each is mandatory.

24.   Signature or Subscription by Mark. “Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber can not write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

25.   “The state” or “this state” means the state of California.

26.   “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.

27.   Week. A “week” consists of seven consecutive days.

28.   Writing. “Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

29.   “Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.

B.     When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.

C.     All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

(Ord. 2893 § 1, 1975: prior code § 1-2.)

 

1.04.030 Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc.
        Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 2893 § 1, 1975: prior code § 1-2.)

 

1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.
A.    Gender. Designation in the form of any gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders and the term “he” shall mean “he or she.”

B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.

C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.

(Ord. 4602 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2893 § 1, 1975; prior code § 1-2.)

 

1.04.050 Limitation on liability.
        It is the intent of the city council of the city of El Cajon that any ordinance establishing performance standards or establishing an obligation to act upon a city officer or employee shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of tort liability if the officer or employee fails to perform said act. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, the obligations imposed upon city officers or employees for implementation and enforcement of this code are directory in nature. Nothing in this code shall be construed as limiting or eliminating any defense or immunity from liability for the city or its officers or employees established by the provisions of Title 1, Division 3.6 of the California Government Code or by any other provision of law. (Ord. 3870 § 1, 1985.)

Chapter 1.06 CITY RECORDS
1.06.010 Authorization for preservation of city records.
        The city clerk is authorized to preserve city records pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 34090.5(a—d) and any succeeding section thereto. The reproduction of all official records preserved in such manner shall constitute the “original” thereof. (Ord. 4258 § 2, 1997.)

Chapter 1.08 ORDINANCES
1.08.010 Preparation.
        All ordinances shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested in writing by the mayor or city manager, or prepared by the city attorney on his or her own initiative. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-16.16.)

 

1.08.020 Introduction for passage.
        Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the mayor or city manager or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise they shall not be considered. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-16.17.)

Chapter 1.10 CLAIMS
1.10.010 Authority.
        This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 4855 § 1, 2006.)

 

1.10.020 Claims required.
        All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 4855 § 1, 2006.)

 

1.10.030 Form of claim.
        All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. (Ord. 4855 § 1, 2006.)

 

1.10.040 Claim prerequisite to suit.
        In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 4855 § 1, 2006.)

 

1.10.050 Suit.
        Any action brought against the city of El Cajon upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city of El Cajon shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 4855 § 1, 2006.)

 

1.10.060 Claims accruing prior to effective date; retroactivity.
        This chapter shall apply to any claims accruing after the effective date of this ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for any claims or causes of action that have accrued prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, and which are exempt from the Tort Claims Act by Government Code Section 905, this chapter shall apply retroactively so that such claims must be filed within one year of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter. (Ord. 4855 § 1, 2006.)

Chapter 1.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION
1.12.010 Designated.
        Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or regulation, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or regulation violation in any building or upon any premises within the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the official by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, the official shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four hours’ written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect.. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the owner and/or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event that owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.

        This section shall not be construed to authorize entry or seizure in excess of state or federal law. (Ord. 4328 § 1, 1992; Ord. 2896 § 1, 1975: prior code § 1.12.010.)

Chapter 1.14 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURES
1.14.010 Purpose.
        The city council finds there is a need for an alternative method to enforce violations of the El Cajon Municipal Code. The city council further finds that an administrative citation program is an appropriate method of enforcing violations of the municipal code. The administrative citation remedy provided in this chapter is available in addition to any other remedy authorized by law. (Ord. 4641 § 1, 2000.)

 

1.14.020 Definitions.
A.    Administrative Citation. A written notice of violation of a provision of the El Cajon Municipal Code, which includes imposition of an administrative fine.

B.     Code Enforcement Officer. The fire chief, building official, and zoning compliance officer, or any other person authorized by the city manager to enforce the provisions of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

C.     Hearing Officer. The person designated by the city manager to conduct administrative hearings pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Responsible Party. Property owner(s), and/or other persons responsible for a violation of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

(Ord. 4641 § 2, 2000.)

 

1.14.030 Authority to enforce.
        All authorized personnel shall be vested with the authority to determine whether a violation of a provision of this code exists and to issue an administrative citation. (Ord. 4641 § 3, 2000.)

 

1.14.040 Notice of violation.
        Prior to issuing an administrative citation, if a violation of a provision of this code does not create an imminent danger to health or safety, the owner(s) and/or other responsible party, shall be informed of the violation, and provided a reasonable amount of time to correct, or otherwise remedy said violation. The time period provided to remedy such violation shall not exceed thirty calendar days. (Ord. 4641 § 4, 2000.)

 

1.14.050 Administrative citation.
A.    Whenever a code enforcement officer determines that a violation of a provision of the El Cajon Municipal Code has occurred, he or she shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to each owner and/or any person responsible for the violation.

B.     Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

1.     Date of the violation;

2.     Address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

3.     The section of the code violated and a description of the violation;

4.     The name of the owner(s) and/or person responsible for the violation;

5.     The amount of fine for the code violation;

6.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which, and the place where the fine is to be paid;

7.     An order requiring compliance with the municipal code;

8.     A description of the administrative citation hearing process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested;

9.     Name and signature of the code enforcement officer.

C.     A separate administrative citation may be issued to each owner and/or party responsible for the violation, for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which a violation of any provision of this code is committed, maintained, continued, or permitted to exist.

(Ord. 4641 § 5, 2000.)

 

1.14.060 Service of an administrative citation.
A.    Service of an administrative citation shall be by one of the following methods:

1.     Personal service upon the owner or person responsible for the violation; or

2.     Certified mail with return receipt requested; or

3.     Posting the administrative citation in a conspicuous place on the property.

B.     Service to each owner by certified mail shall be addressed to the address shown on the last available tax assessment roll, or as otherwise known. Service to each responsible party by certified mail, other than the owner, shall be addressed to such person at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records, or as otherwise known.

C.     The failure of any owner or other person responsible for the violation to receive a properly addressed citation shall not affect the validity of the citation.

(Ord. 4641 § 6, 2000.)

 

1.14.070 Amount of fines.
        Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 8.33 of this code, which shall apply to violations of that chapter, and except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.243 of this code, which shall apply to violations of that chapter, the amount of administrative fine, which may be imposed for each separate violation of the same provision of the code, shall be established by resolution of the city council within the following limits:

A.    For a first violation a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars per day, per violation;

B.     For a second violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars per day, per violation; and

C.     For a third violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars per day, per violation;

D.    For a fourth violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per day, per violation; and

E.     For any additional violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars per day, per violation.

F.     The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date.

(Ord. 5065 § 3, 2017.)

 

1.14.080 Payment of fine.
A.    The payment of the administrative citation fine may be made in person or by mailing said sum, within ten days of the date of service of the citation, to the city of El Cajon (Attention: Finance Dept.), 200 East Main Street, El Cajon, CA, 92020.

B.     Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to Subsection “A” shall be refunded if it is determined after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation, or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

C.     Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that has been charged in the administrative citation.

(Ord. 4641 § 8, 2000.)

 

1.14.090 Deferral of administrative citation fine deposit.
A.    A person who has received an administrative citation and requests an administrative hearing, may request a deferral of the fine deposit required in Section 1.14.100, if he or she is financially unable to make the advance deposit.

B.     Request for deferral of an administrative citation fine deposit based upon financial hardship shall be made on the form approved by the city manager.

C.     The city manager shall determine whether deposit of the administrative fine amount shall be deferred due to financial hardship.

D.    If a deferral of the deposit is granted and the hearing officer subsequently upholds the administrative citation, the recipient(s) of the citation shall be required to pay the amount of the fine within ten days of the date the written decision of the hearing officer is mailed.

(Ord. 4641 § 9, 2000.)

 

1.14.100 Request for administrative hearing.
A.    Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the code, or that he or she is the person responsible for the violation, by submitting a written request for a hearing. Such a request must be submitted within ten calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served and must be accompanied by the full amount of the fine (except as provided in Section 1.14.090).

B.     The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

C.     If the code enforcement officer submits an additional written report with respect to the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of the report shall also be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

(Ord. 4641 § 10, 2000.)

 

1.14.110 Hearing procedure.
A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.14.100, or deferred pursuant to Section 1.14.090.

B.     A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than ten calendar days and not more than thirty calendar days from the date that the request is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C.     The hearing officer may consolidate administrative citations issued for violations of the same code section to the same owner or responsible party.

D.    At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the administrative citation.

E.     The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.

F.     The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the code enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts stated therein.

G.    The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the code enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.

(Ord. 4641 § 11, 2000.)

 

1.14.120 Hearing officer’s decision.
A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to either uphold, modify, or cancel the administrative citation(s) and shall list the reasons for that decision in the decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

B.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, the city shall retain the fine amount on deposit with the city.

C.     If the hearing officer determined that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.

D.    The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision.

E.     The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the number of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer.

(Ord. 4641 § 12, 2000.)

 

1.14.130 Recovery of administrative fines and costs.
        Administrative citation fines which are not paid within ten days of the date the citation is served, or, where an administrative hearing is held, within ten days of the date the hearing officer mails the written decision upholding the citation, shall be subject to late payment penalties and administrative fees charged to cover the costs incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of the chapter. The city may collect any past due administrative citation fine, late penalty, or administrative fee by use of all available legal means. (Ord. 4641 § 13, 2000.)

 

1.14.140 Administrative citation remedy not exclusive.
        The administrative citation remedy provided in this chapter is in addition to any existing remedy authorized by law, and is not to be construed as superseding or limiting any other remedies, civil or criminal. The administrative remedy herein provided shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 4641 § 14, 2000.)

 

1.14.150 Right to judicial review.
        Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer with respect to an administrative citation may obtain judicial review by filing an appeal within twenty days after the mailing or personal delivery of the hearing officer’s final decision. The procedure for appeal of the hearing officer’s decision shall be as provided in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 4641 § 15, 2000.)

Chapter 1.16 NUISANCE
1.16.010 Terms defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter:

        “Authorized personnel” includes all department heads and designees.

        “Owner” includes owners of any interest in the property, including but not limited to, owners, lessees, sublessees, mortgagee in possession, licensee, beneficiaries of deeds of trust on the property, and any person in charge and control of the property. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.020 Purpose—Nuisance defined.
        The council declares that its purpose in adopting this chapter is to establish a procedure to cause the abatement of municipal code violations. The procedures established in this section shall be in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to address violation of this municipal code. This chapter is also intended to be used as an alternative to existing nuisance abatement procedures established in other chapters of this code.

        The city council declares that any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code which obstructs, injures, or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property belonging to a neighborhood, community or any considerable number of persons and poses a serious threat to the public’s health, safety and welfare, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated consistent with the procedures provided for in this section. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.030 Authority to declare nuisance.
        All authorized personnel shall be vested with the authority to determine whether a public nuisance, as defined herein, may exist on any private property and cause a written notice to be issued to abate such nuisance.

        The city council may declare the existence of a public nuisance at any time in addition to the above authorized personnel. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.040 Authority to abate nuisance.
        Whenever a public nuisance is maintained or exists in the city, either under the general law or defined to be such under this code, it shall be the duty of the specific department charged with enforcement of the conditions as they are maintained or exist, and they are hereby authorized and empowered, to abate the same by removal, destruction or abatement of the act or thing constituting a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or restrict the ability of the police and fire departments in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.050 Special standards and exceptions.
        With the following exceptions, the procedures provided in this chapter may be used in the abatement of all nuisances.

A.    Summary Abatement. All conditions which are determined by the city manager to pose an immediate risk to the health or safety of persons or property within the city may be abated summarily. A hearing shall be held after completion of the work to confirm both the necessity of abatement and the costs incurred. Notice must be given to the owner as soon as possible. If unable to provide notice in accordance with Section 1.16.090, property must be posted within twenty-four hours of the work. Abatement costs under these circumstances shall be recovered under the summary abatement procedure.

B.     Substandard Structures. All notices issued to correct violations or to abate nuisances shall contain a provision notifying the owner that, in accordance with Sections 17274 and 24436.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred on the property in the taxable year.

C.     Abandoned Vehicles. The abatement and removal, as public nuisances, of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private property or public property and for the recovery of costs of administration and the removal is not subject to the provisions of this chapter. The procedure for abatement and cost recovery is set forth in Sections 10.12.160 through 10.12.210 of this code.

(Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.060 Recordation of abatement notices and instruments.
        All notices and instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment are entitled to recordation pursuant to Section 38772.5 of the California Government Code. Any document generated pursuant to this chapter may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be recorded against the subject property. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.070 Notice of abatement.
A.    The notice shall contain:

1.     The name and address of the owner of the property;

2.     A legal description of the property and a description in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property;

3.     A statement of the provisions of the code or zoning ordinance allegedly violated, including a description of the manner in which the alleged violation has occurred. The statement shall state the facts with particularity sufficient to place the owner of such property on notice of the circumstances constituting a nuisance. Reference to this chapter should be included;

4.     The date upon or before which the nuisance must be abated;

5.     A description of the consequences of failure to comply as prescribed in this section including, but not limited to, a recorded abatement notice against the property, abatement of the nuisance by the city at the owner’s expense, a property assessment and lien for such costs;

6.     Either the date, time and location which has been set for a hearing by the city council, or a statement of a right to appeal to the city council. Notices for the abatement of substandard property nuisances shall contain an established hearing date. The determination of whether to set a hearing date or provide an option to the property owner for appeal shall otherwise be based upon the following factors:

a.     The extent of intrusion upon private property to effect the abatement;

b.     The difficulty of abatement;

c.     The potential harm from delaying abatement.

B.     The period for compliance shall be not less than twenty days nor more than sixty days, unless the city council grants an extension.

(Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.080 Service of notice of abatement.
        The notice of abatement shall be served upon each owner by personal service on the owner(s); or by certified or registered mail, addressed to each owner at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known.

        Copies of said notice shall also be posted at the conspicuous places on the property. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.090 Hearing by city council.
        In the following situations a nuisance determination may come before the city council for hearing: (1) when the property owner appeals the staff determination; (2) when staff sets a hearing on the determination; (3) when the property owner fails to abate the conditions described in the notice by the date specified; (4) when immediate abatement was necessary without prior notification of the property owner.

A.    Notice of the hearing shall be given to the owner of the property as provided in Section 1.16.080.

B.     At the hearing, the authorized personnel shall present information relating to the municipal code violation and the conditions which constitute a public nuisance. The owner of the property or any interested person may present testimony concerning the existence of a public nuisance on the property in question.

C.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may confirm, by resolution, the determination of the authorized personnel that a public nuisance exists on the property.

(Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.100 Concurrence by council—Duty to comply—Time for compliance.
        If the city council confirms the determination of the authorized personnel, the city council may order the abatement of those conditions which it finds constitute a public nuisance in violation of the municipal code by city personnel or by its private contractor. The owner of the property, however, may correct the conditions prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth by the city council. Upon such abatement in full by the owner, the proceedings under this chapter shall terminate. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.110 Noncompliance with notice—Notice of intent to lien.
        In the event the owner of the property does not comply with the requirements of the notice on or before the date specified for the performance of said work, the authorized personnel shall provide to the city attorney in recordable form “Notice of Intent to Lien,” in substantially the following form:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENT TO LIEN

 

        The property described in Attachment “A” hereto, or a building or structure thereon, has been determined to constitute a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 1.16 [and other sections if applicable] of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

        The City of El Cajon now intends to cause or has caused certain work to be performed upon said property to abate or eliminate the nuisance and will charge the expense of said work to the following owner(s) of said property.

 

        [insert name(s) of owner(s)]

 

        Failure of said owner(s) to pay such expense will result in a lien on said property.

 

        Dated___________

 

        CITY OF EL CAJON

 

        By______________”

 

        The city manager may designate personnel to cause the work to be done. All necessary warrants for entry on private property shall be obtained prior to commencing the work. When the work is completed, the authorized personnel shall file with the city clerk a report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of the work. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.120 Lien—Notice and service.
        The notice of intent to lien pursuant to this chapter shall give notice to the owner that a lien for the costs of work performed may be claimed.

        Lien notices shall be served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 (commencing with Section 415.10) of the Code of Civil Procedure.

        If the owner of record after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.130 Lien and personal obligation.
        The city shall have a lien for the cost of any work performed pursuant to this code against the real property on which such work was rendered and against any other real property within the jurisdiction of the city which is owned by the person responsible for causing the nuisance.

        The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it shall be on a parity.

        The costs of such work are also joint and separate personal obligations of the person who caused the nuisance. The city attorney may collect the costs by use of all appropriate legal remedies.

        The lien provided by this section may be foreclosed and enforced by a civil action in a court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.140 Billing of abatement costs.
        When abatement is completed, a report of proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of the abatement action shall be filed with the city clerk. The actual cost thereof shall be charged to the owner of such property, and the owner shall be billed therefor by mail, if not paid prior thereto. The bill shall inform the owner that failure to pay the bill will result in a lien against the subject property and a joint and separate personal obligation. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

 

1.16.150 Hearing on costs.
        Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty days after the date of billing, the city clerk shall set the report and account for hearing by the city council within twenty-one days after receipt of the report and shall post a copy of the authorized personnel’s report and account and notice of the time and place of the hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the council chambers. A copy of the report and account and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be provided to the owner of the property in question. Such notice shall be given in the manner provided by Section 1.16.080. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.160 Hearing—Council confirmation or modification.
        The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections to its accuracy. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified and corrected by the council. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

        The amounts so approved shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The council shall confirm the assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll. The council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.170 Payment—Time—Installments—Interest.
A.    The city finance department may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council hearing called for in Section 1.16.090.

B.     The city council, in its discretion, may permit assessments in amounts of five hundred dollars or more to be paid in equal annual installments for up to five years. The council shall adopt a resolution prior to confirmation of the assessment which establishes any conditions of an installment plan.

C.     All assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the city council shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date.

(Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.180 Administrative fees.
        An administrative fee to cover the cost incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall be charged to the owner of the property deemed to be a public nuisance. The fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.190 Enforcement.
        The provisions of Sections 38772 and 38773.5 of California Government Code are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

        In addition to any other remedy provided by law any provision of this chapter may be enforced by injunction. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.200 Violations—Penalty.
A.    The following conditions, actions or omissions shall be subject to the general penalty clause as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city of El Cajon:

1.     The owner or other person having charge or control of any building, structure or premises maintained as a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or who violates any order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter;

2.     Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure who fails to vacate the building or structure in accordance with an order given as provided in this chapter;

3.     Any person who obstructs, impedes or otherwise interferes with any representative of the city, or with any person whenever such representative or person is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating, demolishing and removing or otherwise abating a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant hereto;

B.     Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.210 Violations.
        All violations of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

 

1.16.220 Severability.
        If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter, or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications. To this extent only, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 4318 § 2, 1991.)

Chapter 1.18 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
1.18.010 Election of Council Members.
        The four city council members shall be elected from four districts and the Mayor shall be elected at-large. Each district councilmember shall reside within and be elected by voters within their respective district. Such districts shall be used in all matters concerning the appointment, recall, vacancy or any other aspects of that particular council seat. (Ord. 5062 § 6, 2017.)

 

1.18.020 Map of Council Districts.
        The city clerk shall maintain a map of the city showing the current boundaries and numbers of each city council district as may be established and amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 5062 § 6, 2017.)

 

1.18.030 2018 and 2020 City Council Elections.
A.    The city shall hold an election for the seat representing city council district one in November of 2018. The individual so elected shall fill the seat of the councilmember who was elected in November of 2014.

B.     The city shall hold elections for the seats representing city council districts two, three and four in November of 2020. The three individuals so elected shall fill the seats of the councilmembers who were elected in November of 2016.

(Ord. 5062 § 6, 2017.)

 

1.18.040 Mail Ballot Elections.
A.    The city council is authorized to conduct elections wholly by mail ballot as described in subsection (B) of this section. The city council shall determine whether an election will be conducted by mail at the time the election is called. Actions of the city council pursuant to this section shall be set forth in a resolution approved at a regular or special meeting of the city council.

 

B.     The following items may be the subject of a mail ballot election:

1.     Any election to approve a special tax as required or authorized by Article XIII C of the California Constitution.

2.     Any election to approve a property-related fee or charge as required or authorized by Article XIII D of the California Constitution.

3.     Any assessment ballot proceeding required or authorized by Article XIII D of the California Constitution; provided, however, that such a proceeding shall be denominated an assessment ballot proceeding rather than an election.

C.     Elections authorized by this section shall be held on an established mailed ballot election date pursuant to California Elections Code section 1500.

D.    Elections authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with special provisions as may be adopted by resolution of the city council with respect to assessment ballot proceedings and elections for property-related fees and charges, and, with respect to elections on taxes, in accordance with the provisions for mail ballot elections set forth in California Elections Code sections 4100 et seq., as now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(Ord. 5062 § 6, 2017.)

Chapter 1.20 OFFICIAL NOTICES
1.20.010 Methods of service.
        Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made herein, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matters to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (Prior code § 1-9.)

 

1.20.020 Proof of service.
        Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit or any person over the age of eighteen years which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1-10.)

 

1.20.030 Shortening time for notice of public hearing.
        Notwithstanding the notice of public hearing provisions of Chapter 15.16, or any other chapter of this code, the notice required to be given to a property owner or other responsible person prior to a public hearing may be shortened to any reasonable period of time upon declaration by a city official that a prompt public hearing is urgent for the preservation of the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 3719 § 2, 1983.)

Chapter 1.24 GENERAL PENALTY
Note
*       For state law authorizing cities to impose fines for violations of ordinances, see Gov. Code § 36901. For provisions declaring violation of ordinance to be an infraction, see Gov. Code § 36900.

 

1.24.010 Designated violations-Misdemeanors and infractions.
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall constitute a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this code may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction; and with the further exception that any violation of the provisions relating to parking, operation of bicycles, operation of dockless vehicles, operation of motor vehicles, and use of freeways, highways and streets by animals, bicycles, dockless vehicles, motor vehicles or pedestrians shall constitute an infraction.

B.     Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise made in this code, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

C.     Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise made in this code, shall be punishable by fine only as follows:

1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

D.    Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable accordingly.

E.     In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated as such by this city, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

(Ord. 5076 § 3, 2019; Ord. 3804 § 1, 1984; Ord. 3636 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2893 § 2, 1975; prior code § 1-7.)

 

1.24.020 Civil penalties—Procedures.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this code, any person or organization violating any land use ordinance as defined in Chapter 15.18, or rules and regulations adopted thereunder, or the conditions of any permit issued pursuant to such ordinance, rule or regulation, or by any act of commission or omission procures, aids or abets such violation, shall be subject to civil penalties as provided in this chapter.

B.     Civil penalties may be directly assessed by means of a Notice and Order issued pursuant to Chapter 15.18, or may be recovered by legal action.

C.     Civil penalties assessed by means of a Notice and Order shall be collected in accordance with the lien, personal obligation and other procedures specified in this code. Civil penalties assessed in a legal action shall be collected in the same manner as judgments in civil actions.

D.    Where the conduct constituting a violation is of a continuing nature, each day of such conduct is a separate and distinct violation. Civil penalties for failure to obtain any required permit shall begin to accrue on the first day activity subject to the permit requirement is commenced, and shall cease to accrue on the day the permit is obtained. Civil penalties for violation of any Order to Cease Violation or Notice and Order to Correct shall begin to accrue on the first day the said Order or Notice is posted, and shall cease on the day the violation is actually stopped.

E.     1.     A civil penalty for a violation of any land use ordinance, rule or regulation by a person engaged in a noncommercial venture shall be assessed at the rate of fifty dollars per day per violation.

2.     A civil penalty for a violation of any land use ordinance, rule or regulation by a person engaged in a commercial venture shall be assessed at the rate of one hundred dollars per day per violation.

3.     Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), of this subsection (E), a civil penalty for a violation of Chapter 17.243 of this code by any person operating a business, or by any property owner allowing the operation of a business, in violation of that chapter, is punishable by a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars per day per violation.

F.     Penalties for the second separate violation of a like nature by the same person shall be five times the rates identified in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection E of this section. Penalties for the third separate violation of a like nature by the same person shall be ten times the rates identified in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection E of this section. Penalties for the fourth separate violation of a like nature by the same person engaged in a noncommercial venture shall be assessed at five hundred dollars per day per violation; penalties for the fourth separate violation of a like nature by the same person engaged in a commercial venture shall be assessed at one thousand dollars per day per violation. Penalties for any separate violation of a like nature by the same person engaged in a noncommercial venture, beyond a fourth violation, shall be assessed at one thousand dollars per day per violation; penalties for any separate violation of a like nature by the same person engaged in a commercial venture, beyond a fourth violation shall be assessed at two thousand five hundred dollars per day per violation.

(Ord. 5065 § 4, 2017.)

 

1.24.030 Sworn statements under penalty of perjury.
        Every person who testifies, declares, deposes, or certifies under penalty of perjury, where such is required to comply with the provisions of this code or by direction of the officers of the city of El Cajon, who willfully states as true any material matter which such person knows to be false, is guilty of perjury. Any person guilty of perjury under this section shall be subject to the laws of the state of California for the crime of perjury. (Ord. 4056 § 2, 1987; Ord. 3814 § 1, 1984.)

Chapter 1.28 ARREST PROCEDURE
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding citation for misdemeanors, see Pen. Code § 853.6 et seq.

 

1.28.010 Applicability.
        Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any requirement of this code or of the ordinances of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless provision is otherwise herein made.

        If any person is arrested for a violation of this code or of the ordinances of the city, and such person does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer may issue a citation in the manner prescribed in Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the state. (Ord. 3647 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 3, 1975: prior code § 1-7.1.)

Chapter 1.32 JUDICIAL REVIEW PROCEDURE
1.32.010 Purpose.
        It is the declared purpose of this chapter to make the provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure applicable to decisions of the city, or of any commission, board, officer or agent thereof. The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over any conflicting provision in any otherwise applicable law, ordinance, or rule relating to the subject matter. (Ord. 3708 § 1, 1983.)

 

 

1.32.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter:

A     “Decision” means a decision subject to review pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee, revoking or denying an application for a permit, license or other entitlement, or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance.

B.     “Party” means an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted, or dismissed; a person whose permit or license has been revoked or whose application for a permit or license has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied.

C.     “Petitioner” means a person who has filed for a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

(Ord. 3733 § 1, 1984; Ord. 3708 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.32.030 Judicial review of final decisions.
        Judicial review of any decision of the city, or of any commission, board, officer, or agent thereof, may be had pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate authorized by said section is filed within the time limits specified in this chapter. (Ord. 3708 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.32.040 Judicial review—Time limits.
        Any petition for writ of mandate authorized by Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure must be filed no later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration of the decision in any applicable provision of any statute, ordinance, or rule, for the purposes of this chapter, the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is such provision for reconsideration, the decision is final for the purposes of this chapter upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided, that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to any such provision the decision is final for the purposes of this chapter on the date that reconsideration is rejected. (Ord. 3708 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.32.050 Record of proceedings.
        The complete record of the proceedings at which the decision was reached shall be prepared by the city or its commission, board, officer or agent making the decision and shall be delivered to the petitioner within one hundred ninety days after the filing of a written request therefor. The city may recover its actual costs for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record. Such record shall include the transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by a hearing officer, the final decision, all admitted exhibits in the possession of the city or its commission, board, officer or agent, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. (Ord. 4852 § 2, 2006.)

 

1.32.060 Judicial review—Extension of time limit.
        If the petitioner files a request for the record as specified in Section 1.32.050 of this chapter within ten days after the date the decision becomes final as provided in Section 1.32.040 of this chapter, the time within which a petition pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure may be filed shall be extended to not later than the thirtieth day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or the attorney of record. (Ord. 3708 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.32.070 Notice of final decision.
        In making a decision as defined in Section 1.32.020(A) of this chapter, the city shall provide notice to the party that the time within  which judicial review must be sought is governed by this chapter and Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 3708 § 1, 1983.)

Chapter 1.36 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1.36.010 Purpose.
        Unless otherwise provided by law, ordinance, rule or regulation, when the council is to render an adjudicatory decision after consideration of evidence, an “administrative hearing” will be conducted in accordance with this chapter. This chapter does not apply whenever a public hearing is required by law. This chapter does not apply when a hearing is required for matters such as subdivisions, variances, conditional use permits, and planned developments. The administrative hearing shall be labeled by the city clerk for council action to indicate the type of matter involved, as exemplified by, but not limited to, the types of administrative hearings described in this chapter. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.020 Administrative hearing—Appeal.
        Where an appeal is filed with the city clerk requesting the council to review a final, determinative action of a city committee, commission, or employee, an “administrative hearing: appeal” shall be set for hearing by the city clerk, and the parties shall be designated as follows:

A.    The “appellant” who files the appeal;

B.     The “real party in interest,” if not the appellant, whose interest is affected by the action.

(Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.030 Administrative hearing—Application.
        Where an application is filed with the city clerk seeking a right or entitlement, an “administrative hearing: application” shall be set for hearing by the city clerk, and the party who is seeking the right or entitlement shall be designated the “applicant”. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.035 Administrative hearing—Inquiry.
        Where a notice of code violation is issued by the city seeking to determine whether a person’s conduct is in conflict with applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, an “administrative hearing: inquiry” shall be set for hearing by the city clerk, and the party whose conduct is in question shall be designated the “respondent”. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.040 Administrative hearing—Review.
        Where the council seeks to determine whether a right, authority, permit, license or privilege should be revoked, suspended, limited or conditioned, an “administrative hearing: review” shall be set for hearing by the city clerk, and the party whose entitlement is in question shall be designated the “respondent”. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.050 Representation.
        In proceedings under this chapter, an individual party may appear in person, or be represented by an agent with written authorization. A corporate party may be represented by an authorized officer or employee. A partnership or joint venture may be represented by an authorized member or employee. Any party may be represented by a member of the State Bar of California. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.060 Presenting officer.
        The city manager or his designated representative shall present the pre-hearing position of the city and shall be designated the “presenting officer”. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.070 Notice.
        The parties shall be given reasonable notice of the date set for hearing. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.080 Exchange of information.
A.    No later than five p.m., six days prior to the date set for hearing, each party and the presenting officer shall file with the city clerk a list of all witnesses to be presented by such person and ten copies of each document such person intends to offer into evidence during the hearing.

B.     In a like manner, the presenting officer shall file a proposed decision with proposed findings.

(Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.090 Continuances.
        Continuances or extensions of time may be granted by the council for good cause, or upon agreement of all parties and the presenting officer. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.100 Oral evidence.
A.    Only a party, the presenting officer, or a person whose name appears on a filed witness list may present oral evidence during the hearing.

B.     Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation.

(Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.110 Documentary evidence.
        Only those documents filed with the city clerk in accordance with Section 1.36.080 of this chapter shall be considered for admission into evidence. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.120 Subpoena.
        For good cause the council or the mayor may cause a subpoena to be issued. The mayor shall sign the subpoena, attested to by the city clerk. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.130 Evidence.
A.    Each party and the presenting officer shall have the right to fully present evidence in accordance with this chapter.

B.     Each party and the presenting officer shall have the right to present evidence in explanation or rebuttal.

C.     The hearing shall not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence, including hearsay, shall be admitted if it is evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to relying in the conduct of serious affairs. The presiding member of the council may set reasonable time limitations on the presentation of evidence.

D.    The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized by law.

E.     Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

F.     Each party and the presenting officer may propound questions through the presiding member of the council to the opposing side.

(Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.140 Argument.
        Upon the submission of evidence, only the presenting officer, a party, or an authorized representative of a party may present argument. The presiding member of the council may limit the time for the argument. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

 

1.36.150 Determination.
        Applying laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations to the specific evidence presented during the hearing, the council shall make an adjudicatory decision regarding the rights, duties, and entitlements of interested persons, and may make such decision or direct that such action be taken as the council deems necessary. (Ord. 3727 § 1, 1983.)

TITLE 1 ENDNOTES
 

1.     For statutory provisions regarding the codification of city ordinances, see Gov Code §§ 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10.

 

2.     For state law authorizing cities to impose fines for violations of ordinances, see Gov. Code § 36901. For provisions declaring violation of ordinance to be an infraction, see Gov. Code § 36900.

 

3.     For statutory provisions regarding citation for misdemeanors, see pen. code § 853.6 et seq.

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 5106. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 MAYOR
Chapter 2.12 CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURES
Chapter 2.16 SALARIES OF COUNCILMEMBERS AND MAYOR
Chapter 2.20 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.24 CITY COMMISSIONS
Chapter 2.32 REPEALED
Chapter 2.36 CITY OFFICES—WORKING DAYS, HOURS, HOLIDAYS
Chapter 2.40 MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 2.44 OFFICERS’ BONDS
Chapter 2.56 PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapter 2.60 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 2.64 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.72 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 2.75 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
Chapter 2.80 ALTERNATE PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECT PROCUREMENT

Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding the city manager form of government, see Gov. Code §§ 34851—34859.

 

2.04.010 Office created.
        The office of city manager is hereby created and established. (Prior code § 2-17.)

 

2.04.020 Appointment—Tenure.
        The city manager shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and ability. (S)he shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-18.)

 

2.04.030 Residence in city not required for appointment.
        Residence in the city at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of appointment as city manager. (Prior code § 2-19.)

 

2.04.040 Appointment of persons who have been members of city council.
        No person elected to membership on the city council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after (s)he has ceased being a member of the city council. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-20.)

 

2.04.050 Surety bond—Required.
        The city manager shall be required to give a bond for the faithful performance of the duties of said position. The amount of said bond is to be determined by the city council. The bond fee shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 3591 § 2, 1982; Ord. 2996 § 4, 1976: prior code § 2-21.)

 

2.04.060 Surety bond—Cost to be paid by city.
        The bond fee for the corporate surety bond required of the city manager shall be paid by the city. (Prior code § 2-22.)

 

2.04.070 Compensation.
        The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix. Such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Prior code § 2-23.)

 

2.04.080 Reimbursements for expenses.
        The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city, under the discretion of the city council. Reimbursement shall be made, however, only when a verified, itemized claim, setting forth the funds expanded for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council, and duly approved and allowed by the city council. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-24.)

 

2.04.090 Substitute during absence.
        In the case of absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability, subject, however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond, conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed, as set forth in Section 2.04.050. (Prior code § 2-25.)

 

2.04.100 Expenditures to be reported.
        No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except upon report or approval of the city manager. (Prior code § 2-26.)

 

2.04.110 Administrative head of city government.
        The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government, under the direction and control of the city council. (Prior code § 2-27.)

 

2.04.120 Relationship to city council generally.
        Neither the city council nor any of its committees or members shall direct, request or attempt to influence, either directly or indirectly, the appointment of any person to office or employment by the city manager, or in any manner interfere with the city manager or prevent him or her from exercising his or her own judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-28.)

 

2.04.130 Responsibility to city council.
        The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. (Ord. 4554, 1997; prior code § 2-29.)

 

2.04.140 Certain powers and duties enumerated.
        In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head of the city government, and not as a limitation thereof, it shall be the duty of the city manager and (s)he shall have the power to do the following:

A.    See that all laws and this code and other ordinances are duly enforced;

B.     Exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof, except the city attorney;

C.     Appoint and dismiss the chief of police, all heads of departments, and all subordinate officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney subject to the provisions of Chapters 2.64, 2.68 and 2.72;

D.    Transfer employees from one department to another;

E.     Consolidate and combine offices, positions, departments or units under the his or her jurisdiction. Determine and implement the content of job classifications and recommend to the city council appropriate compensation ranges;

F.     Attend all meetings of the city council and its committees, unless excused therefrom by the city council;

G.    Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as (s)he sees necessary or expedient;

H.    Keep the city council at all times advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city;

I.      Prepare and submit to the city council its annual budget;

J.      Prepare and recommend to the city council a salary schedule;

K.    Make investigations into the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation running to the city;

L.     Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities of the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed;

M.    Exercise supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council;

N.    Superintend the construction of all public buildings within the city;

O.    Make, apply and file with the city clerk a complete inventory of property, real and personal, owned by the city, and file amended inventories thereof at least semiannually as to stock, supplies and equipment, and at least annually as to other property;

P.     Serve in an appointive office or as head of a department within the city government to which (s)he may be qualified when appointed thereto by the city council, and hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the city council;

Q.    Prepare and submit to the city council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;

R.     Sign contracts on behalf of the city as directed by the city council or as necessary to exercise his or her powers and duties; and

S.     Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or by resolution of the city council.

(Ord. 4554, 1997; Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 2-30.)

 

2.04.145 Authority of city manager to suspend notice and bidding requirements in an emergency.
A.    Pursuant to Public Contracts Code Section 22050, the city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized, in an emergency, to repair or replace a public facility and take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, without giving notice for bids to let contracts.

B.     If the city manager, or his or her designee, orders any such action, (s)he shall report to the city council not later than seven days after the action, or at its next regularly scheduled meeting if that meeting will occur not later than fourteen days after the action, the reasons justifying why the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation of bids and why the action is necessary to respond to the emergency. The city council shall continue to review the action at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, unless the city manager has terminated the action prior to the city council reviewing the emergency action.

(Ord. 4576 § 1, 1998.)

 

2.04.150 Removal from office—Authority of city council.
        The city council may remove the city manager by a four-member vote. (Prior code § 2-31.)

 

2.04.160 Removal from office—Resolution by city council.
        At least thirty days before the removal of the city manager shall become effective, the city council shall, by a four-member vote, adopt a resolution removing the city manager and stating the reasons for his removal. (Prior code § 2-32.)

 

2.04.170 Removal from office—Suspension from duty—Termination of salary.
        After furnishing the city manager with the certified copy of the resolution removing him from office, the city council shall suspend him from duty, but his salary shall continue until the effective date of the termination of his employment. (Prior code § 2-33.)

 

2.04.180 Removal from office—Public hearing.
        Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of a certified copy of the resolution required by Section 2.04.160, the city manager may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a public hearing before the city council.

        The city council shall fix a time for the public hearing, which shall be held at the city council’s usual place of meeting. Such hearing shall be held before the expiration of the thirty days provided in Section 2.04.160. The city manager shall appear and be heard at such hearing. (Prior code § 2-34.)

 

2.04.190 Removal from office—Discretion of city council—Purpose of hearing.
        The city council, in removing the city manager, shall use its uncontrolled discretion. Its action shall be final, and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow, prior to the effective date of the removal, the city manager publicly to present to the council his ground of opposition to removal. (Prior code § 2-35.)

Chapter 2.08 MAYOR
2.08.010 Selection of mayor pro tempore—Term.
        The city council shall meet on the second Tuesday in December and choose one of its number as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall serve at the will of the majority of the city council, or until the expiration of the normal term as set forth herein.

        The title “deputy mayor” shall be interchangeable for all purposes with the title “mayor pro tempore.” (Ord. 4481, 1995; Ord. 4292 § 1, 1991; Ord. 4108 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3607 § 1, 1982; Ord. 3347 § 1, 1979: prior code § 2-3.)

 

2.08.020 Designation of office—Election—Term.
        Beginning with the general municipal election held on April 9, 1968, in the city, one of the offices of city councilmember to be filled at such election shall be designated as the office of mayor. The person so elected at such election as mayor shall hold office for four years from the Tuesday succeeding the election, and until a successor is elected and qualifies. The office of mayor shall be filled every four years thereafter at the general municipal election. (Ord. 4554, 1997; Ord. 4292 § 1, 1991: prior code § 2-4.)

 

2.08.030 Duties.
        The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council. The mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular, adjourned regular and special meetings of the city council. The mayor shall state every question coming before the council, announce the decision of the council on all subjects, and decide all questions of order. However, such decisions on order shall be subject to an appeal to the city council, in which event a majority vote of the city council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions. (Ord. 4292 § 1, 1991; prior code § 2-5.)

 

2.08.040 Duties of mayor pro tempore.
        If the mayor is absent or unable to act, the mayor pro tempore shall serve until the mayor returns or is able to act. The mayor pro tempore has all of the powers and duties of the mayor. In the event of the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall sign ordinances or resolutions adopted during such absence. (Prior code § 2-6.)

Chapter 2.12 CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURES
Note
*       Prior history: Prior code §§ 2-16.1—2-16.8 and 2-16.10—2-16.14 and Ords. 3097, 3599 and 4018.

 

2.12.010 Applicability.
        This chapter shall establish the council procedure regulations of the city. It shall apply to all regular, adjourned regular and special meetings of the city council, and in addition, Sections 2.12.020, 2.12.030, 2.12.050 and 2.12.070 through 2.12.160, inclusive, shall apply to all city boards, commissions and agencies.

        Reference to “presiding officer,” “council,” “councilmember,” and “city clerk,” where appearing in this chapter, shall respectively mean “chairperson,” “planning commission,” “commissioner” and “secretary of the planning commission,” when applicable to planning commission meetings, etc. and as appropriate for other boards, commissions and agencies. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.020 Meeting defined.
A.    The term “meeting” means the gathering together of three or more members of the city council or a majority of the total members of any board, commission, or agency, each member within normal hearing distance of the other, at the time and place established by ordinance, resolution or motion, for regular or adjourned regular meetings or at such other time and place as authorized by law for special meetings, for the purpose of acting in their official capacity as the legislative body of the city in the case of the city council, and in their official capacity as a board, agency or commission, to make decisions, commitments or promises by a majority of the council, board, commission, or agency, or by actual vote by a majority of the vote of the council or a board, commission or agency when sitting as a body or entity upon a motion, proposal, resolution, order or ordinance.

B.     Unless otherwise authorized by law to be held in closed session, all such meetings shall be open and public; provided, however, the city council may hold closed sessions from which the public may be excluded for the consideration of such matters as are specifically provided by the laws of the state.

C.     A majority of the total members of the council shall constitute a quorum and shall be sufficient to transact regular business. Such a quorum shall be required notwithstanding absences or vacancies.

D.    Councilmembers are expected to attend all meetings of the city council. If a councilmember fails to attend without permission all regular, adjourned regular or special meetings for sixty days consecutively from the last meeting attended, that office becomes vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy.

E.     The foregoing shall not prevent less than a quorum, otherwise gathered at the time and place and for the purpose of conducting a meeting, from adjourning from time to time in accord with the law until a quorum is present.

F.     The definition of a meeting in addition to that set forth above, shall include all legislative or final appellate court definitions.

G.    A councilmember present but abstaining shall be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum.

H.    A councilmember disqualified from voting by law shall not be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.030 Effect of nonobservance of chapter.
        Failure to observe the rules set forth in this chapter shall not invalidate any action taken which is otherwise lawful but defective only for failure to follow the procedure outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.040 Time and place of meetings.
A.    The city council shall hold regular meetings in the council chambers of the city hall, 200 Civic Center Way, El Cajon, California 92020, or at such other place as may be determined by the council. The times and dates of regular city council meetings shall be determined by city council resolutions.

B.     When the day for any meeting falls on a holiday as provided in this chapter, no meeting shall be held on such holiday, but a meeting may be held at the same hour on the following business day that is not a holiday.

C.     Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor or by a majority of the members of the city council by delivering personally or by mail written notice to each councilmember and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice at least twenty-four hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice and by posting, at least twenty-four hours prior to the special meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public.

1.     The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted.

2.     No other business shall be considered at such meetings.

3.     Such written notice may be dispensed with as to any councilmember who, at or prior to the time the meeting convenes, files with the city clerk a written waiver of notice.

4.     Such waiver may be given by telegram.

5.     Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any councilmember who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. (Ord. 5078 §§ 1, 2, 2019; Ord. 4557, 1997; Ord. 4525, 1996; Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.050 Adjournment.
A.    Any meeting may either be terminated or continued to another time, place or date by adjournment, regardless of whether or not all matters on the agenda or under discussion have been completed, acted on or concluded. Notwithstanding the above, no meeting shall be terminated before closing all public hearings which were notified for such meeting, without first continuing such public hearings to another time, place and date. Subject to the above, a motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.

B.     No meeting shall be adjourned to a date beyond the next regular meeting. Where a meeting is continued to a future date, if either the time or place, or either of them is not stated in the order of adjournment, it shall be deemed to be at the hour and place specified for meetings of the council.

C.     If less than a quorum of councilmembers appear at a meeting, any member or, if all members are absent, the city clerk, shall adjourn the meeting to a stated day and hour. The clerk shall cause a written notice of the adjournment to be given in the same manner as provided for special meetings, unless such notice is waived by a member of council.

D.    Once adjourned, the meeting may not be reconvened. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.060 Agenda—Order of business.
A.    All reports, communications, ordinances, contract documents or other matters, including basic fact and matters pertinent thereto, to be submitted to the council, shall be delivered to the city clerk not later than three p.m. on the Wednesday preceding the meeting. The city clerk shall thereafter arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business, and furnish each member of the council with a copy of the list not later than five p.m. on the Friday preceding the regular or adjourned regular meeting. Whenever feasible, each item on the agenda shall contain a staff recommendation and the specific action requested to be taken by the council. All material pertaining to and accompanying the agenda shall be made available to the public when made available to the city council.

B.     No matters other than those listed on the agenda shall be finally acted upon by the council provided; however, that matters not on the agenda may be submitted for council consideration and action pursuant to state law or under any of the following conditions:

1.     Upon a determination by a majority vote of council that an emergency situation exists, as defined in Government Code Section 54956.5;

2.     Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of council, or if less than two-thirds of the members are present, a unanimous vote of those members present, that the need to take action arose subsequent to the agenda being posted; and

3.     The item was posted for a prior meeting of the council occurring not more than five calendar days prior to the date action is taken on the item, and at the prior meeting the item was continued to the meeting at which action is being taken.

C.     The business of the council shall, except upon an affirmative vote of the city council or a determination by the mayor, city manager or city clerk, be taken up for consideration and disposition at a three p.m. meeting.

D.    If there are public hearing matters presented to the city council, the meeting may, except upon an affirmative vote of the city council or a determination by the mayor, city manager or city clerk, be adjourned to seven p.m., at which time the council shall take up said matters.

        The regular order of business may be changed or suspended for any purpose at any particular meeting by the presiding officer with the consent of a majority of the councilmembers present. (Ord. 5078 §§ 3, 4, 2019; Ord. 4525, 1996; Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.070 Minutes.
A.    The minutes shall consist of a clear and concise statement of each and every council action, including the motions made and the vote thereon. The city council shall determine the scope and format for all minutes including city boards, commissions and agencies. The city clerk shall have exclusive responsibility for preparation of the minutes.

B.     Minutes may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each councilmember with a copy.

C.     Records of each closed session of the city council shall be kept as required by state law. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.080 Voting.
A.    When any motion is in order for the question, a vote thereon shall be taken by voice, roll call, or voting device and entered in full upon the record.

B.     A member’s vote may be changed only upon a timely request to do so immediately following the announcement of the vote by the city clerk and prior to the time that the next item in the order of business is taken up.

C.     Ordinances, resolutions and other matters submitted to the council must be adopted by a majority vote of the total membership of the council unless a greater number of votes may be required by law. The word “majority” means three votes for the city council and all city boards, commissions and agencies with a total of five members. In instances where a majority vote cannot be obtained and no additional action is taken and one or more members of the council is absent, such matter shall automatically be added to a future agenda of the council to be considered at least once by the council with all members present.

D.    An abstention (as opposed to a disqualification) shall constitute an affirmative vote, so long as there is at least one additional affirmative vote other than an abstention. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.090 Presiding officer.
A.    The mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the city council. In the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the councilmembers present to serve until the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore or until adjournment.

B.     The presiding officer shall sign all ordinances, resolutions and other documents necessitating such signature. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular, adjourned regular and special meetings of the council and shall state, or call upon the clerk to state, every question before the council, call for the vote, and announce the decision of the council on all subjects. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order; subject, however, to an appeal to the council by any councilmember, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The presiding officer shall have and exercise such other powers and duties as are authorized by law.

C.     The presiding officer shall have power, authority and discretion, without a vote of the council to:

1.     Set time limits on council discussion on any matter;

2.     Set time limits on any communications from members of the public to the council; in no event shall any individual public communication exceed three minutes without the consent of the presiding officer;

3.     Declare the opening of public hearings;

4.     Rule any motion on a subject not on the agenda as being out of order, in which case the motion shall thereafter be void;

5.     Continue or postpone any matter until the next regular, adjourned regular or special meeting whenever the city attorney advises that there is a question as to the validity or constitutionality of the particular proposed course of action which is the subject matter of such motion;

6.     May require any witness testifying to facts at any public hearing to be sworn before proceeding further with any such testimony;

7.     Rule any speaker out of order, terminate any communication with the council from a member of the public who actually disrupts or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of the council meeting; and/or declare a recess in order to establish order at any meeting;

8.     Issue a warning to a person violating paragraph 7 and, if the person continues to violate paragraph 7 and disrupts the meeting, to order that person to leave the council chambers; and

9.     Order any person removed from a meeting to be excluded from further attendance at that meeting or any special, regular, or adjourned regular meeting beginning on that same date unless overruled by a majority vote of the city council.

D.    The presiding officer may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all members. The presiding officer shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilmember by reason of being mayor or acting as the presiding officer. (Ord. 5078 § 6, 2019.)

 

2.12.100 Public hearings.
A.    The term “public hearing” includes all public hearings having specific notice requirements by state law or city ordinance, including employee disciplinary proceedings and proceedings for the revocation, suspension, or reinstatement of permits, licenses, and franchises.

B.     Public hearings shall be conducted in the following order:

1.     Staff Reports;

2.     Hearing opened by mayor;

3.     Public testimony;

4.     Close hearing by majority vote;

5.     Discussion among city council; and

6.     Action by majority vote.

C.     On the date and at the time and place designated in the notice, the council shall afford any interested person or his or her authorized representative, or both, the opportunity to present witnesses, to present documentary evidence, to present statements, arguments or contentions orally and/or in writing, subject to the rules on addressing the council and rules stated in this chapter.

D.    All oral statements, documents, exhibits, communications, petitions, maps, or displays submitted at the hearing may be considered by the council as evidence and in such event retained as part of the record. Whenever practicable, a written staff report shall be prepared and presented as part of the staff presentation. Evidence shall not be taken outside the council chambers and shall not be considered by the council, except when, during the hearing, the meeting is adjourned to a particular date, place and time for the purpose of taking visual or demonstrative evidence.

E.     In the event a councilmember is absent at a meeting where a hearing is held which has been continued to a subsequent meeting, such member may participate in the matter at such subsequent meeting if otherwise qualified upon stating for the minutes that such councilmember has reviewed the written minutes of the prior portions of the hearing and is prepared to participate.

F.     Any hearing being held or noticed or ordered to be held by the council may, by minute action, be continued to any subsequent regular or adjourned regular meeting of the council in compliance with the laws of the state. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.110 Speaking rights of members.
A.    Every councilmember desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer shall confine comments to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and indecorous language.

B.     A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it be to call such member to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If called to order while speaking, a member shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and, if in order, shall be permitted to proceed.

C.     The councilmember moving the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or council action shall have the privilege of closing the debate. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.120 Motions.
A.    No motion may be debated nor voted upon unless it has received a second. Only one motion may be before the council at any time.

B.     A motion to reconsider any action by the council may only be made at the meeting at which such action was taken. Such motion may be made at any time no other motion is pending, shall have precedence over all other motions, and shall be subject to debate. If the action to be reconsidered was a public hearing item as provided in Section 2.12.100, it must be renoticed as originally required and considered at a future meeting unless a finding is made by a majority vote that all of the public interested in the matter to be reconsidered who were present are still present in the council chambers. (Any member may make or remake the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council, except when the subject matter of a motion had previously been tabled.)

C.     A motion to table takes precedence over all other motions and shall be subject to debate. When a motion to table is passed, the matter shall not again be considered by the council unless such matter is taken from the table by a majority vote of the council.

D.    A matter once tabled shall not be placed on the agenda nor discussed unless a member who had voted to table such matter requests the council to have such matter taken from the table, or requests the clerk to place such matter on the agenda for the purposes of determining whether or not such matter shall be taken from the table. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.130 Record of debate and remarks of councilmembers.
        Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for such member’s dissent from, or such member’s protest against, any action of the council entered on the minutes. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.140 Rules of order.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceedings of the council shall be governed by common sense and good taste. In the event of a dispute concerning procedural matters not specifically covered in this chapter, the majority vote of the council shall prevail.

B.     Rules adopted to expedite the transaction of business of the council in an orderly fashion are deemed to be procedural only, and the failure to strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with the law. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

 

2.12.150 Addressing the council.
A.    Any person desiring to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so. In addition, but unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, any person shall have the right to address the council upon obtaining recognition by the presiding officer to speak subject to the following:

1.     Public Hearings. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the council orally or in writing relating to matters which are then subject to a public hearing pursuant to Section 2.12.100.

2.     Non-“Hearing” Matters. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council with regard to matters with which they are concerned and are then the subject of council discussion. When copies of such communications are furnished each councilmember present, such written communications shall not be read aloud at the meeting unless so ordered by a majority vote of the council. Written communications from the administrative staff shall not be read aloud unless requested by any councilmember.

3.     Public Comment. Any person may address the council under public comment with regard to any matter with which they are concerned. The council shall not discuss any matter not on the agenda pursuant to state law and this chapter nor take any action except to refer such matter to a future agenda.

4.     Addressing the Council. Each person addressing the council shall speak into the microphone at the speaker’s podium, shall state his or her name or other identifying designation in an audible tone of voice for the record, and unless further time is granted by the presiding officer, shall limit the remarks to three minutes. Other than during that portion of the agenda set aside for public comment, all remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body, and not to any member thereof. No person other than the council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer.

5.     Limitation to Agenda Item. Except under that portion of the agenda set aside for public comment, the presiding officer shall not permit any communication, written or oral, to be made or submitted unless such communication addresses the agenda item then under discussion.

6.     Consent Required. Except for that portion of the agenda set aside for public comment, no person shall address or question a councilmember, the staff or any other person in the audience without the prior consent of the presiding officer.

7.     Permission to Speak. After a motion is made by a councilmember, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the council to do so.

8.     Anonymous Communications. Anonymous communications, or communications using an identifying designation other than his or her name, shall not be placed on a future agenda without the approval of a majority of the council. Testimony from anonymous individuals in any matter shall be given the weight each councilmember deems it deserves under the circumstances. The wearing of masks or the use of material or clothing to cover a speaker’s face for reasons other than health or religious purposes, shall not be allowed.

9.     Group Communications. When any identifiable group of persons, as opposed to the general public at large, wishes to address the council on the same agenda item, the presiding officer shall have the discretion to request that a spokesperson be chosen by said group to address the council. If additional issues are to be presented at the hearing by any other member of such group, the presiding officer may limit the number of persons and the time periods to address the council, so as to avoid unnecessary repetition of issues before the council.

10.   Additional Opportunity to Address the Council. Subject to the needs of the council to expeditiously perform its business and to avoid repetitive testimony, any person may be permitted by the presiding officer to address the council more than once on any particular item. No person shall be allowed to address the council more than once on an item until all persons present and wishing to address the council have been provided the opportunity to do so. The presiding officer may limit the time period allowed any person to address the council on an item more than one time, and shall not permit repetitive testimony from any person. (Ord. 5078 § 8, 2019.)

 

2.12.160 Rules of decorum—Enforcement.
A.    While the council is in session, all persons shall preserve the order and decorum of the session; and neither a member of the public nor a councilmember shall, by conversation or otherwise, actually disrupt, disturb or otherwise impede the orderly conduct of the proceedings, or refuse to obey the orders of the city council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided.

B.     Any person actually disrupting the conduct of the proceedings of the city council shall forthwith be excluded by the presiding officer from further attendance before that session of the council, and any special, regular, or adjourned regular meeting of the city council on that same date, unless permission to continue is granted by majority vote of the council.

C.     While the city council is in session: (1) any person or councilmember who actually disrupts a council meeting by acting in a disorderly, noisy, sustained, manner, (2) any person whose conduct actually disrupts the due course of the council meeting while addressing the city council or any councilmember thereof, or (3) any member of the public in attendance who actually disrupts the meeting by failing, on demand of the presiding officer, to comply with any warning or order of the presiding officer made in accord with the authority of this chapter, is subject to arrest for violating the California Penal Code or this code.

D.    No person, except city officials and their representatives, and representatives of the news media in possession of, and displaying, valid San Diego Police Department-issued media credentials or media credentials issued by a news agency having not less than daily broadcasts (for television or radio) or not less than monthly publications (if print) to statewide or nationwide audiences, shall be permitted within the area beyond the rostrum which is reserved for staff and council without the express consent of the presiding officer or the city council.

E.     The city manager may designate such appropriate person or persons to act as sergeant at arms to carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purposes of maintaining order and decorum at the city council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms, or any of them present, to remove any person who violates the order of exclusion from the meeting, and to place under arrest any person who violates the order and who willfully resists, delays, or obstructs removal, and which conduct disrupts the meeting, and cause such person to be prosecuted under provisions of the California Penal Code or this code, the complaint to be signed by the presiding officer or other appropriate person present.

F.     “Disrupt,” as used in this chapter, includes, but is not limited to, the utterance of loud, threatening or abusive language; whistling; clapping; stamping of feet; repeated waving of arms; displaying signs or banners that block the view of the councilmembers or other members of the public; or other actions, which prevent the conduct of the city council’s business, or prevents other members of the public from participating in the meeting. (Ord. 5078 § 10, 2019.)

 

2.12.170 Attendance may be compelled by subpoena.
        Council action by less than a quorum of the council may adjourn from time to time and may compel attendance of absent members by the issuance of a subpoena signed by the member of council presiding over the councilmembers constituting less than a majority. A subpoena shall issue only upon a majority vote of the members convening for the purpose of issuing such subpoena. Any member so subpoenaed shall obey said subpoena and shall participate in good faith in the meeting to which such member is subpoenaed in order that the essential business of the council may be conducted. Any member who fails to obey said subpoena or fails to participate in such meeting, shall be subject to the criminal penalties provided for breach of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 4292 § 3, 1991.)

Chapter 2.16 SALARIES OF COUNCILMEMBERS AND MAYOR
2.16.010 Authority.
        This chapter is enacted pursuant to Title 4, Division 3 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2-41.)

 

2.16.020 Salaries of councilmembers and mayor.
        With the exception of the mayor, each member of the council of the city shall receive, as salary, the sum of one thousand nine hundred ninety-six dollars per month, as prescribed in Title 4 Division 3 of the Government Code of the state of California for cities over seventy-five thousand up to and including one hundred fifty thousand in population, which shall be effective January 1, 2021, in the same manner as the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city.

        The mayor of the city shall receive, as salary, the sum of two thousand eight hundred seventy-nine dollars per month, which shall be effective January 1, 2021, in accordance with the provisions applicable to members of the city council as hereinabove set forth. (Ord. 5084 § 2, 2019.)

 

2.16.030 Salary increase or decrease—Population.
        Following any new and later estimate of population made by the department of finance placing the city in a population group other than that set forth in Section 2.16.020, the salary payable to each member of the council shall be increased or decreased accordingly to equal the sum prescribed for that population group in Title 4, Division 3 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2-43.)

 

2.16.040 Exclusion of certain expenses.
        The salaries prescribed in this chapter are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for the city. (Prior code § 2-44.)

Chapter 2.20 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding redevelopment agencies, see Health & Safety Code § 33100 et seq.

 

2.20.010 Authorization.
        Pursuant to Section 33101 of Part 1, Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, which Part 1 of said Division 24 of said code is known as the “Community Development Law,” there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city, and said agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its power under the Community Redevelopment Law. (Prior code § 2A-1.)

 

2.20.020 City council as agency.
        Pursuant to Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, the city council is declared to be the agency provided in Section 2.20.010, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in said city council. (Prior code § 2A-2.)

 

2.20.030 Filing with Secretary of State.
        The redevelopment agency authorized by this chapter to function shall cause a certified copy of this chapter to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State, in accordance with Section 33102 of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Prior code § 2A-3.)

Chapter 2.24 CITY COMMISSIONS
2.24.010 Short title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “El Cajon Commissions Ordinance.” (Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

2.24.020 Scope.
        All commissions within the city shall be established in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, except where specifically exempted by special provision. (Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.030 Membership—Residency and appointment.
A.    All commissions shall consist of five members who have been residents of the city at the time of applying for a commission, and shall continue to reside in the city during their term of office, except as provided in sections 2.24.110(A), 2.24.310 and 2.24.420.

B.     Except as otherwise provided in this Section 2.24.030, or as otherwise provided by state law, the members of all commissions shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council.

(Ord. 4988 § 2, 2013.)

 

2.24.040 Vacancy.
        Should a vacancy occur, other than by expiration of the members term of office, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term, pursuant to Section 2.24.030. (Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.050 Five-member commissions—Terms—Expiration.
        All commissioners who serve on a commission consisting of five members, shall serve for four years, with appointments to expire January 31st, except that the initial terms on a newly created five-member commission shall be staggered so that there is one vacancy occurring each year for three years, and two vacancies in the fourth year. Commissioners serving on the planning commission, or personnel commission on the effective date of this ordinance, whose terms presently expire in September of a particular year, shall have their terms extended to January 31st following the year in which their term is set to expire. Commissioners shall serve until such time as their successor is seated. (Ord. 4938 § 2, 2010.)

2.24.060 Removal.
        Any commissioner may be removed by either of the following means:

A.    By the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council;

B.     By a majority vote of the city council.

(Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.070 Compensation, meetings and quorum.
A.    The commissions shall meet regularly at least once a month except for the personnel commission. The personnel commission shall meet as needed to hear appeals or review personnel rule changes or issues pertaining to classification or discrimination. Each commissioner may receive compensation for travel and other expenses when such expenditures are authorized by the city council.

B.     For the purpose of holding or conducting meetings, any three members in attendance shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the entire membership of the commission shall be necessary for it to take action. The meetings shall be held in accordance with Section 2.40.010.

(Ord. 4554, 1997; Ord. 4546, 1997; Ord. 4484, 1995; Ord. 4228 § 1, 1990; Ord. 4045 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3884 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3786 § 1, 1984; Ord. 3484 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.080 Chair and vice-chair.
        At the first meeting of each commission after the first of February of each year the commissioners shall select one of their members as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson, unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 4554, 1997; Ord. 3979 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3884 § 2, 1985; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.100 Personnel commission—Powers and duties.
        The personnel commission shall, as provided by this chapter and Chapters 2.64 and 2.72, and by the personnel rules, have the power to:

A.    Hear appeals submitted by any person in the classified service relative to disciplinary action, dismissal or demotion; hear alleged violations of the personnel rules or matters involving alleged discrimination and certify its findings to the city council;

B.     Review the revisions of classification specifications;

C.     Except on those matters for which another procedure is provided by law or when matters of discipline are involved, investigate and make recommendations on any matter of personnel policy, or when requested to do so by the city council or the city manager;

D.    In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission, examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or the production of evidence before it by subpoena issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all subpoenas issued under the provisions of this chapter to be served. Refusal of a person to attend or testify and answer such subpoena shall subject such person to prosecution in the manner set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council:

1.     Witness Fees. All witnesses appearing in city administrative hearings pursuant to subpoena shall be entitled to fees and mileage in the same amount and under the same circumstances as prescribed by law for witnesses in civil actions in a superior court.

2.     Deposit for Subpoenas. It shall be necessary for the party requesting the issuance of subpoenas to deposit with the city clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage as prescribed by law, including but not limited to Government Code Section 68093.

        Witness fees shall be paid from said deposit. Any sums not used for such purpose shall be immediately refunded to the party making the deposit.

(Ord. 4505, 1996; Ord. 4228 § 1, 1990; Ord. 3381 § 1, 1979; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.110 Nomination and appointment.
        The members of the personnel commission shall be nominated and appointed in the following manner:

A.    Two members shall be appointed by the city council from a list of three persons nominated by the employees in the classified service via their employee associations, except in the instance when the incumbent is to be renominated, then one name may be submitted to the city council for consideration. The members nominated by the employees shall not be subject to the residency requirement set out in Section 2.24.030.

B.     Two members shall be appointed by the city council directly.

C.     The fifth member shall be appointed by the city council from a list of three persons nominated by the four appointed as provided for in this section, except in the instance when the incumbent is to be nominated, then one name may be submitted to the city council for consideration.

(Ord. 4228 § 1, 1990; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.120 Removal of personnel commissioner.
A.    The city council may remove a personnel commissioner for just cause. Prior to the removal of any commissioner, the city council shall cause written notice to be served upon the commissioner, setting forth the grounds upon which the proposed removal is based. Findings which would constitute just cause include but are not limited to the following:

1.     Absenteeism;

2.     Moral turpitude;

3.     Violation of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.

B.     Unless the commissioner requests a hearing, removal shall commence five days after receipt of the notice provided for herein.

(Ord. 4228 § 1, 1990; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

2.24.130 Notice and hearing.
A.    Upon written request to the city council by the commissioner, the city council shall appoint a time within not less than five days, nor more than thirty days, for a hearing to determine whether or not the commissioner shall be removed.

B.     The city clerk shall serve notice of hearing upon the commissioner by certified mail at the address shown on the records of the city. Such notice shall be mailed not less than five days prior to the date of such hearing, and shall state the time and place when and where such hearing shall be held.

(Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.140 Notice of council decision.
        Within fifteen days of the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall announce its decision and findings by resolution. A copy shall be mailed to the commissioner, and to any other party expressing an interest therein. (Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.150 Recommendations of commission advisory.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and Chapters 2.64 and 2.72 or by the personnel rules, findings of the personnel commission shall only be advisory to the city council. (Ord. 4228 § 1, 1990; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.160 Orders of reinstatement.
        If, with respect to a demotion, suspension or removal of any employee of the classified service, the personnel commission, by at least a four-fifths vote of the entire commission, concludes that the charges on which such action was based were not proved, or, although proved, were motivated by personal, racial, religious or political prejudice, an order by the personnel commission of reinstatement without loss of pay shall be binding upon the officer having appointive power, and such officer shall forthwith order such reinstatement. (Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.200 Planning commission—Powers and duties.
        The planning commission is created pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California, and shall have, and is vested with, all the powers and duties provided therein, and such other powers and duties as may be conferred upon planning commissions by any and all laws of the state and Titles 16 and 17 of the city of El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 4948 § 3, 2010.)

 

2.24.210 Compensation of planning commissioners.
        Each planning commissioner may receive compensation for each meeting attended, and may receive compensation for travel and other expenses when such expenditures are authorized by the city council. (Ord. 4948 § 3, 2010.)

 

2.24.220 Secretary of planning commission.
        The director of community development, or his or her designee, shall act as the secretary of the planning commission. (Ord. 4948 § 3, 2010.)

 

2.24.230 Exemption from review and report by planning commission.
        The provisions of California Government Code Section 65402(a) requiring a report as to conformity with the general plan shall not apply to: (1) the disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes; (2) acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for street widening; or (3) alignment projects, provided such dispositions for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for street widening, or alignment projects are of a minor nature. (Ord. 3922 § 1, 1986.)

 

2.24.300 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4938 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.310 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4938 § 1, 2010; Ord. 4761 § 3, 2004.)

 

2.24.400 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4988 § 3, 2013.)

 

2.24.410 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4988 § 4, 2013.)

 

2.24.420 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4992 § 2, 2013.)

 

2.24.430 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4901 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4668 § 8, 2001.)

 

2.24.500 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4889, 2007; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.510 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4889, 2007; Ord. 3360 § 2, 1979.)

 

2.24.600 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4975 § 1, 2012; Ord. 4803 §§ 1, 2, 2005.)

 

2.24.610 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4975 § 1, 2012; Ord. 4546 § 5, 1997.)

 

2.24.700 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4668 § 9, 2001.)

 

2.24.710 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4668 § 10, 2001.)

 

2.24.720 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4747 § 3, 2003; Ord. 4668 § 11, 2001.)

 

2.24.730 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4668 § 12, 2001.)

 

2.24.800 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4671 § 1, 2001.)

 

2.24.810 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5086 § 1, 2019; Ord. 4671 § 2, 2001.)

 

2.24.900 Public safety facility financing oversight committee—Powers and duties.
        The public safety facility financing oversight committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and the city manager, and shall make recommendations to the city council and the city manager on matters pertaining to the expenditure of the proceeds of the transactions and use tax adopted by Ordinance No. 4788 of the city council, approved by the voters of the city as Proposition O (“Proposition O”) at the November 2, 2004, general election. Such oversight shall include the monitoring of the costs and expenses related to the financing of the public safety facilities and the design and construction of the facilities, including the expenditure of proceeds of any bonds issued to finance the construction of the city’s, facilities as contemplated by Proposition O. The public safety facility oversight committee shall annually review an independent financial audit of the income and expenditure of all moneys related to the tax imposed by Proposition O, and the facilities constructed in connection therewith, and provide a report to the city council and the public regarding such annual review. The committee will cease upon construction of the public safety facility in accordance with Ordinance No. 4788. (Ord 4791 § 1, 2004.)

 

2.24.910 Membership—Residency and appointment.
A.    Notwithstanding Sections 2.24.030 and 2.24.050 of this chapter, the public safety facility oversight committee shall consist of seven members, no less than four members who are residents of the city at the time of applying for the commission and who shall continue to re side in the city during their term of office. Up to three members of the committee, as designated in subsection B of this section, may re-side outside of the city. Each member shall serve a term of four years except that the initial term of those members described in subsection C of this section, shall be for two years, and thereafter for four years.

B.     In order to have a broad representation of construction and financing of public facilities, three of the members of the committee, none of whom need be residents of the city, must be from one or more of the following occupations:

1.     A California licensed architect with experience designing and building commercial, industrial and governmental buildings;

2.     A California licensed general contractor with experience constructing commercial, industrial and governmental buildings;

3.     A California licensed civil engineer with experience in the designing and building of commercial, industrial and governmental buildings;

4.     A building/property manager with experience in the management of commercial property;

5.     A construction estimator with experience in estimating the construction of large-scale projects; and

6.     A California certified public accountant with experience in professional accounting.

C.     In addition to the members designated in subsection B of this section, four of the members of the public safety facility oversight committee each of whom need to be residents of the city, must be from one or more of the following occupations or categories:

1.     A business owner from the El Cajon business community;

2.     A member of a bona fide tax payers’ association or organization;

3.     A public safety employee (i.e., either police or fire personnel) either retired from service or not employed by the city; and

4.     A resident elector of the city.

(Ord. 4791 § 2, 2004.)

 

2.24.920 Administrative services.
        The city manager shall designate the department to provide clerical and administrative services to the public safety oversight committee as required. (Ord. 4791 § 3, 2004.)

Chapter 2.32 REPEALED
2.32.010 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997: prior code § 2-37.)

 

2.32.020 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997: prior code § 2-37.)

 

2.32.030 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997: prior code § 2-38.)

 

2.32.040 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997: prior code § 2-39.)

 

2.32.050 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997: prior code § 2-40.)

Chapter 2.36 CITY OFFICES—WORKING DAYS, HOURS, HOLIDAYS
2.36.010 Working days and hours for city offices—City holidays.
        The holidays of the city shall be as follows:

A.    January 1st, New Year’s Day;

B.     The third Monday in January, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;

C.     The third Monday in February, Washington’s birthday;

D.    The last Monday in May, Memorial Day;

E.     July 4th, Independence Day;

F.     The first Monday in September, Labor Day;

G.    November 11th, Veterans’ Day;

H.    The fourth Thursday in November, Thanksgiving Day;

I.      The Friday following Thanksgiving;

J.      December 25th, Christmas Day;

K.    Every day proclaimed by the city council as a public holiday.

(Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 4129 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3487 § 1, 1980; Ord. 2983 § 1, 1976: prior code § 2-1.)

Chapter 2.40 MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL AND COMMISSIONS
2.40.010 Meetings of city council and city commissions.
        No public meetings, except special meetings, shall be held by the city council or commissions on Saturdays, Sundays, city election days, state election days or city holidays as provided in Section 2.36.010. (Prior code § 2-2.)

Chapter 2.44 OFFICERS’ BONDS
2.44.010 Deputy city treasurer—Surety bond required.
        The deputy city treasurer shall be required to give a bond for the faithful performance of the duties of said position. The amount of said bond is to be determined by the city council. The bond fee shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 3591 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2996 § 1, 1976: prior code § 2-7.)

Chapter 2.56 PARKS AND RECREATION
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding parks and playgrounds, see Gov. Code § 38000 et seq.

 

2.56.010 Definitions.
        “Camp” means to reside in or use a park for living accommodation purposes, as exemplified by remaining for prolonged or repetitious periods of time not associated with ordinary recreational use of a park with camp paraphernalia; sleeping or making preparations to sleep; storing camp paraphernalia; regularly cooking or consuming meals; or living in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that the participants, in conducting these activities, are in fact using the area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging.

        “Camp paraphernalia” includes and means, but is not limited to, one’s personal possessions (including but not limited to clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and similar material).

        “City park” and “city playground” mean any public park grounds or playground owned by, leased by, or under the control of the city, including any parking lots, walkways, and sidewalks adjacent to public park grounds.

        “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed; to put for safekeeping; to place or leave in a location.

(Ord. 4751 § 2, 2003; Ord. 4449, 1994; Ord. 4037 § 1, 1987: prior code § 23-1.)

 

2.56.015 Applicability of provisions to Superblock, Expanded Civic Center, and Prescott Promenade.
        The provisions in this chapter applicable to city parks and city playgrounds shall also be applicable to the Superblock, Expanded Civic Center, and Prescott Promenade area more particularly described as follows:

 

        Lots 1 through 5, inclusive, of Superblock Phase II in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 9548, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 6, 1980, together with Lot 1 of El Cajon Civic Center in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 8071, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 14, 1975; and

 

        Blocks 4 and 5 of Map thereof Number 597, filed in the office of the Recorder of San Diego County, State of California, on April 28, 1886. Together with that portion of Highland Avenue between Douglas Avenue and Lexington Avenue closed by the El Cajon City Council on February 3, 1987, Resolution Number 46-87.

 

        All publicly owned property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue including that area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade.

(Ord. 4586 § 1, 1998; Ord. 4537, 1997.)

 

2.56.020 Operation and maintenance.
        The operation of all city parks and city playgrounds shall be under the control of the director of recreation subject to the supervision of the city manager. The maintenance of all city parks and city playgrounds shall be under the control of the director of parks subject to the supervision of the city manager. All employees of the parks and recreation departments, appointed by the city manager, shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this chapter, and shall call a police officer if necessary. (Ord. 4037 § 1, 1987: prior code § 23-2.)

 

2.56.030 Prohibited acts.
        No person shall do any of the following acts within the premises of any city park or city playground:

A.    Transport, carry, fire or discharge any firearm, weapon, air gun, slingshot, or explosive of any kind;

B.     Discharge any firecracker, bomb, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks; provided, however, that supervised public displays of fireworks by the city may be permitted pursuant to Article 78 of the Uniform Fire Code adopted by the city;

C.     Pick, dig, remove, injure, destroy or carry away wood, soil, leaf mold or rock, or any tree, flower, plant or shrub, except with the permission of the director of parks;

D.    Ride, drive, bring, allow or permit any bovine animal, sheep, goat or swine, or bring, allow or permit any horse or ass therein, except when ridden on specially designated trails or areas, unless authorized to do so by the city council or designee;

E.     Bring any dog or permit any dog, to be brought therein unless the same is at all times kept on a leash. However, this provision does not apply to that certain area of Wells Park designated as a “leash free” area;

F.     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill circulars, pamphlets, tracts, or advertisements in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from handing out, distributing, or selling any commercial handbill on any public sidewalk or pedestrian pathway in conformance with Chapter 12.06 of this code provided, however, that no person shall hand out, distribute, or sell any commercial handbill in any other public place not allowed by Chapter 12.06. Further, it is not unlawful on any sidewalk, street, pedestrian pathway, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. No person shall post or affix to any pole, tree, car, fence or structure situated therein any kind of handbill, circular, pamphlet, tract, or advertisement;

G.    Build, kindle or light, or permit to be built, kindled or lighted, a fire in any location, except in a safe place established for that purpose; provided that all fires shall be subject to supervision by the director of recreation. No person shall throw away any lighted cigar, cigarette or tobacco or lighted match or other matter that could set fire to any grass, shrubs or buildings;

H.    Vend, offer for sale or dispose of goods, wares or merchandise, or conduct any business unless authorized to do so by Chapter 12.06, or by the city council or designee, except that nothing in this provision shall prohibit religious or political solicitations;

I.      Leave or throw away any garbage, refuse, cans, ashes, bottles, broken glass or like substances, or any carcass of any animal or fowl in any place, except into incinerators or containers provided for that purpose;

J.      After using a stove, permit such stove to remain in any untidy condition, or fail to clear away therefrom all cooking utensils and other materials;

K.    Place any food, dishes, cooking utensils or other things in any stream, lake, pond, pool, fountain, or at any hydrant for the purpose of cleaning the same, nor shall any person use any stream, lake, pond, pool, fountain, or hydrant for washing, swimming or bathing, or otherwise pollute the same;

L.     Take, kill, wound or maltreat any bird or animal, either wild or domesticated;

M.    Set up or maintain any exhibition, show, performance, concert, place of amusement, or concert hall without permission from the director of recreation. No person shall use amplification contrary to Chapter 9.44 of this code;

N.    Play baseball, football, or any other game of ball, cricket or other game, except in any such place as shall be specifically designated for that purpose by the director of recreation;

O.    No male person shall resort to any toilet set apart for women, and no female person shall resort to any toilet set apart for men; provided, however, that this shall not apply to children accompanied by a guardian entering a toilet set apart for the gender of the guardian;

P.     Drive or ride a bicycle, motorcycle, automobile or any other vehicle on any pedestrian walk, as distinguished from an automobile road or a designated bicycle path, unless authorized by the director of recreation or designee. No person shall drive any such bicycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle or other vehicle at a greater speed than that specified by traffic ordinance by the city council for a road within a city park or city playground and indicated by a sign or signs placed along such road;

Q.    Ride or drive any bicycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle or other vehicle at a greater speed than ten miles per hour at the entrance or exit thereto, or at a greater speed than fifteen miles per hour at any other place therein. No person shall drive any such bicycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle or other vehicle at a greater speed than that specified by traffic ordinance by the city council for a road within a city park or city playground and indicated by a sign or signs placed along such road;

R.     Leave or park any motorcycle, motor vehicle, or leave or hitch any horse on any driveway or at any other place, except at such place or places as are provided for and designated as places for parking motorcycles, motor vehicles or other vehicles, or for hitching horses;

S.     Haul or carry on any cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle, any manure, garbage, rubbish, hay, soil or lumber without the permission of the director of parks;

T.     Obstruct the free travel of vehicles or pedestrians on any road, avenue, walk or path;

U.    No child under the age of seven years shall be unattended by an adult;

V.    Consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in violation of Chapter 9.22 of this code;

W.    Remain upon the grounds of a city park or city playground, or occupy the grounds of such park or playground or any part thereof, or use any of the facilities or equipment therein, or permit any vehicle to remain therein, except between the hours of seven a.m. and ten-thirty p.m. of any day, unless authorized by the director of recreation. The director of recreation may, in reasonable discretion, designate and enforce a suitable and proper time for closing such grounds or facilities and equipment;

X.    Camp, lodge or sleep overnight, or between the hours of ten-thirty p.m. and seven a.m.;

Y.    Dispose of human waste in other than a designated facility, as provided in Chapter 9.38 of this code.

Z.     Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (1) of this subsection, operate any food establishment (as defined in Section 113780 of the California Health and Safety Code), mobile food facility (as defined in Section 113900 of the California Health and Safety Code), vending machine (as defined in Section 113903 of the California Health and Safety Code), produce stand (as defined in Section 113855 of the California Health and Safety Code), swap meet prepackaged food stand (as defined in Section 113905 of the California Health and Safety Code), temporary food facility (as defined in Section 113895 of the California Health and Safety Code), satellite food distribution facility (as defined in Section 113880 of the California Health and Safety Code), stationary mobile food preparation unit (as defined in Section 113890 of the California Health and Safety Code), mobile food preparation unit (as defined in Section 113815 of the California Health and Safety Code) or open air barbecue facility (as defined in Section 113830 of the California Health and Safety Code).

1.     This subsection is not intended to prohibit activities wherein no permanent facilities are used for storing or handling food, nor families, groups, or other organizations which give or sell food to its members and guests at occasional events. For the purposes of this subsection the term “occasional event” means an event that occurs not more than two days in any ninety-day period.

2.     This prohibition does not apply to: (a) community events in accordance with Chapter 5.52; (b) to a city council sponsored community event; (c) sidewalk vendors in accordance with Chapter 12.06; (d) nor to those who have obtained the necessary permit to hold an event at a city recreation center, East County Performing Arts Center, or the Community Center.

3.     The exception found in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall not be construed to allow a person to use park property as a mobile or stationary kitchen, “eating establishment, restaurant or similar purpose to provide food to the general public, including but not limited to a food bank as defined in Section 114445 of the California Health and Safety Code.

AA.  Possess or dispose of any tobacco or tobacco-related product in violation of Section 8.32.025 of this code.

BB.  Store personal property, including camp paraphernalia.

(Ord. 5075 §§ 2—4, 2018; Ord. 4764 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 4751 § 3, 2003; Ord. 4737 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4613 § 1, 1999; Ord. 4258, 1997; Ord. 4506, 1996; Ord. 4037 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3797 § 2, 1987; Ord. 3723 §§ 1, 2, 1983; prior code § 23-9.)

 

2.56.040 Enforcement.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 4037 § 1, 1987.)

Chapter 2.60 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding lost and unclaimed property, see Civil Code § 2080 et seq.

 

2.60.010 Period of possession by police department.
A.    General. Any unclaimed property (except animals, and perishable property) in the possession of the police department shall be held by the police department for a period of at least three months.

B.     Perishable Property. Any unclaimed perishable property in the possession of the police department may be disposed of immediately by one of the methods in Section 2.60.030.

(Ord. 4602 § 4, 1999; Ord. 3520 § 1, 1981.)

 

2.60.020 Dispensation of unclaimed property—Private citizen finder.
A.    If the reported value of the property is fifty dollars or more and no owner appears and proves ownership within the required period of possession, the police department shall cause notice of the property to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. If, after seven days following the first day of publication of the notice, no owner appears and proves ownership, the title shall vest in the private citizen who found or saved the property, if that private citizen pays the cost of publication. If the private citizen fails to pay the cost of publication within ten days, the property shall be dispensed by one of the methods in Section 2.60.030.

B.     If the reported value of the property is less than fifty dollars and no owner appears and proves ownership within the required period of possession, title shall vest in the private citizen who found or saved the property. If the private citizen fails or refuses to take possession of the property within ten days, the property shall be dispensed by one of the methods in Section 2.60.030.

(Ord. 3520 § 1, 1981.)

 

2.60.030 Dispensation of unclaimed property—Public employee finder.
        If no owner appears and proves ownership of the property within the required period of possession, and the property was found or saved in the course of employment by a public employee, the property shall be either:

A.    Sold at public auction to the highest bidder; or

B.     Retained by the city, if the property is needed for a public use.

(Ord. 3520 § 1, 1981.)

 

2.60.040 Public auction—Notice.
        Where unclaimed property is to be sold at public auction, the chief of police shall cause notice of such sale to be published at least five days before the time fixed for sale in a local newspaper of general circulation. Title to the property shall not vest in the successful bidder unless the cost of publication is first paid to the city. Where the unclaimed property is perishable, the publication requirement may be waived. (Ord. 3520 § 1, 1980.)

 

2.60.050 Public auction—City employees and families precluded.
        City employees and their immediate families shall be precluded from bidding on unclaimed property being sold by the police department, and from directly or indirectly having any interest in such sales. (Ord. 3520 § 1, 1980.)

 

2.60.060 Marking for identification.
        Each article of unclaimed property held by the police department shall be identified with a tag on the same, showing the date and circumstances surrounding its acquisition by the police department. (Ord. 3520 § 1, 1980.)

Chapter 2.64 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.64.010 Adoption of system—Purpose.
        Pursuant to the authority granted under provisions of the Government Code of the state, and in order to establish an equitable procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the most competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness and to provide a reasonable degree of employment security for qualified employees, the personnel system contained in this chapter and Chapter 2.72 is hereby adopted for the city. (Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

 

2.64.020 City manager designated director of human resources—Authority.
        The city manager shall be the head of and have general supervision and administrative authority of the human resources department. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties so conferred to a director of human resources or contract employee deemed qualified. (Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

 

2.64.030 Director of human resources—Powers and duties.
        The director of human resources shall:

A.    Attend meetings of the personnel commission;

B.     Administer all provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council or personnel commission;

C.     Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to this chapter and to the personnel rules. If such recommendations are not made to the personnel commission, a copy shall be forwarded to them for information purposes;

D.    Provide for the publishing or posting of tests for positions in the classified service, the receiving of applications therefor, the conducting and grading of tests and the certifications of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate positions in the classified service. Hear any appeals allowed by the personnel rules related to testing for positions in the classified service and certified to lists of and eligible for appointment to the appropriate positions in the classified service;

E.     Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revision of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective after hearing and recommendation and review by the personnel commission and upon approval of the city council;

F.     Serve as advisor to the city council in matters of affirmative action and assist with appeals as needed in this area;

G.    Prepare a compensation plan which shall become effective upon recommendation of the city manager and upon approval by the city council.

(Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

 

2.64.040 Designation of classified service.
        The provisions of this chapter and Chapter 2.72 shall apply to all appointive officers and employees of the city on regular duty, except as enumerated in this chapter. All such officers and employees shall be deemed to be in the classified service of the city. (Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

 

2.64.050 Personnel system—Certain officers and employees excepted.
        Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the following appointive officers and employees of the city are excepted from the provisions of this personnel system and shall be considered non-classified employees:

1.     Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

2.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or other services;

3.     Volunteer personnel;

4.     Emergency employees who are hired to meet requirements of an emergency condition;

5.     Persons in classifications hired on a seasonal, temporary, limited-term, on-call, emergency, intermittent, substitute, internship or other irregular basis generally working less than one thousand five hundred sixty hours in any fiscal or calendar year;

6.     Accountant;

7.     Animal control services manager;

8.     Assistant city attorney;

9.     Assistant city manager;

10.   Assistant to the city manager;

11.   Assistant engineer;

12.   Associate engineer;

13.   Building official/Fire marshal;

14.   City attorney;

15.   City clerk;

16.   City engineer;

17.   City manager;

18.   Construction projects manager;

19.   Deputy city attorney;

20.   Director of community development;

21.   Director of finance;

22.   Director of parks;

23.   Director of human resources;

24.   Director of public works;

25.   Director of recreation;

26.   Director of redevelopment and housing;

27.   Executive assistant to city attorney;

28.   Executive assistant to city manager;

29.   Financial operations manager;

30.   Fire chief;

31.   Fleet manager;

32.   Human resources analyst;

33.   Information technologies manager;

34.   Junior engineer;

35.   Junior management analyst;

36.   Maintenance supervisor;

37.   Management analyst;

38.   Network administrator;

39.   Operations manager;

40.   Police chief;

41.   Police records manager;

42.   Principal civil engineer;

43.   Principal planner;

44.   Public works supervisor;

45.   Purchasing agent;

46.   Recreation services manager;

47.   Senior accountant;

48.   Senior human resources analyst;

49.   Senior management analyst;

50.   Senior planner;

51.   Staff attorney;

52.   Traffic engineer; and

53.   All other management positions added to the classification plan and so designated by city council action as exempt.

(Ord. 4829 § 2, 2006)

 

2.64.060 Right to contract for performance of human resources administrative services.
        The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical or administrative services in connection with the operation of the personnel system. This shall not limit the personnel commission, upon its own motion, from recommending the performance of human resources services by a qualified person or agency. The city council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of any technical or administrative service. (Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

 

2.64.070 Classified service appointments—Standards.
        Appointments to vacant positions in the classified service shall be made by the city manager or delegated representative and shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 2.72 and with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination and shall consist of selection techniques which will fairly test the qualifications of candidates, such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, assessment centers, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combination of these or other tests deemed job-related. (Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

 

2.64.080 City council—Authority to abolish positions.
        Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interests of economy or because the necessity for a particular position involved no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the classified employment. Whenever any reduction in the interests of economy is made, the city shall observe appropriate procedures prescribed by the personnel rules or applicable memorandum of understanding and notify employee representatives as required. (Ord. 4646 § 2, 2000.)

Chapter 2.72 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
2.72.010 Recommendation of adoption by commission to city council.
        Except on those matters which are subject to the “meet and confer” process as specified under Section 3505 of the Government Code of the state, the personnel commission shall, after public hearing thereon, make recommendations to the city council on all proposed rules or amendments to the rules prior to their adoption. Such rules shall not be in conflict with this chapter. All rules or amendments thereto shall be adopted by city council resolution and shall become effective upon their approval and adoption by the city council. (Prior code § 19-19.)

 

2.72.020 Contents.
        The personnel rules and regulations shall provide for the following matters in addition to such others as may be necessary and proper or deemed expedient to carry out the intent and purposes of this chapter and Chapter 2.64:

A.    Preparation and administration of a position classification plan;

B.     Preparation and administration of a compensation plan;

C.     Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment;

D.    Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing the names of persons eligible for employment;

E.     Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional emergency appointments;

F.     Evaluation of employee performance;

G.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees;

H.    Separation of employees from the city service;

I.      Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations and working conditions;

J.      The establishment of adequate personnel records;

K.    The establishment of appeal procedures;

L.     The establishment of an affirmative action program.

Rules governing the above may be modified in accordance with changes in federal, state or local law. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3599 § 3, 1982; prior code § 19-20.)

 

2.72.030 Credits on civil service examinations—Veterans generally.
        In every open examination, a credit of five percent of the maximum rating prescribed for such examination shall be given to any applicant who has been engaged in the military service of the United States, including service in any uniformed auxiliary of, or to, any branch of such military service created or authorized as such auxiliary by the Congress of the United States during World War II or during a war as defined in Section 205 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state for a period of at least three hundred sixty-five days, and who has been honorably discharged from such service. Such credits shall be given to an applicant only during the eight-year period following separation from military service, and such credit shall only be given upon the first employment of the city. (Such credit shall not be allowed applicants retired from the military service on full pensions.) (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3082 § 1, 1977.)

 

2.72.040 Credits on civil service examinations—Disabled veterans.
        In every open examination, a credit of five percent of the maximum rating prescribed for such examination, in addition to all other credits awarded, shall be given to any applicant who has been engaged in any of the services listed in Section 2.72.030 and has been honorably discharged or retired therefrom, if such applicant has service-connected disability of at least fifteen percent which has been duly established pursuant to federal law. An applicant who qualifies for credit under Section 2.72.030 and 2.72.040 shall be awarded a total of ten percent credit. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3082 § 1, 1977.)

 

2.72.050 Credits on civil service examinations—Spouses of disabled veterans.
        A five percent credit on every open civil service examination shall be given to the spouse of any person who has been engaged in any of the services listed in Section 2.72.030 and has service-connected disability to such an extent as to prevent him/her from engaging in any remunerative occupation. A five percent credit shall be given only upon first employment with the city. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3082 § 1, 1977.)

 

2.72.060 Civil service—Eligibility—Passing grade.
        Any applicant seeking to receive any credits on civil service examinations shall satisfy the following requirements:

A.    Attain a passing grade on an original civil service examination;

B.     Submit proof of eligibility at the time of application, or at a later date if the director of human resources shall find that the promulgation of the eligible list will not be delayed thereby.

(Ord. 4646 § 4, 2000.)

 

2.72.070 Use of age restrictions in qualification for employment.
        Any person possessing the minimum qualifications for a position in the classified service shall be eligible to take any civil service examination, regardless of age. Changes in this area may be determined by federal or state law. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the city council from fixing minimum or maximum age limits, if permitted, for the employment of city public safety officers. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; prior code § 19-25.)

 

2.72.080 Political activities—Compliance with state law.
        The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. (Prior code § 19-26.)

 

2.72.090 Political activities—Grounds for discharge.
        Any willful violation of Section 2.72.080 or violation through culpable negligence shall be sufficient grounds to authorize the discharge of any officer or employee. (Prior code § 19-27.)

 

2.72.100 Probationary period of employment.
        The probationary period for regular and promotional appointments shall normally be for a period of one year. However, the probationary period may be extended for an additional six months in accordance with the procedure established in the personnel rules. Extended probationary periods, if done in accordance with Government Code Section 3500, shall also be subject to an extension of an additional six months in accordance with the personnel rules. During the probationary period, an employee may be rejected at any time by the appointing authority without right of appeal or hearing unless required by other law.

        An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which promoted unless discharged from the city service or if no position is available as provided in this chapter and the rules.

        An employee in the classified service, promoted or transferred to a position not included in the classified service, shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which promoted or transferred, if action is taken to reject the employee unless discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and Chapters 2.64 and 2.68 and the personnel rules for positions in the classified service. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3254 § 1, 1978: prior code § 19-28.)

 

2.72.110 Retention of employment during good behavior.
        Every officer and employee holding a position in the classified service, who has served the probationary period, shall retain employment so long as it exists under the same or a different title, during good behavior. Good cause shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990: prior code § 19-29.)

 

2.72.120 Summary suspension of probationary employees.
        The city manager may, without right of hearing before the personnel commission or right of appeal, suspend without salary an employee on probationary status with the city. (Ord. 3291 § 1, 1978: prior code § 19-30.)

 

2.72.130 Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay and suspension—Notice of same.
        The appointing authority shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend any regular employee. Notice of such action must be in writing and served personally, or by certified letter, on such employee, except where an emergency situation exists, in which case the notice shall be served within three working days of the action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or reasons therefor, and when applicable, a general statement advising the employee of applicable appeal rights. Reprimands shall not be subject to this provision.

        The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990: prior code § 19-31.)

 

2.72.140 Right of appeal from disciplinary action.
        Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 2.64, or the personnel rules, any employee in the classified service shall have the right to appeal to the personnel commission any disciplinary action, or alleged violation of this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder.

        All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 2.64. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3599 § 3, 1982: prior code § 19-32.)

 

2.72.150 Vacancies.
        Where an appeal is taken to the personnel commission from an order of dismissal from employment in the classified service, the vacancy in the position shall be considered a temporary vacancy pending final action by the personnel commission or appointing authority, and may be filled only by a temporary appointment. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990: prior code § 19-33.)

 

2.72.160 Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions.
        Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or by resolution, any provisions of this chapter and Chapter 2.64, or of the personnel rules, shall apply to the incumbents of full-time positions otherwise exempt from this personnel system. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 3599 § 3, 1982: prior code § 19-34.)

 

2.72.170 Discrimination prohibited.
        No person in the classified service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against, without regard to an employee’s political opinions or affiliations, race, color, religious creed, ancestry, national origin, marital status, sex, age, medical condition or disability (including HIV or AIDS). (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990; Ord. 2893 § 6, 1975: prior code § 19-35.)

2.72.180 Affirmative action officer.
        The city manager shall be the affirmative action officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred as affirmative action officer to any other officer or employee. (Ord. 4228 § 3, 1990: prior code § 19-36.)

Chapter 2.75 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 5106. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


2.75.010 Provisions of Conflict of Interest Code adopted by reference.
A.    The Political Reform Act (Government Code Section 81000, et seq.) requires state and local government agencies to adopt and promulgate conflict of interest codes. The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation (2 California Code of Regulations 18730) which contains the terms of a standard conflict of interest code. After public notice and hearing it may be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission to conform to amendments in the Political Reform Act. Therefore, the terms of 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission are incorporated by reference. This regulation shall constitute the conflict of interest code of the city. Designation of officials and employees shall be established and updated as needed by resolution.

B.     Designated employees shall file their statements with the city which will make the statements available for public inspection and reproduction. (Government Code Section 81008). Statements for all designated employees will be retained by the city.

(Ord. 4649 § 1, 2000.)

 

2.75.020 Penalty.
        Designated employees violating any provision of this chapter are subject to the administrative, criminal, and civil sanctions provided in the Political Reform Act, Government Code Sections 81000 and 91015. In addition, a decision in relation to which a violation of the disqualification provisions of this chapter, or of Government Code Sections 87100 or 87450, has occurred may be set aside as void pursuant to Government Code Section 91003. (Ord. 4649 § 2, 2000.)

Chapter 2.80 ALTERNATE PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECT PROCUREMENT
2.80.010 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide definitions and guidelines and to establish specific procedures to be used to solicit, qualify, evaluate, and select and award construction contracts using alternate public construction project procurement procedures, which may include the design-build method. The intent is to provide alternative and optional procedures for bidding and building construction projects when it is anticipated that an alternative process will reduce project cost, expedite project completion, or provide design features not achievable through the design-bid-build method. (Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

 

2.80.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

        “Alternate procedure” means an alternate public construction project procurement procedure, other than by traditional design-bid-build procurement procedure (i.e., where the city hires a design professional to produce complete plans and specifications, and contractors bid on the construction of the improvements based on those previously approved plans and specifications), by which both the design and construction of a project are procured by one of the following methods in compliance with this chapter.

1.     Design-build, as defined in this chapter.

2.     From a design-build entity, as defined in this chapter, which might also include other disciplines including, but not limited to, soils or materials testing and soil remediation, or the provision of products, such as solar energy devices or playground equipment.

3.     From a construction consultant who is preliminarily selected as the preferred contractor, and where the city establishes any method for obtaining preconstruction services from the construction consultant, including guidelines for the approval of a design of the project in coordination with the construction consultant and the city’s previously selected design professionals, or any similar methodology, in any event intended to result in the best value to the city through a guaranteed maximum price from the construction consultant through a design-build contract.

        “Best interest of the city” means an alternate procedure that is projected to meet the interests of the city and objectives of the project which may include reducing the project delivery schedule and total cost of the project while maintaining a high level of quality workmanship and materials.

        “Best value” means value determined by objective criteria, and may include, but is not limited to, price, features, functions, life cycle costs, and other criteria deemed appropriate.

        “Competitive negotiation” means a competitive sealed proposal procurement method that includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

1.     Generally describes the services sought to be procured by the city;

2.     Sets forth minimum criteria for evaluating proposals submitted in response to a request for proposals;

3.     Generally describes the format and content of proposals to be submitted;

4.     Provides for negotiation of scope and price; and

5.     May place emphasis on described factors other than price to be used in evaluating proposals.

        “Construction consultant” means a pre-qualified, licensed, contractor selected by the city as the preferred contractor for a design-build project, who shall be compensated for services incurred in assisting in the design of a project resulting in a design-build contract with the construction consultant as a single entity or a member of a design-build entity.

        “Design-build” means a public construction procurement method in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity. Design-build includes the utilization of competitive negotiation.

        “Design-build contract” means a contract between the city and a design-build entity or construction consultant to furnish the architecture, engineering, and related services as required for a given public works project, and to furnish the labor, materials and other construction services for the same project. A design-build contract may be awarded conditioned upon subsequent refinements in scope and price during the development of the design, approval by the city of a guaranteed maximum price for project construction, and may permit the city to make changes in the scope of the public works project without invalidating the design-build contract.

        “Design-build entity” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, or engineering services. A design-build entity may include a construction consultant as a design-build entity member.

        “Design-build entity member” includes any person who provides licensed contracting, architectural, or engineering services.

        “Design professional” means a professional that is duly licensed and registered in California, either city staff or an outside consultant, who provides professional design services and/or develops the criteria package that may include, but is not limited to, facility program, design criteria, performance specifications and other project-specific technical material.

        “Project” means the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any public structure, building, road, or other public improvement of any kind, including demolitions, and the construction and installation of drainage systems, lighting and signaling systems, sewer and water systems, and park and recreational facilities.

        “Qualified list of design-build entities or construction consultants” means those design-build entities or construction consultants selected based on a competitive selection process and who are determined to be qualified to act as a design-build entity or a construction consultant for the city on any project. (Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

 

2.80.030 Alternate procedure procurement.
        Prior to procuring a design-build contract, the city shall select one of the following methods of prosecution of work:

A.    Prepare a project-specific request for a proposal setting forth the scope of the project that may include, but is not limited to, the size, type and desired design character of the project and site, and performance specifications. The performance specifications shall describe the quality of construction materials, assemblies, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or building layouts, and other information deemed necessary to adequately describe the city’s needs. The performance specifications shall be prepared or reviewed and approved by a design professional designated by the city.

B.     Prepare a project-specific request for a proposal setting forth the scope of the project that may include, but is not limited to, the size, type and desired design character of the project and site, and performance specifications to be distributed exclusively to those teams selected from the qualified list of design-build entities or construction consultants. The performance specifications shall describe the quality of construction materials, assemblies, and other information deemed necessary to adequately describe the city’s needs.

C.     Select a design-build entity or construction consultant from those teams identified on the qualified list of design-build entities or construction consultants without preparing a formal request for proposals. Prior to an award to a design-build entity or construction consultant pursuant to the qualified list of design-build entities or construction consultants the city manager shall certify to the city council in writing that the most qualified firms have been invited to interview and the selected firm is capable of providing the services and it is in the best interest of the city to proceed in this manner.

D.    Select a design-build entity or construction consultant as a sole source, if, in advance of the contract, the city manager certifies in writing the sole source status of the provider based on the need to utilize a specified material or methodology in the best interest of the city, which could only be supplied, constructed, or installed by only one contractor or supplier.

(Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

 

2.80.040 Qualification and selection process.
        The city may establish a qualification and selection process for design-build entities or construction consultants that specifies the qualification criteria, as well as recommends the manner in which the winning entity will be selected. Nothing in this chapter precludes a design-build contract from being awarded to a sole source if, in advance of the contract, the city manager certifies in writing the sole source status of the provider. (Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

 

2.80.050 Qualification criteria.
        At a minimum, the city shall require the following criteria in soliciting proposals from design-build entities or construction consultants:

A.    Possession of all required licenses, registrations, and credentials in good standing in the state of California that are required to design and construct the project.

B.     Submission of documentation establishing that the design-build entity members or construction consultant employee(s) or subcontractors have completed, or demonstrated the capability to complete, projects of similar size, scope, building type, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project in compliance with applicable state and local building codes, including Title 15 of this Code.

C.     Submission of a proposed project management plan establishing that the design-build entity or construction consultant has the experience, competence and capacity needed to effectively complete the project.

D.    Submission of evidence establishing the design-build entity or construction consultant has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance, as well as a financial statement demonstrating to the city’s satisfaction that the design-build entity or construction consultant has the capacity to complete the project.

E.     Provision of a declaration that the applying members of the design-build entity or construction consultant has not had a surety company finish work on any project within the past five years.

F.     Provision of a declaration providing detail for the past five years concerning all of the following:

1.     Civil or criminal violations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act against any member of the design-build entity or construction consultant;

2.     Civil or criminal violations of the Contractors’ State License Law against any member of the design-build entity or construction consultant;

3.     Any criminal conviction of, or civil judgment against, any member of the design-build entity or construction consultant of submitting a false or fraudulent claim to a public agency;

4.     Civil or criminal violations of federal or state law governing the payment of wages, benefits, or personal income tax withholding, or of Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) withholding requirements, state disability insurance withholding, or unemployment insurance payment requirements against any member of the design-build entity or construction consultant. For purposes of this section, only violations by a design-build entity member or construction consultant’s employee or subcontractor as an employer shall be deemed applicable, unless it is shown that the design-build entity member or construction consultant’s employee or subcontractor, in his or her capacity as an employer, had knowledge of a subcontractor’s or employee’s violations or failed to comply with the conditions set forth in Section 1770 et seq. of the State California Labor Code;

5.     Civil or criminal violations of federal or state law against any design-build entity member or construction consultant’s employee  or subcontractor governing equal opportunity employment, contracting or subcontracting;

6.     Any construction or design claim or litigation totaling more than $50,000 pending or settled against any member of the design-build entity or construction consultant over the last five years; and

7.     Any debarment, disqualification or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project.

G.    Provision of a declaration by an officer, principal, member, manager, general partner, or other, similar, representative of the design-build entity or construction consultant that the design-build entity or construction consultant will comply with all other provisions of law applicable to the project. The declaration shall state that reasonable diligence has been used by the representative in its preparation and that it is true and complete to the best of the signer’s knowledge.

H.    In the case of a partnership or other association that is not a legal entity, a copy of the agreement creating the partnership or association and specifying that all partners or association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the design-build contract.

I.      The information concerning the design-build entity’s or construction consultant’s qualifications and experience shall be verified under oath by an officer, principal, member, manager, general partner, or other, similar, representative of the design-build entity and each of its design-build entity members or of the construction consultant and each of its employees or subcontractors. It shall be unlawful to submit any declaration under this chapter containing any material matter that is known to be or, after reasonable investigation, should be known to be, false, or omits to make a statement of material matter that the person making the statement knows, or should know to be, false.

(Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

 

2.80.060 Selection method.
        The city shall select one of the following methods as the process to be used for the selection of the winning entity:

A.    A competition based on performance specifications and criteria set forth by the city in the request for proposals, without preliminary designs provided by the city.

1.     Criteria used in this form of evaluation of proposals may include, but not be limited to, items such as evaluation of references with respect to responsiveness; quality of work; timeliness; overall performance; proposed design approach; life-cycle costs; project features; financial strength; quality; total cost; past performance; business standing; schedule; and operational and functional performance of the facility. An evaluation will be made considering overall quality; capability; resource availability; and financial stability of the design-build entity or construction consultant. However, any criteria and methods used to evaluate proposals shall be limited to those contained in the request for proposals or qualifications.

2.     Any architectural firms, engineering firms, specialty consultants, or individuals retained by the city to assist in the preparation of the request for proposals shall not be eligible to participate in the competition with any design-build entity or construction consultant.

3.     Award shall be made to the design-build entity or construction consultant whose proposal is judged as providing best value meeting the interests of the city and meeting the objectives of the project.

B.     A competition based on program requirements, performance specifications, and a preliminary design or combination thereof set forth by the city in the request for proposals. Limited or preliminary drawings and specifications detailing the requirements of the project may accompany the request for proposals.

1.     The city shall establish technical criteria and methodology, including price, to evaluate proposals and shall describe the criteria and methodology of evaluation and selection in the request for proposal or qualification design-build entity or construction consultant.

2.     Except as otherwise provided herein, any architectural firms, engineering firms, specialty consultants, or individuals retained by the city to assist in the preparation of request for proposals shall not be eligible to participate in the competition with any design-build entity or construction consultant; provided, however, that with the city’s consent any such agreement between the city and the retained professionals may be assigned, for good and valuable consideration, to the design-build entity as a design-build entity member or to the construction consultant as an employee or subcontractor as applicable.

3.     Award shall be made to the design-build entity or construction consultant on the basis of the technical criteria and methodology, including price, whose proposal is judged as providing best value in meeting the interests of the city and meeting the objectives of the project.

C.     A competition based on program requirements and a detailed scope of work, including any preliminary design drawings and specifications set forth by the city in the request for proposals.

1.     Any architectural firms, engineering firms, specialty consultants, or individuals retained by the city to assist in the preparation of request for proposals shall not be eligible to participate in the competition with any design-build entity or construction consultant.

2.     Award shall be made on the basis of best value that is also in the best interest of the city.

D.    A “sole source” award as otherwise allowed by this chapter or title, the city’s charter, or any law.

E.     By competitive negotiation.

(Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

 

2.80.070 Work listing.
A.    The city recognizes that the design-build entity or construction consultant is charged with performing both design and construction. Because a design-build contract may be awarded prior to the completion of the design, it is often impractical for the design-build entity or construction consultant to list all subcontractors at the time of the award.

B.     All of the following requirements shall apply to subcontractors licensed by the state that are employed on any alternate procedure projects undertaken pursuant to this chapter.

1.     The design-build entity or construction consultant in each design-build proposal shall specify the construction trades or types of subcontractors that may be named as members of the design-build entity, or employees or subcontractors of the construction consultant, at the time of award. In selecting the trades that may be identified as members of the design-build entity or construction consultant, the design-build entity or construction consultant shall identify the trades deemed essential in the design considerations of the project. All subcontractors that are listed at the time of award shall be afforded the protection of all applicable laws.

2.     All subcontracts that were not listed by the design-build entity or construction consultant at the time of award in accordance with subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be performed and awarded by the design-build entity or construction consultant in accordance with a bidding process set forth in the design-build contract.

3.     In a contract between the design-build entity or construction consultant and a subcontractor, and in a contract between any subcontractor and its subcontractor, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld may not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the city and the design-build entity or construction consultant. If the design-build entity or construction consultant provides written notice to any subcontractor who is not a member of the design-build entity or employee or subcontractor of the construction consultant, prior to or at the time that the bid is requested, that a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity or construction consultant, then the design-build entity or construction consultant may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the city and the design-build entity or construction consultant from any payment made by the design-build entity or construction consultant to the subcontractor.

(Ord. 5022 § 2, 2015.)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.12 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND
Chapter 3.16 CENTRALIZED PURCHASING DIVISION
Chapter 3.20 BIDDING AND WRITTEN CONTRACTS
Chapter 3.22 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS
Chapter 3.28 TRANSFER OF CITY TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY
Chapter 3.32 TAX DISTRICTS
Chapter 3.36 DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.40 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.44 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
TITLE 3 ENDNOTES

Chapter 3.04 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding the transfer of the city clerk’s financial and accounting duties to a director of finance when such office has been established and the powers and duties thereof defined by ordinance, see Gov. Code § 40805.5.

 

3.04.010 Office created.
        The office of director of finance is created and established. The director of finance shall be the chief accounting officer of the city, and shall consolidate all accounting matters of the city in this office, as an entirely separate and distinct entity from all other departments. (Prior code § 11-1.)

 

3.04.020 Appointment.
        The office of director of finance shall be appointive. The director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager. (Prior code § 11-2.)

 

3.04.030 Qualifications for office.
        The director of finance shall be qualified by sufficient technical accounting, training, skill and experience to be proficient in the office. The director of finance shall also show evidence of his executive ability.

        Residence in the city shall not be deemed a necessary qualification for appointment to this office. (Prior code § 11-3.)

 

3.04.040 Surety bond required.
        The director of finance shall be required to give a bond for the faithful performance of the duties of said position. The amount of said bond is to be determined by the city council. The bond fee shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 3591 § 3, 1982; Ord. 2996 § 5, 1976: prior code § 11-4.)

 

3.04.050 Powers and duties.
        The director of finance shall be the head of the finance department and shall have the power and is required to do the following:

A.    Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city, under the direction of the city manager;

B.     Compile the budget expense and income estimates for the city manager;

C.     Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of the offices, departments and agencies;

D.    Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all money, and have control of all expenditures, audit all purchase orders before issuance, audit and approve, before payment by the city council and treasurer, all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or other charges against the city government, and with the advice of the city attorney, when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded;

E.     Submit to the city council through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city, and, as of the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report;

F.     Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies;

G.    Perform all the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk. The city clerk shall be relieved of such duties. Such duties shall include all those imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 37201 through 37210 and Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the state;

H.    Supervise the office of license tax collector;

I.      Invest and reinvest money of the city, sell or exchange securities so purchased, and deposit such securities for safekeeping, pursuant to Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code (the director of finance is the “city treasurer” for purposes of Government Code Sections 53607 and 53608). He shall negotiate and contract for banking services to include establishment of such investment, checking and warrant accounts as he deems necessary to effectively manage the city’s cash and investments;

J.      Purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under Sections 53601 and 53635 of the Government Code, as they now read or may hereafter be amended, from money in his custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he may deem wise and expedient, and sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased;

K.    Redeem from time to time the securities in which city money has been invested pursuant to subsection J of this section so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury. Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to subsection J of this section may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise; provided, however, that said bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold;

L.     Make a monthly report of all investments set forth in this section to the city council;

M.    Deposit for safekeeping with a trust company or a state or national bank located within this state, or with the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or any branch thereof located within this state, or with any Federal Reserve Bank, or with any state or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the securities in which the city money has been invested pursuant to subsection J of this section; provided, however, that he shall take from such trust company or bank a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such trust company or bank until they are withdrawn therefrom by him;

N.    Perform such other functions as the city manager may specify or as may be prescribed by action of the city council.

(Ord. 3006 § 1, 1976; prior code § 11-5.)

 

3.04.060 Designation of temporary acting director.
        Should the director of finance be absent or disabled, the city manager shall designate a temporary acting director of finance. (Prior code § 1106.)

Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding the apportionment of money to cities having a special gas tax street improvement fund, see Strs. and Hwys. Code § 2113; for provisions regarding highway users tax funds generally, see Strs. and Hwys. Code § 2100 et seq.

 

3.08.010 Created.
        There is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax improvement fund. (Prior code § 11-7.)

 

3.08.020 Payments into fund.
        All money received by the city from the state under the provision of the state Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways, other than state highways, shall be paid into the special gas tax improvement fund. (Prior code § 11-8.)

 

3.08.030 Expenditures.
        All money in the special gas tax improvement fund shall be exclusively for the purpose authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 3, Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Ord. 2893 § 3, 1975: prior code § 11-9.)

Chapter 3.12 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding capital outlay funds, see Gov. Code § 53730 et seq.

 

3.12.010 Created.
        Pursuant to Sections 53730.5 through 53737 of the California Government Code, a capital outlay fund is established for the city. (Ord. 4602 § 5, 1999: prior code § 11-10.)

 

3.12.020 Levying and collecting assessments—Authority.
        The city council may levy and collect assessments or taxes for the creation and accumulation of a fund for capital outlays, not to exceed any limitation prescribed by law. (Prior code § 11-11.)

 

3.12.030 Showing on annual budget.
        The capital outlay fund shall be shown on the annual budget as reserves for future expenditures in subsequent years, and when so shown shall be identical as to purpose but need not be itemized. (Prior code § 11-13.)

 

3.12.040 Transfer of annual surplus into fund.
        The city council may transfer to the capital outlay fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of the fiscal year. (Prior code § 11-14.)

 

3.12.050 Expenditures limited.
        The capital outlay fund shall remain inviolate for the making of any capital outlays. Money shall not be disbursed from the fund except for such purpose unless the city council submits a proposition to the electors to obtain their consent to use the money in the fund for some other specific purpose and it is approved by a two-thirds vote of all voters voting at the election. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 11-15.)

Chapter 3.16 CENTRALIZED PURCHASING DIVISION
3.16.010 Centralized purchasing division created.
        There is created a centralized purchasing division within the finance department in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

3.16.020 Purchasing agent—Office created.
        There is created the position of purchasing agent. The agent shall be appointed by the city manager. The purchasing agent shall be the head and have general supervision of the purchasing division. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

3.16.030 Purchasing agent—Powers and duties generally.
        The duties of the purchasing agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing agent shall have authority to do the following:

A.    Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment;

B.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality and/or quantity in supplies, services and equipment at the least possible expense to the city;

C.     Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

D.    Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city;

E.     Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

F.     Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and Chapter 3.20, and any other applicable rules and regulations;

G.    Supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with applicable specifications;

H.    Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use;

I.      Maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division;

J.      Maintain, update and verify inventories of all property by all city departments, as submitted by such entities;

K.    Perform such other functions as the director of finance may specify, or as may be prescribed by the city manager or by action of the city council.

(Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

3.16.040 Services available to other agencies.
        The purchasing agent may provide purchasing services to other agencies. Such purchases shall be made in conformity with the procedure established by this chapter. (Ord. 4812 § 2, 2005.)

 

3.16.050 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4812, 2005; Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

3.16.060 Requests on standard requisition forms.
        Departments, offices and agencies shall submit requests for all supplies, services and equipment to the purchasing agent via standardized requisition, which may be in written or electronic form. (Ord. 4812 § 3, 2005.)

 

3.16.070 Purchase orders.
        Contracts with vendors shall be evidenced by a purchase order, which may be in written or electronic form.

        Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 4812 § 4, 2005.)

 

3.16.080 Inspection of supplies and equipment.
        The purchasing agent may inspect supplies and equipment delivered and contractual services performed to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract therefor. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries that are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 4812 § 5, 2005.)

 

 

3.16.090 Report of unusable supplies.
        Departments, offices and agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as shall be prescribed, reports showing all supplies and equipment that are no longer used or that have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing agent shall have authority to sell and/or auction all supplies and equipment that cannot be used by any agency or that have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on new supplies and equipment. Such sales shall be made pursuant to Chapter 3.20 of this code. (Ord. 4812 § 6, 2005.)

Chapter 3.20 BIDDING AND WRITTEN CONTRACTS
3.20.005 Terms defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter:

        “Bid” or “sealed bid” means offers submitted via the city’s approved secure online purchasing system, in sealed envelopes, or otherwise secured to prevent the contents from being known prior to the submission deadline. This procedure is appropriate for higher-value purchases when exact specifications can be determined and the only significant variable is price.

        “Competitive solicitation” means any process, including a bid, quote or proposal, whether used alone or in combination, which provides all interested vendors a fair and equal opportunity to compete for the city’s business.

        “Proposal” means an offer at set prices and terms or an offer to enter into a negotiated contract. This process is appropriate when the specification is for an end result rather than a specific product or process. Proposals are to be structured to present suggested processes, services or solutions that best serve the needs and interests of the city.

        “Public project” means a public works project as defined in section 20161 of Article 4 of the Public Contract Code, as that section may be amended, moved, or re-numbered from time to time.

        “Quote” means offers that are not required to be sealed or secured under this chapter. Such offers may be made by phone, fax, email, postal mail or other suitable means, as specified in the request for quotes or other solicitation for proposals, quotes, or similar responses. This procedure is appropriate for lower-value purchases and for obtaining budget estimates. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.010 Bidding and written contracts—When required.
        The city council hereby provides that the city is exempt from the application of section 20162 the California Public Contract Code, and said section shall not apply to requirements and procedures for bids, sealed bids, quotes, proposals, or competitive solicitation, in the purchasing of equipment, services, supplies, or other property, or for expenditures involving a public project, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

A.    Sealed bids shall be obtained for all purchases of equipment, services, supplies or other personal property in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars, and for all expenditures involving a public project in excess of the limits established in subsections (A)(1) through (3) below.

1.     Public projects of fifty thousand dollars or less may be performed by the employees of a public agency by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.

2.     Public projects of more than fifty thousand dollars and up to two hundred thousand dollars may be let by contract or purchase order after receiving not less than three written quotes.

3.     Public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars must, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure.

B.     Sales and purchases of equipment, services, supplies or other personal property shall be by written contract with the lowest (in the case of purchases), or highest (in the case of sales), responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed by this chapter, unless waived pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.

C.     The bidding procedures of this chapter may be waived, and an open market sale or purchase pursuant to section 3.20.110 of this chapter may be authorized by:

1.     The city manager, or his or her designee, for all purchases and sales not exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars, when:

a.     The commodity or service can be obtained from only one source;

b.     The commodity or service is required to match or be compatible with other furnishings, material or equipment presently on hand, and is to be purchased from the supplier of such on-hand items;

c.     The city manager or city council has ordered a standardized type or make of commodity; or

d.     The city manager, or his or her designee, determines that due to special circumstances, it is in the city’s interest to waive the bidding requirement.

2.     The city manager, or his or her designee, for all expenditures not involving a public project, when an emergency requires that the commodity be obtained from the nearest available source;

3.     The city manager, or his or her designee, when supplies or equipment may be acquired from or in cooperation with another governmental agency that is acquiring or has acquired supplies or equipment in a process that accomplishes the purposes of this chapter;

4.     The city manager, or his or her designee, when supplies or equipment may be acquired under a competitively-bid California state contract;

5.     The city council, for all expenditures not involving a public project, when any of the circumstances stated in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(3) of this section exist, or when the city council determines that due to special circumstances it is in the city’s interest to waive the bidding requirement;

6.     The city council, for all expenditures involving a public project over the limits established in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(3) of this section, or if authorized by the Public Contract Code, the Government Code, or by the courts of this state.

(Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.020 Notices soliciting bids—Required—Publication—Posting.
A.    When a public project in excess of two hundred thousand dollars is involved, notice inviting bids shall be published in accordance with section 20164 of the California Public Contract Code.

B.     Other than contracts for public projects, and unless the bidding process is waived pursuant to section 3.20.010(C) of this chapter, notice inviting bids shall be made in accordance with applicable law and in the form and manner specified in this chapter. If the bidding process is waived pursuant to section 3.20.010(C)(1) of this chapter, or by the city council based on those circumstances listed in section 3.20.010(C)(5), the purchasing agent shall notify all qualified prospective bidders registered with the city of El Cajon no fewer than ten calendar days prior to the date set for submission of quotes or proposals. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.030 Notices soliciting bids—Contents.
        Notice inviting bids under the provisions of this chapter shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold. Such notice shall specify the place where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, the deadline for submission of bids, and the time and place for opening bids. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.040 Notices soliciting bids—Additional.
        The purchasing agent shall, in addition to any other notices required under the provisions of this chapter, advertise pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on the city of El Cajon’s official website. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.050 Soliciting bids from names on bidders’ list.
        The purchasing agent may solicit sealed bids for contracts under the provisions of this chapter from any responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders’ list, those who have requested their names to be added thereto, or any other source that will ensure open competition. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.060 Bidder’s security.
A.    When a public project in excess of two hundred thousand dollars is involved, security shall accompany the bid presented in accordance with sections 20170 through 20174 of the California Public Contract Code.

B.     When no public project is involved, bidder’s security is not required except when deemed necessary by the purchasing agent. In such case, it shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids under the provisions of this chapter. Bidders shall be entitled to return of such bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit its bid security upon refusal or failure to execute a contract within ten days after the notice of award of a contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.070 Sealed bids—Submittal.
        Bids shall be submitted to the city, in the manner as specified in the notice inviting bids. Bids not required to be submitted through the city’s approved secure online purchasing system shall be submitted on paper in a sealed envelope. Bids submitted on paper shall be delivered to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope containing the same. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours or on the city of El Cajon’s official website for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.080 Authority of city council to reject bids and readvertise.
        In its discretion, the city council may reject any or all bids presented pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and readvertise for bids. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.090 Tie bids.
        If two or more bids received under the provisions of this chapter are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.100 Performance and labor and materials bonds.
        The city council shall have authority to require a performance bond or labor and materials bond before entering into a public project contract under the provisions of this chapter. Any bond required for public project contracts shall be in an amount the city council finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires a bond pursuant to this section, the form and amount of the bond(s) shall be described in the notice inviting bids, pursuant to section 3.20.020. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.110 Open market purchases or sales.
A.    When authorized pursuant to section 3.20.010(C) of this chapter, a purchase or sale may be made on the open market. Whenever possible, such purchase or sale shall be based on a competitive solicitation process consisting of sealed bids, quotes, proposals, or other process, said processes being used alone or in combination.

B.     The purchasing agent shall conduct the competitive solicitation process in accordance with generally accepted business practices, including telephone, facsimile, email, and secure internet purchasing system. Documentation of all purchases shall be maintained in an accessible format in accordance with the city’s records management policy. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.120 Authority of the city manager to sign nonpublic contracts of seventy-five thousand dollars or less.
A.    Pursuant to section 40602 of the Government Code, the city council authorizes the city manager, or his or her designee, to sign non-public contracts when said contracts do not exceed the sum of seventy-five thousand dollars for the initial term of the contract. The city manager, or his or her designee, is also authorized to sign any amendments to non-public contracts to extend, or renew, additional terms that do not exceed a period of one year each, and do not exceed the sum of seventy-five thousand dollars each.

B.     Within the same dollar amount set out above, the city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to participate in joint and cooperative nonpublic works contracts with the state of California, the county of San Diego, school districts, water districts, and such other agencies as the council may direct.

C.     The city manager, or his or her designee, may sign contracts for all expenditures not involving a public project, when an emergency requires that the commodity or services be obtained from the nearest available source. (Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

 

3.20.130 Authority to award bid.
A.    All contracts for public projects for more than the dollar amount established by subsection (A)(3) of section 3.20.010 must be awarded by the city council in accordance with applicable law.

B.     Except as provided in subsection (A), above, all contracts for public projects and purchases of equipment, services, supplies, or other personal property up to seventy-five thousand dollars, may be awarded by the purchasing agent to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder in accordance with section 3.20.010 of this chapter, provided that all of the following conditions are met:

1.     The items to be purchased were approved by council in the adopted budget.

2.     The award is within the amount allocated by council for the purchase.

3.     There are at least three responsive bidders.

4.     The award is being made to the low bidder.

5.     There has been no protest against the proposed award lodged with the city within five days of the bid opening.

(Ord. 5082 § 3, 2019.)

Chapter 3.22 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS
3.22.010 Selection of professionals.
A.    Unless otherwise provided, the city’s selection of private architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, or construction project management firms for professional service shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where the city manager determines that the services needed are of a technical nature and involve little professional judgment, and that selecting the lowest responsible bidder would be in the public’s best interest.

(Ord. 4528 § 15, 1997.)

 

3.22.020 Contracting agent.
        The city manager or designee shall serve as the contracting agent for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 4528 § 15, 1997.)

 

 

3.22.030 Annual statements of qualifications.
        The city manager shall develop and maintain a procedure whereby architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying and construction project management firms may submit annual statements of qualifications and performance data. (Ord. 4528 § 15, 1997.)

 

3.22.040 Selection procedures.
        For each proposed professional contract:

A.    The contracting agent shall establish the professional competence and qualifications necessary to be possessed by a firm in order to be awarded the proposed professional services contract. Professional competence and qualification may be determined in accordance with, but not limited to, the following factors:

1.     The firm’s experience and expertise in the field;

2.     The quality of the firm’s work;

3.     The firm’s ability to meet project deadlines; and

4.     The firm’s past performance on similar projects.

B.     The contracting agent may publish a notice that the city is proposing to award a contract to obtain specified, professional services or, in the alternative, may directly solicit proposals from appropriate firms. Requests for proposals shall require the following information (when applicable):

1.     The scope of work;

2.     Plans and specifications;

3.     A time schedule for the project;

4.     An estimate or range for total cost;

5.     Proof of insurance and/or other surety;

6.     Proof of city business license or ability to obtain such license;

7.     A list of employees who will be assigned to the project and their qualifications; and

8.     Other special conditions related to the contract.

C.     The contracting agent may discuss with one or more firms the alternative methods for providing the required services and may conduct further negotiations with one or more of the most qualified firms to fully clarify each firm’s offer to provide services.

(Ord. 4528 § 15, 1997.)

 

3.22.050 Prohibited procedures.
        Any practices which might result in unlawful activity are prohibited, including, but not limited to rebates, kickbacks or other unlawful consideration. City employees are specifically prohibited from participating in the selection process when those employees have a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 4528 § 15, 1997.)

 

3.22.060 Award of contract.
        The contracting agent shall submit the proposal(s) of the most qualified firm or firms together with a recommendation to the city manager, or designee, for review and awarding of the professional services contract. (Ord. 4528 § 15, 1997.)

Chapter 3.28 TRANSFER OF CITY TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding the transfer of city tax functions to the county, see Gov. Code § 51500 et seq.

 

3.28.010 Transfer of duties of city assessor and tax collector.
        The city council elects that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and tax collector. (Prior code § 27-1.)

 

3.28.020 Ordinances fixing amount of revenue necessary for current year.
        The city council, before making the levy provided for in Section 3.28.040, shall fix by ordinance the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation upon the taxable property in the city as a revenue to carry on the various departments of the city for the current year, not to exceed the limit fixed by law, and to pay the bonded or other indebtedness of the city, or any portion or district thereof. (Prior code § 27-2.)

 

3.28.030 Filing description of districts where different rate of taxation to be levied.
        When there is any district or portion of the city in which there must be levied a rate of taxation different from the rate to be levied in any other district or portion of district of the city, the city council shall cause to be filed, on or before the first Monday of July of each year, with the county auditor, a description of the exterior boundaries of each district or portion of the city in which there is to be levied a rate different from the rate to be levied in any other district or portion of the city. (Prior code § 27-3.)

 

3.28.040 Fixing tax rates.
        The city council shall, before September 1st of each year, fix the rate of taxes, or rates of taxes if different portions or districts require different rates, designated in the number of cents upon each one hundred dollars, using as a basis the value of the property as assessed by the county assessor as the same may be equalized and returned to the city council by the county auditor. (Prior code § 27-4.)

 

3.28.050 Compensation for county’s services.
        The amount of compensation to be paid to the county for the performance of services of assessment and collection of taxes for or on behalf of the city shall be fixed by agreement between the county board of supervisors and the city. (Prior code § 27-5.)

 

3.28.060 Compensation to county—Maximum amounts.
        Not more than one percent for collecting the first twenty-five thousand dollars under this chapter, and not more than one-fourth of one percent for all sums over that amount, shall be charged for the services of assessment and collection of taxes. (Prior code § 27-6.)

 

3.28.070 Abolition of offices of assessor and tax collector.
        The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished, effective the first of July, 1948. (Prior code § 27-7.)

 

3.28.080 Certain duties of assessor and tax collector transferred to city clerk.
        All duties other than those of assessing of property of the city, performed by the city assessor, are transferred to and shall be performed by the city clerk.

        All duties other than the collection of property taxes, performed by the tax collector of the city, shall be transferred and be performed by the city clerk. (Prior code § 27-8.)

Chapter 3.32 TAX DISTRICTS
3.32.010 General tax district number one.
        General tax district number one is established in the city and shall consist of all the territory within the city limits, except area included in general tax district number two, general tax district number three, and general tax district number four, as described in this chapter. (Prior code § 27-9.)

 

3.32.020 General tax district number two.
        General tax district number two of the city is established, and shall consist of the following territory annexed to the city by the following ordinances:

A.    Portion of El Cajon Heights, etc., Ordinance No. 297, adopted January 15, 1951;

B.     Portions of El Cajon Heights and Marshall Resubdivision, Ordinance No. 299, adopted January 15, 1951;

C.     Portions of Renette Avenue, Avocado Avenue and Washington Avenue, Ordinance No. 300, adopted January 15, 1951;

D.    Portions of El Cajon Heights and other property, Ordinance No. 312, adopted May 21, 1951.

(Prior code § 27-10.)

 

3.32.030 General tax district number three.
General tax district number three of the city is established by the city, by the following areas, described in and annexed to the city by the following ordinances:

A.    Alpha Way, Ordinance No. 334, adopted September 17, 1951;

B.     An alley east of Taft Avenue and north of Lexington Avenue, Ordinance No. 380, adopted August 25, 1952;

C.     An alley east of Taft Avenue and south of Lexington Avenue, Ordinance No. 381, adopted August 25, 1952;

D.    Eucalyptus Drive, Ordinance No. 510, adopted March 5, 1956;

E.     Fletcher Parkway, Ordinance No. 596, adopted June 25, 1956;

F.     Aster Annexation, Ordinance No. 605, adopted August 15, 1956;

G.    Broadway Annexation, Ordinance No. 897, adopted June 2, 1958;

H.    Bradley Acres Number Two, Ordinance No. 1072, adopted June 22, 1959;

I.      Magnolia Ranch Tract Number Three, Ordinance No. 1170, adopted November 2, 1959;

J.      Main Street Annexation Number Two, Ordinance No. 1170, adopted February 23, 1960;

K.    Highway Eighty Annexation, Ordinance No. 1189, adopted April 11, 1960.

(Prior code § 27-11.)

 

3.32.040 General tax district number four.
        General tax district number four of the city is hereby established by the city, and shall consist of that territory annexed to the city by the following ordinances:

A.    Ordinance No. 1312, adopted on May 18, 1961 (Pierce Street Annexation);

B.     Ordinance No. 1737, adopted on April 6, 1965 (Fletcher Hills Annexation No. 3);

C.     Ordinance No. 1858, adopted on August 1, 1966 (Hacienda Annexation No. 3).

(Prior code § 27-12.)

Chapter 3.36 DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
Note
*       For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose a documentary stamp tax on the sale of real property within the city, see Rev. & Tax. Code § 11901 et seq.

 

3.36.010 Short title—Adoption authority.
        This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the city.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 27A-1.)

 

3.36.020 Imposition.
        There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 27A-2.)

 

3.36.030 Payment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.36.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 27A-3.)

 

3.36.040 Exemptions from tax—Instruments to secure debts.
        The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure.

        When any such deed, instrument, or writing itself fails to establish entitlement to this exemption, the mortgagee or beneficiary may establish within a reasonable time of the payment of the tax that the transfer is exempt under this section and any refund thereafter made shall not bear interest. (Prior code § 27A-4.)

 

3.36.050 Exemptions—Public agencies.
        Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Prior code § 27A-5.)

 

3.36.060 Exemptions—Plans of reorganization or adjustments.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

A.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

B.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

C.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

D.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

        Subdivisions A through D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 27A-6.)

 

3.36.070 Exemptions—Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

(Prior code § 27A-7.)

 

3.36.080 Exemptions—Partnerships.
A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1.     Such partnership (or an other partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

(Prior code § 27A-8.)

 

3.36.090 Administration.
        The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 27A-9.)

 

3.36.100 Refunds.
        Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 27A-10.)

 

3.36.110 Operative date.
        This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County of San Diego, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is the later. (Prior code § 27A-11.)

Chapter 3.40 SALES AND USE TAX
Note
*       For statutory provisions authorizing cities to levy sales and use taxes, see Gov. Code § 37101; for statutory provisions regarding uniform local sales and use taxes, see Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200 et seq.

 

3.40.010 Short title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform local sales and use tax regulations” of the city. (Prior code § 27-13.)

 

3.40.020 Purpose.
        The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:

A.    To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state;

B.     To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state, insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.     To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a one percent tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes;

D.    To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter;

E.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will exclude the receipts of particular sales from the measure of the sales tax imposed by this city which have been included in the measure of the sales tax imposed by any other city and county, county other than the county in which this city is located, or city in this state, and avoid imposing a use tax on the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property in this city when the gross receipts from the sale of, or the use of, that property has been subject to a sales or use tax by any other city and county, county other than the county in which this city is located, or city in this state, pursuant to a sales and use tax ordinance enacted under the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code.

(Prior code § 27-14.)

 

3.40.030 Effective date—Contract with state.
        This chapter shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and, prior thereto, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1956, this chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the State Board of Equalization; provided further, that this chapter shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the county of San Diego. (Prior code § 27-15.)

 

3.40.040 Sales tax imposed.
A.    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter.

B.     For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization.

C.     Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

D.    Wherever and to the extent that in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the name of the State Treasury or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of such code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.

E.     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6068 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section.

G.    There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

1.     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

2.     The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

H.    This subsection shall only become operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.

        There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

1.     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

2.     The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes;

3.     The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

(Ord. 3729 §§ 1, 4, 5, 1983; Ord. 2897 § 2, 1975; prior code § 27-16.)

 

3.40.050 Use tax imposed.
A.    An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the city, at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

B.     Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

C.     Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the name of the State Treasury or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of such code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

D.    There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

1.     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

2.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

3.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

E.     This subsection shall only become operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.

        There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

1.     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

2.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

3.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes;

4.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

(Ord. 3729 §§ 2, 4, 6, 1983; Ord. 2897 § 2, 1975; prior code § 27-17.)

 

3.40.060 Adoption of amendments to Revenue and Taxation Code.
        All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 27-18.)

 

3.40.070 Enjoining collection prohibited.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city or against any officer of the state or this city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 27-19.)

Chapter 3.44 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Note
*       For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose a transient occupancy tax, see Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7280 and 7281.

 

3.44.010 Short title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax regulations” of the city. (Prior code § 27-20.)

 

3.44.020 Purpose.
        It is the purpose and intent of the council that there be imposed on transient occupants of hotel rooms in the city a tax, the proceeds of which are to be used solely for the purpose of stimulating the economic growth of the city. (Prior code § 27-20.)

 

3.44.030 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home, motor home, travel trailer or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

B.     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

C.     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

D.    “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

E.     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered.

(Ord. 3239 § 1, 1978; prior code § 27-21.)

 

3.44.040 Tax imposed—Collection of tax.
        For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city treasurer. (Ord. 3305 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3239 § 1, 1978: prior code § 27-22.)

 

3.44.045 Additional tax imposed.
        Notwithstanding the tax imposed by Section 3.44.040 of this code, and in addition thereto, for the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay an additional tax in the amount of two percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city treasurer. (Ord. 4186 § 1, 1989.)

 

3.44.046 Additional tax imposed.
        Notwithstanding the tax imposed by Sections 3.44.040 and 3.44.045 of this code, and in addition thereto, for the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay an additional tax in the amount of two percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city treasurer.

(Ord. No. 4392, Enacted, 03/02/93)

 

3.44.050 Exemptions.
        No tax shall be imposed upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided.

        No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the city treasurer. (Prior code § 27-23.)

 

(Ord. No. 4375, Amended, 12/01/92)

 

3.44.060 Duties of operator.
        Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 27-24.)

 

3.44.070 Repealed.
        (Prior code § 27-25.)

 

(Ord. No. 4375, Repealed, 12/01/92)

 

3.44.080 Reports and remittance.
A.    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the city treasurer, make a return to the city treasurer, on forms provided by the city treasurer, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected shall be remitted to the city treasurer.

B.     The city treasurer may establish shorter reporting periods, not less than one month, for any operator if the city treasurer deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax, and the city treasurer may require further information in the return.

C.     Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

D.    All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city treasurer.

E.     All returns and payments submitted by each operator shall be treated as confidential by the city treasurer and shall not be released except upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction or to an officer or agent of the United States, the state, the county or the city for official use only.

(Prior code § 27-26.)

 

(Ord. No. 4375, Amended, 12/01/92)

 

3.44.090 Penalties for late payment.
A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

C.     Fraud. If the city treasurer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.     Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

(Prior code § 27-27.)

 

3.44.100 Determination of tax by city treasurer.
        If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax or to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report or remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter or if such operator maintains records which are inadequate to show the amount of tax due, the city treasurer shall proceed in such manner as may be deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due.

        As soon as the city treasurer obtains such facts and information upon which to base the assessment of the tax, the city treasurer shall assess the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter against the operator. The city treasurer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at the last known place of business.

        Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the city treasurer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the city treasurer shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties.

        At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the city treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable within fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.44.110.

        Should the city treasurer become aware that additional taxes are due and payable, other than those previously reported or remitted by the operator, the city treasurer may make additional assessments in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 27-28.)

 

(Ord. No. 4375, Amended, 12/01/92)

 

3.44.110 Appeals.
        Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city treasurer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 27-29.)

 

3.44.120 Records to be kept.
        It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 27-30.)

 

3.44.130 Refunds.
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or had been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city treasurer within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city treasurer.

B.     An operator may claim or refund to take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the city treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city treasurer, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the city treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

(Prior code § 27-31.)

 

3.44.140 Collection of tax by court action.
        Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 27-32.)

TITLE 3 ENDNOTES
 

        For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose a transient occupancy tax, see Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7280 and 7281.

Title 4 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Chapter 4.04 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Chapter 4.08 PURCHASING SYSTEM-IN GENERAL [Moved to Chapter 3.16]
Chapter 4.12 PURCHASING SYSTEM—BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURE [Moved to Chapter 3.20]
Chapter 4.14 PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS
Chapter 4.16 REPEALED

Chapter 4.04 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
4.04.010 Department and office created.
        The department of administrative services and the office of director of administrative services are created and established. The director of administrative services shall be the head of the department and shall have administrative supervision and control of business services, information technologies, fleet maintenance, and facilities maintenance division operations in this department, as an entirely separate and distinct entity from all other departments. (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 3181 § 1, 1978.)

 

4.04.020 Appointment.
        The office of director of administrative services shall be appointive. Such person shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 3181 § 1, 1978.)

 

4.04.030 Qualifications for office.
        The director of administrative services shall be qualified by sufficient technical training, skill and experience to be proficient in the office. The director of administrative services shall show evidence of executive and administrative ability.

        Residence in the city shall not be deemed a necessary qualification for the appointment to the office. (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 3181 § 1, 1978.)

 

4.04.040 Powers and duties.
        The director of administrative services shall have the power and is required to do the following:

A.    Have charge of administration of business services, information technologies, fleet maintenance, and facilities maintenance operations of the city, under the direction of the city manager;

B.     Prepare, administer and control the department’s annual budget;

C.     Negotiate, administer, and control leasing of city property;

D.    Supervise and be responsible for maintenance and repair of the city’s vehicles and related equipment;

E.     Supervise and be responsible for maintenance, integration, and upgrading of the city’s computer networks and related automation systems;

F.     Supervise and be responsible for the voice and data telecommunications for the city.

G.    Supervise and be responsible for printing and reproduction services for all city departments;

H.    Supervise and be responsible for the receiving, processing, distribution and mailing of U.S. Mail and the city’s internal mail;

I.      Supervise and be responsible for the cleanliness, upkeep, maintenance and repair of all city facilities structures;

J.      Perform such other functions as the city manager may specify or as may be prescribed by action of the city council.

(Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 3471 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3181 § 1, 1978.)

 

 

4.04.050 Designation of temporary acting director.
        Should the director of general services be absent or disabled, the city manager shall designate a temporary acting director of general services. (Ord. 3181 § 1, 1978.)

Chapter 4.08 PURCHASING SYSTEM-IN GENERAL [Moved to Chapter 3.16]

Chapter 4.12 PURCHASING SYSTEM—BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURE [Moved to Chapter 3.20]

Chapter 4.14 PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS
4.14.010 Selection of professionals.
A.    Unless otherwise provided, the city’s selection of private architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, or construction project management firms for professional service shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where the city manager determines that the services needed are of a technical nature and involve little professional judgment, and that selecting the lowest responsible bidder would be in the public’s best interest.

(Ord. 4244 § 1, 1990.)

 

4.14.020 Contracting officer.
        The city manager or designee shall serve as the contracting officer for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 4244 § 1, 1990.)

 

4.14.030 Annual statements of qualifications.
        The city manager shall develop and maintain a procedure whereby architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying and construction project management firms may submit annual statements of qualifications and performance data. (Ord. 4244 § 1, 1990.)

 

4.14.040 Selection procedures.
        For each proposed professional contract:

A.    The contracting officer shall establish the professional competence and qualifications necessary to be possessed by a firm in order to be awarded the proposed professional services contract. Professional competence and qualification may be determined in accordance with, but not limited to, the following factors:

1.     The firm’s experience and expertise in the field;

2.     The quality of the firm’s work;

3.     The firm’s ability to meet project deadlines; and

4.     The firm’s past performance on similar projects.

B.     The contracting officer may publish a notice that the city is proposing to award a contract to obtain specified, professional services or, in the alternative, may directly solicit proposals from appropriate firms. Requests for proposals shall require the following information (when applicable):

1.     The scope of work;

2.     Plans and specifications;

3.     A time schedule for the project;

4.     An estimate or range for total cost;

5.     Proof of insurance and/or other surety;

6.     Proof of city business license or ability to obtain such license;

7.     A list of employees who will be assigned to the project and their qualifications; and

8.     Other special conditions related to the contract.

C.     The contracting officer may discuss with one or more firms the alternative methods for providing the required services and may conduct further negotiations with one or more of the most qualified firms to fully clarify each firm’s offer to provide services.

(Ord. 4244 § 1, 1990.)

 

4.14.050 Prohibited procedures.
        Any practices which might result in unlawful activity are prohibited, including, but not limited to rebates, kickbacks or other unlawful consideration. City employees are specifically prohibited from participating in the selection process when those employees have a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 4244 § 1, 1990.)

 

4.14.060 Award of contract.
        The contracting officer shall submit the proposal(s) of the most qualified firm or firms together with a recommendation to the city council for review and awarding of the professional services contract. (Ord. 4244 § 1, 1990.)

Chapter 4.16 REPEALED

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 5.08 AMOUNTS PAYABLE
Chapter 5.12 LICENSE AND PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
Chapter 5.16 SPECIAL OPERATION LICENSE
Chapter 5.20 WORK PERMITS
Chapter 5.24 CABARETS, DANCE HALLS, PUBLIC DANCES
Chapter 5.28 CARD ROOM – NON-GAMBLING
Chapter 5.30 TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.32 CLOSING-OUT SALE
Chapter 5.36 JUNKYARDS
Chapter 5.40 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.42 BATHHOUSES
Chapter 5.44 MECHANICAL MUSIC DEVICES
Chapter 5.48 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 5.52 COMMUNITY EVENT PERMIT
Chapter 5.56 POOLROOMS
Chapter 5.60 PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE
Chapter 5.64 SWAP MEETS
Chapter 5.68 VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1]
Chapter 5.72 ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO FREE PUBLIC DANCES
Chapter 5.76 TRAMPOLINE CENTERS
Chapter 5.80 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 5.82 MOBILE HOME RENT MEDIATION
Chapter 5.84 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 5.88 REPEALED
Chapter 5.90 CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION
Chapter 5.94 SOUND TRUCKS
Chapter 5.98 SPECIAL EVENT SHOWS
TITLE 5 ENDNOTES

Chapter 5.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
5.04.010 Purpose.
        Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 are for the purpose of licensing, for revenue purposes only, the transaction and carrying on of certain businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations in the city for the purpose of raising municipal revenue and provide a penalty for the violation thereof. (Ord. 4602 § 6, 1999: prior code § 16-1.)

 

5.04.020 Definitions.
A.    “Business” includes professions, trades, and occupations, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

B.     “City” means the city of El Cajon, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

C.     Collector. “License tax collector” shall mean the city tax collector, city clerk, or other city officer charged with the administration of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

D.    “Gross receipts” shall include the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be the following:

1.     Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

2.     Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

3.     Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

4.     Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

5.     Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;

6.     Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded.

E.     Intercity Commerce. Any entity may be deemed to be in intercity commerce for purposes of this chapter whose gross receipts attributable to business within El Cajon do not exceed seventy-five percent of its total gross receipts.

F.     “Peddler” or “solicitor” includes any person not having a regular established place of business within the city, and who goes from house to house, place to place, or person to person within the city, soliciting, offering for sale, or selling any goods, wares, services, advertising or merchandise of any nature. “Itinerant merchant” includes any person who engages in a temporary business of selling or delivering goods, wares, services, advertising or merchandise, and who in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent or public room in a motel or any street, alley or real estate within the city for the exhibition and sale of such items, services or advertising, including the securing of orders for future delivery only.

G.    “Person” includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee.

H.    “Rental Unit” includes a building or portion of a building designed for residential purposes, including a one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwelling, which is rented, leased or let in any manner for consideration. “Rental Unit” shall not include hotels and motels and other similar transient lodging establishments, mobile homes, or board and care facilities.

I.      “Sale” includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

J.      “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury.

(Prior code § 16-2.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.04.030 Revenue measure.
        Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. Fees and taxes collected are not refundable. (Ord. 3889 § 1, 1985: prior code § 16-3.)

 

5.04.040 Effect on other ordinances.
        Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (Prior code § 16-4.)

 

5.04.050 License and tax payment required.
        There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from said city to do so and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

        This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city, nevertheless, shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Prior code § 16-5.)

 

5.04.060 Branch establishments.
        A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location; and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. (Prior code § 16-6.)

 

5.04.070 Evidence of doing business.
        When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, or newspapers, advertise, hold out, or represent that he is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the city, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the license tax collector that he is conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the license tax collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting a business in the city. (Prior code § 16-7.)

 

5.04.080 Constitutional apportionment.
        None of the license taxes provided for by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the constitutions of the United States and the state of California.

        In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the license tax collector or the city council for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 16-8.)

 

5.04.100 Exemptions—Charitable.
        There shall be specifically exempt from the payment of any license taxes all organizations which are organized and operated for nonprofit purposes within the provisions of the following subsections of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701:

a.     Labor, agricultural, or horticultural organizations

b.     Fraternal beneficiary societies, orders, or organizations

d.     Religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, educational, amateur sports or humanitarian corporations

e.     Business leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate boards, and boards of trade

f.      Civic leagues; social welfare and employees’ organizations

g.     Nonprofit pleasure and recreation clubs

l.      Domestic fraternal societies, orders or associations

r.      Political organizations

t.      Association property, common areas, architectural control, restrictions and community welfare; management, maintenance, care and enforcement

        and to whom the Franchise Tax Board has issued a determination exempting the organization from tax. The exemption from payment of a license tax as required by this chapter shall not waive compliance with any and all other ordinances and regulations applicable to such exempt person. Charitable organizations utilizing paid solicitors are not exempt from license tax under this section. However, non-profit political organizations utilizing paid solicitors are exempt.

        There is further exempt from payment of any license tax any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture, whenever the receipts of such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose, and no salaries, wages or fees are paid in connection therewith.

        No license tax shall be required in connection with any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association when the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or organization was formed; provided, that the provisions of this code and all other ordinances and regulations of the city shall be complied with.

        Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the license tax collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by the ordinances codified in this chapter and Chapters 5.08 and 5.90. (Ord. 4010 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3907 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3889 § 2, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 2, 1982: prior code § 16-10.)

 

5.04.110 Exemptions—Enumerated.
        In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 5.04.100 hereof, the following activities are exempted from the license tax provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08:

A.    A business engaged in intercity transportation and paying license fee under Section 4303 of the Public Utilities Code;

B.     A facility licensed under the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1500, et seq.) to provide care for six or fewer persons, exclusive of members of the household.

(Ord. 3684 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3072 § 1, 1977; prior code § 16-11.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.04.120 Issuance—Grounds for denial—Appeal.
A.    Every person required to have a license under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the license tax collector of the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the license tax collector shall issue to such person a business license as hereinafter provided.

B.     The issuance of a business license as provided in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall only be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds:

1.     Application has not been made as hereinafter prescribed; or

2.     The prescribed tax has not been paid; or

3.     The requirements of Section 5.04.290 have not been met; or

4.     The activity for which the license is sought is contrary to local, state or federal law.

(Prior code § 16-12.)

 

5.04.130 Contents.
        The business license issued by the license tax collector shall contain the following information:

A.    The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

B.     The business licensed;

C.     The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

D.    The date of the expiration of such license;

E.     Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08; and

F.     Any license coupon issued under Chapter 5.98 shall be deemed to have complied with this section when the application of the sponsor has been approved by the director of finance.

(Ord. 3904 § 2, 1985; prior code § 16-13.)

 

5.04.140 Original application.
        Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the license tax collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information:

A.    The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested;

B.     The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residence of the owners of same;

C.     In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning said business;

D.    In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof;

E.     In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant;

F.     Any further information which the license tax collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license applied for.

        If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the license tax collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the license tax collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the license tax collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at the time such first license was issued.

        The license tax collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required. (Prior code § 16-14.)

 

5.04.150 Renewal.
        In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the license tax collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a sworn statement, upon a form to be provided by the license tax collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the license tax collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by such applicant pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Prior code § 16-15.)

 

5.04.160 Statements and records—Generally.
        No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the license tax collector, his deputies, or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.

        All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the license tax collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the license tax collector to examine said records at reasonable times and places. (Prior code § 16-16.)

 

5.04.170 Statements and records—Information confidential.
        It is unlawful for the license tax collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license or pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A.    The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

B.     The disclosure of information pursuant to law;

C.     The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued, and the general type of nature of their business;

D.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city;

E.     The disclosure of charitable or religious solicitation license application information to any concerned citizen, including the news media.

(Ord. 3585 § 3, 1982; prior code § 16-17.)

 

5.04.180 Statement and records—Failure to file statement.
        If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefore made by the license tax collector he fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 fails to apply for a license, the license tax collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.

        If the license tax collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he may determine the amount of any license tax due by means of any information he may be able to obtain.

        If such a determination is made, the license tax collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at El Cajon, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may appeal said determination of the license tax collector pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.12. (Prior code § 16-18.)

 

5.04.190 License nontransferable—Changed location and ownership.
        No license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be transferable; provided that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee of one dollar, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved; provided further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section.

        A sponsor or organization licensed under Section 5.98.040 is exempt from the provisions of this section relating to any additional fee for transfer of said license coupons. (Ord. 3904 § 3, 1985; prior code § 16-19.)

 

5.04.200 Duplicate license.
        A duplicate license may be issued by the license tax collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement, paying to the license tax collector a duplicate license fee of one dollar. (Prior code § 16-20.)

 

5.04.210 Posting and carrying licenses.
A.    Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on;

B.     Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued.

(Prior code § 16-21.)

 

5.04.220 Issuance and display of identifying stickers, tags, etc.
A.    Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the license tax collector shall issue only one license; provided that he shall issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items.

B.     Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates, or other symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the license tax collector. Such sticker, tag, plate, or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment kept in use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate, or symbol is used.

C.     No person shall fail to affix as required herein any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment for which it has been issued. No person shall sell or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to another person, or permit its use by another person.

(Prior code § 16-22.)

 

5.04.230 Exhibiting licenses when requested by authorized officials.
        All persons having a license under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall produce and exhibit the same when applying for a renewal and whenever requested to do so by any police officer or by any officer or employee of the city authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. (Prior code § 16-23.)

 

5.04.240 Operation of business or display of license after revocation.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate or carry on any business, trade, calling, profession, occupation, place of occupation or any other activity whatsoever under any license or permit which has been suspended or revoked pursuant to Chapter 5.12.

        No license or evidence thereof shall be exhibited or kept in a conspicuous place by any licensee when such license is delinquent or has been revoked. (Prior code § 16-24.)

 

5.04.250 License tax—How and when payable.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January of each year.

        Upon application by any person for a license during the months of October, November or December, such applicant can elect to be issued a license for the current year and for the next successive calendar year for a fee equal to one and one-half times the applicable annual business license fee.

        Any business located within an area on the effective date of the annexation of such area to the city required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 to have an annual license shall be required to pay a prorated amount of such annual license fee on the basis of quarters for the balance of the year.

        Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:

A.    Semiannual license taxes, on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year;

B.     Quarterly license taxes, on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year;

C.     Monthly license taxes, on the first day of each and every month;

D.    Weekly flat-rate license taxes, on Monday of each week in advance;

E.     Daily flat-rate license taxes, each day in advance;

F.     Other flat-rate license taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business, and thereafter on the first day of any applicable period.

(Prior code § 16-25.)

 

5.04.260 License tax—Where payable—Delivery to director of finance.
        All persons who are required to be licensed under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall see that the proper tax as required is paid to the license tax collector.

        All license taxes shall be paid in lawful money of the United States at the department of finance.

        The license tax collector shall deliver daily to the director of finance all tax moneys collected pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 4528 § 22, 1997: prior code § 16-26.)

 

5.04.270 License tax—Deemed a debt.
        The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of said city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties, with costs of suit, including reasonable attorneys’ fees to be fixed by the court. (Prior code § 16-27.)

 

5.04.280 License tax—Effect of mistakes.
        In no case shall any mistake of the director of finance or the city treasurer, or any deputy thereof, in stating or collecting the amount of any tax prescribed in this chapter, prevent or prejudice any collection for the city of the amount actually due, together with costs of collection, including reasonable attorneys’ fees as fixed by court, nor shall any such mistake prevent or prejudice the prosecution of any person for the violation of any provision of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 4528 § 23, 1997: prior code § 16-28.)

 

5.04.290 License tax—Payment of delinquent taxes prerequisite to issuance of license.
        No license or sticker, tag, plate of symbol shall be issued, nor one which has been suspended or revoked shall be reinstated or reissued, to any person who at the time of applying therefor is indebted to the city for any delinquent license taxes, unless such person, with the consent of the license tax collector, enters into a written agreement with the city through the license tax collector to pay such delinquent taxes plus seven percent simple annual interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments or oftener, extending over a period of not to exceed one year.

        In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the city and agree that in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment the whole amount unpaid shall become immediately due and payable, and that his current license shall be revocable by the license tax collector upon thirty days’ notice. In the event legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including a reasonable attorney’s fee. The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement and the payment of the first installment, and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. (Prior code § 16-29.)

 

5.04.300 License tax—Penalties for nonpayment.
        Penalties shall be applicable on the nonpayment of license taxes as follows:

A.    Daily Licenses. Any daily license tax unpaid when due shall be doubled.

B.     Weekly Licenses. Any weekly license tax unpaid at the end of the calendar week shall have an amount equal to fifty percent of such tax added.

C.     Monthly and Quarterly Licenses. Any monthly or quarterly license tax which shall remain unpaid at the end of the calendar month in which such license tax becomes due shall have added thereto a penalty equal to twenty-five percent of the amount thereof.

D.    Semiannual and Annual Licenses. Semiannual license taxes, if unpaid, are delinquent on January 31st or on July 31st following the dates they are due. Annual license taxes, if unpaid, are delinquent on January 31st following the date they are due. Penalties shall be imposed for nonpayment as follows:

        In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of thirty days to obtain the business license required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, there shall be added to and collected a penalty equal to ten percent of the tax, or one dollar, whichever is the greater; and for each additional month or fraction of a month after the expiration of such thirty-day period that the applicant fails to obtain such license there shall be added to and collected an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the license tax.

(Prior code § 16-30.)

 

5.04.310 Rules and regulations.
        The license tax collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Prior code § 16-33.)

 

5.04.320 Enforcement of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08—Right of entry.
A.    It shall be the duty of the license tax collector, and he is directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the license tax collector or the city council.

B.     The license tax collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 have been complied with.

C.     The chief of police and any officer or employee of the city authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses or taxes therefor, or to make investigations in connection therewith, shall have the right to enter, free of charge or restraint, during business hours, any place of occupation for which a license is required under this chapter and Chapter 5.08 or for which a license has been issued, and demand the exhibition of such license, examine the same, ascertain the tax due in connection therewith, and collect any tax due, and otherwise enforce any provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

D.    The chief of police and any officer or employee of the city authorized to issue, inspect, investigate or collect licenses or taxes in connection therewith, may make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and shall cause complaints to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any and all taxes and penalties due under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

(Prior code § 16-34.)

 

5.04.330 Hearing before city council.
        Any person who claims that an arbitrary assessment of a license tax or penalty has been made by the license tax collector may request a hearing before the city council pursuant to Chapter 5.12. (Prior code § 16-35.)

 

5.04.340 Violation of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3647 § 2, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 6, 1975: prior code § 16-31.)

 

5.04.350 Effect of conviction.
        The conviction of any person for the violation of any provision of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and any fine resulting therefrom, shall not affect the payment of any tax or penalty for nonpayment prescribed in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08; however, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence in any action to collect any tax alleged to be due under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 2893 § 6, 1975: prior code § 16-32.)

Chapter 5.08 AMOUNTS PAYABLE
5.08.010 Business not specifically designated.
        The tax for doing business in El Cajon as required by Section 5.04.050 shall be three dollars for each employee per year, plus the amount hereinafter set forth for each business.

        If no amount is set forth hereinafter for a business, the tax shall be forty dollars, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Ord. 3239 § 3, 1978: prior code § 16-50.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.020 Additional tax when no fixed place of business within the city.
        Any person required to obtain a license under Section 5.08.010 who is doing business within the city without a fixed place of business within the city shall pay, in addition to the annual license tax provided in said section, a tax of twenty dollars, plus three dollars for each employee, per year.

        All vendor licenses under Section 5.98.040 are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 3904 § 4, 1985; Ord. 3239 § 3, 1978: prior code § 16-51.)

 

5.08.030 Advertising, billposting.
        Every person engaged in or carrying on the business or occupation of outdoor advertising, billposting, or erecting and maintaining billboards, shall pay a license tax of seventy dollars per year. This sum shall authorize such licensee to use not more than three locations for billboards or signboards. For each location over three, for such billboards or signboards, an additional annual tax of fifteen dollars shall be added.

        Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to the owners of real estate or their agents in advertising their property for sale or lease by means of such billboards or advertising signboards. (Prior code § 16-52.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.035 Auctioneers.
        Any person engaged in, or carrying on, the business of auctioneering in the city shall present to the director of finance the license document issued by the California Auctioneer Commission. Individuals or businesses engaged in the occupation of auctioneering whose permanent place of business is within the city shall pay the license tax as stated in Section 5.08.010.

        Notification shall be made to the city prior to each auction within the city as to the date, time and location of the auction, whether or not the auctioneer is required to be licensed under this section. (Ord. 3903 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3685 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3500 § 1, 1980.)

 

5.08.040 Sound trucks.
        Every person conducting, managing or operating a sound truck or other vehicle for the purpose of reproducing or amplifying sound, as defined in Chapters 9.44 and 5.94 of this code, shall pay a license tax of thirty dollars per day for such license or permit as referred to in Chapter 5.94. (Ord. 3790 § 2, 1984: prior code § 16-53.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.050 Parades and special events.
        Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a parade or special event as defined in Chapter 12.24 shall pay a license tax of ten dollars per day for such license or permit as referred to in said chapter. (Prior code § 16-54.)

 

5.08.060 Amusement devices generally.
        Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of operating or maintaining any vending machine, machine, device, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device for amusement available or open to the general public, for which a fee is charged for the use of such vending machine, machine, device, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device, not specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter and not prohibited by this code, shall pay a license fee of $30.00 for each vending machine, machine, device, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device. Said license fee shall be paid on an annual basis as set forth in Section 5.04.250. Section 5.04.220 shall not apply to this license fee, however, the single license issued for one location with more than on vending machine, machine, device, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device shall indicate on a prominent place on the face of the license the number of such machines that are covered by that license.

        This section shall not be construed or held as licensing or permitting the carrying on of any unlawful trade, calling, occupation, game or amusement prohibited by the state or the city, and no such license shall be granted or issued therefor. (Prior code § 16-55.)

 

(Ord. No. 4552, Amended, 10/07/97)

 

5.08.070 Circuses, carnivals.
        Every person conducting, managing, or carrying on a circus, carnival, tent show, or performance of any kind under canvas, where or in which such circus, carnival, show or performance four or more people are employed, shall pay an annual license tax of twenty dollars, plus a license tax of fifty dollars per day. (Prior code § 16-56.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.080 Pawnbrokers.
        Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroker shall pay a license tax of thirty dollars per quarter.

        Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to apply to the loaning of money on personal property or personal security by any bank authorized to do so under the laws of the state. (Prior code § 16-57.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.090 Book salesmen.
        Every person carrying on the business or occupation of selling books or pamphlets from house to house or other than in a store shall pay a license tax of two dollars per day. (Prior code § 16-58.)

 

5.08.100 Peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants—Generally.
        Every person acting as a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall pay a license tax of two dollars per day.

        Each agent or employee of any peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall be licensed under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and such agent or employee shall procure and be liable for the license fee prescribed in this section, the same as the employer or principal.

        This section shall not apply to bona fide non-profit political organizations. This section shall not apply to bona fide religious organizations, provided that such organizations do not utilize paid solicitors.

        This section shall not apply to commercial travelers or selling agents selling their goods to dealers for the purpose of resale, whether selling for present or future deliveries, by sample or otherwise, nor shall such section apply to persons selling fresh fruit, vegetables, butter, fresh eggs, farm or other ranch products raised or produced by themselves. (Ord. 4010 § 2, 1987; Ord. 3889 § 3, 1985: prior code § 16-59.)

 

5.08.110 Peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants—Bond prerequisite to issuance of license.
        Before any license as provided in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be issued to peddlers, solicitors or itinerant merchants, the applicant shall file with the director of finance a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars with a surety company possessing a Certificate of Authority from the California Insurance Commissioner, conditioned that the applicant shall comply with all of the ordinances and laws of the city and state regulating solicitation and the sale of merchandise. The bond is security for any judgment rendered against applicant for any violation of any such ordinances or laws that may be recovered by any person for damage arising out of any misrepresentation or deception made by the applicant, whether such misrepresentations or deceptions are made by the owners or by their agents or employees, either at the time of the solicitation or through any advertisement published or circulated with reference to the solicitation.

        This section shall not apply to bona fide non-profit political organizations. This section shall not apply to bona fide religious organizations, provided that such organizations do not utilize paid solicitors. (Ord. 4010 § 3, 1987; Ord. 3889 § 4, 1985: prior code § 16-60.)

 

5.08.120 State licensed contractors.
        Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaged in the business of a state licensed contractor shall pay a license tax of seventy dollars, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Ord. 3239 § 3, 1978: prior code § 16-61.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.130 Dwelling unit construction.
        Every person constructing any new dwelling unit or any mobile home dwelling unit space or pad in the city shall pay to the city, pursuant to Chapter 15.08 of this code, a license tax as follows:

A.    Single-family dwelling units with two or more bedrooms, three hundred dollars per unit;

B.     Single-family dwelling units with one bedroom, two hundred twenty-five dollars per unit; duplex units, two hundred twenty-five dollars per unit; multiple-family dwelling units, one hundred eighty-eight dollars per unit;

C.     Mobile home dwelling unit space or pad, one hundred fifty dollars per unit.

(Ord. 3239 § 3, 1978: prior code § 16-62.)

 

5.08.135 Rental units.
        The license tax for conducting the business of renting, leasing or letting one or more rental unit, as defined in Section 5.04.020, shall be forty dollars per year, plus twenty dollars for each unit per year.

 

5.08.140 Mobile home parks.
        No person shall operate a mobile home park or trailer park without first obtaining a license therefor and paying an annual license tax of forty-five dollars per each mobile home park or trailer park, plus three dollars per year for each space therein. (Ord. 3239 § 3, 1978: prior code § 16-63.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.150 Massage parlors, escort services, and outcall services for entertainers.
        The license tax for operating a massage parlor, escort service, or outcall service for entertainers shall be forty-five dollars per year, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Prior code § 16-64.)

 

5.08.155 Adult entertainment establishments.
        The license tax for operating an adult entertainment establishment shall be forty-five dollars, plus three dollars for each employee, per year.

 

5.08.160 Cabaret.
        The license tax for cabarets shall be:

 

A. Class “A” license

$220.00 per year

B. Class “B” license

$170.00 per year

C. Class “C” license

$120.00 per year

D. Class “D” license

$120.00 per year

E. Class “E” license

$ 95.00 per year

F. Class “F” license

$ 70.00 per year

 

plus three dollars for each employee, per year

 

(Prior code § 16-65.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.170 Alcohol and tobacco free public dance.
        The license tax for conducting or sponsoring an alcohol and tobacco free public dance shall be as follows:

 

A. Class “A” permit

$120.00

B. Class “B” permit

$30.00

 

plus three dollars for each employee, per year

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95; Ord No. 4483, Amended, 08/15/95; Ord. 3653 § 1, 1983: prior code § 16-66.)

 

5.08.180 Poolroom or billiard room.
        The annual license tax for conducting, managing or carrying on the business of a poolroom or billiard room shall be twenty dollars, plus three dollars for each employee per year and twelve dollars per year for each pool or billiard table. (Prior code § 16-67.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.190 Closing-out sale.
        The license tax for a closing-out sale as defined in Chapter 5.32 of this code shall be forty-five dollars, except that if the goods are to be sold at public auction and are jewelry stock, the license tax shall be one hundred twenty dollars. (Prior code § 16-68.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.200 Junkyards, wrecking yards or automotive dismantling operations.
        Every person operating a junkyard, wrecking yard, or automotive dismantling operation shall pay an annual license tax of forty-five dollars, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Prior code § 16-69.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.210 Merchandise coupons.
        The license tax for conducting the business of advertising or selling tickets or merchandise coupons as provided in Chapter 5.48 of this code shall be twenty-five dollars per month. (Prior code § 16-70.)

 

5.08.220 Private patrol service.
        For each private patrol service license there shall be an annual license tax of forty-five dollars, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Prior code § 16-71.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.230 Swap meet.
        Every person owning, conducting, managing, carrying on or operating a swap meet shall pay a quarterly license tax of two hundred fifty-five dollars, payable at the beginning of each quarter, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Prior code § 16-72.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.240 Vehicles for hire.
        The annual license tax for operating vehicles for hire as provided in Chapter 5.68 of this code shall be twenty dollars, plus fifty dollars per vehicle for the first ten vehicles so operated, and one dollar per vehicle for each vehicle in excess of ten. Notwithstanding the foregoing, licensees under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 operating in intercity commerce may pay an apportioned amount as provided in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 3364 § 1, 1979: prior code § 16-73.)

 

(Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.250 Additional tax for dealers in firearms.
        In addition to the license tax required by Section 5.04.050, a special license tax for a license as provided in Penal Code Sections 12071 to 12077 shall be paid by any person who engages in the business of selling or the business of otherwise transferring any pistol, revolver or other firearms capable of being concealed upon the person, or by any person otherwise desiring to comply with Penal Code Section 12071. The tax for such license shall be five dollars per year, or such sum as may hereinafter be fixed by ordinance or resolution of the city council, in addition to the amount of tax to be paid pursuant to Section 5.08.010 of this chapter. (Prior code § 16-74.)

 

5.08.260 Tax apportioned for intercity business—Generally.
        Any person doing business within the city who is engaged in intercity commerce as defined in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 may receive as a rebate, at the end of the year, an apportionate amount of such license tax, such amount to be computed as provided in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Prior code § 16-75.)

 

5.08.270 Tax apportioned for intercity business—Computation.
A.    Apportionment as authorized by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be computed as follows: Licensee shall receive as a rebate the percentage of the total tax levied which corresponds to the percentage of gross receipts attributable to business conducted outside of El Cajon.

B.     No apportionment shall be allowed unless the request for such apportionment is accompanied by sworn statement of gross receipts attributable to business conducted within El Cajon.

C.     Any statement as provided in subsection B above shall be prepared by a licensed accountant.

D.    Any applicant for apportionment of license tax shall offer his books and records for inspection as requested by the city.

E.     All statements pursuant to this section shall remain confidential.

(Prior code § 16-76.)

 

5.08.280 Fortunetelling and related occupations.
        Every person who carries on, practices, or conducts fortunetelling or related occupations as described in Section 9.76.010 of this code, and who demands or receives a fee for the practice or exhibition of the art, shall pay a license tax of five hundred twenty dollars per year, plus three dollars for each employee, per year. (Ord. 3830 § 3, 1985.)

 

(Ord. No. 4446, Renumbered, 07/05/94, 5.08.290; Ord. No. 4471, Amended, 05/09/95)

 

5.08.290 Security alarms—False alarms—Appeals
A.    The license tax for maintaining an alarm as provided in Chapter 5.84 shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

B.     As a condition of the issuance of license for an alarm system under the provisions of this chapter, the licensee shall pay to the city the base tax as provided in subsection A, together with a business license tax for false alarms generated by the licensee’s alarm system. The current schedule of such taxes shall be on file with the city clerk and the police, fire and finance departments and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

C.     Any person may appeal the question of whether or not an alarm was a false alarm to the city manager within ten days after receipt of notice of payment due. The decision of the city manager will be final unless the decision is appealed to the city council within ten days, in which event the decision of the city council shall be final.

Chapter 5.12 LICENSE AND PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
5.12.010 Purpose and applicability.
        This chapter is for the purpose of providing a procedure for the revocation or suspension of all licenses or permits issued by this city, appeals from the denial of any license or work permit, and appeals from any license tax assessment; provided, however, this chapter shall not apply to any licenses or permits issued pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of this city. (Prior code § 16A-1.)

 

5.12.020 Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation—Business licenses.
        Any license required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the city council, after hearing, only upon one or more of the following grounds:

A.    Proper application as prescribed in said chapter has not been made; or

B.     The prescribed tax for such license has not been paid; or

C.     The requirements of Section 5.04.290 have not been met; or

D.    The conduct of the business is contrary to local, state or federal law.

(Prior code § 16A-2.)

 

5.12.030 Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation—Other licenses and permits.
        Any license or permit referred to in Section 5.12.010 may be denied without hearing, or suspended or revoked after hearing by the city council, upon any of the following grounds; provided, however, this section does not apply to the issuance of business licenses pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, or to the issuance of licenses for businesses enumerated in Chapter 5.16 of this code:

A.    The misrepresentation of a material fact in the application for a license or permit by an applicant;

B.     The violation by the licensee or permittee of any provisions of this code under which such license or permit is issued;

C.     When the issuance or continuance of a license or permit would be contrary to the public peace or morals;

D.    When the issuance or continuance of a permit would be contrary to the public health, welfare or safety.

(Prior code § 16A-3.)

 

5.12.035 Right of appeal—Hearing officer.
        Except as provided in § 5.12.055, any person who was denied a license or permit, or any person whose license or permit was suspended or revoked by the city manager may request a hearing conducted by a hearing officer selected by the city manager.(Ord. No. 4528, Enacted, 03/11/97)

 

5.12.040 Time for hearing.
        The request for a hearing must be in writing to the city manager within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the action denying suspending, or revoking the license or permit. Failure to file the request for a hearing in a timely manner shall be grounds to deny a hearing by the hearing officer. (Prior code § 16A-4.)

 

5.12.050 Hearing—Notice.
        Except as provided in § 5.12.055, upon receiving a written request for a hearing, the city manager or delegee shall cause a hearing to be set no less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of the appeal and shall set forth in writing and send to the applicant, licensee or permittee by means of registered mail, certified mail or hand delivery notice of the hearing which shall be conducted to determine the existence of any facts which constitute grounds for the denial suspension, or revocation of a license or permit. Such notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee or permittee, and shall state the time and place when and where such hearing shall be held. (Prior code § 16A-5.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97

 

5.12.055 Expedited hearing.
        Upon revoking or suspending a license because of a significant threat to public health, safety, or welfare, the city manager shall cause a hearing to be set not more than five (5) days after suspending the license and shall set forth in writing and send to the applicant, licensee, or permittee by means of registered mail, certified mail, or hand delivery notice of the hearing which shall be conducted to determine the existence of any facts which constitute grounds for the denial suspension, or revocation of a license. Such notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee or permittee, and shall state the time and place when and where such hearing shall be held. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

5.12.060 Hearing—Subpoena of witnesses.
        The city clerk, at the request of the city manager, or upon the city clerk’s own initiative, or upon the written request of the licensee or permittee, shall issue subpoena for the attendance of witnesses at such hearing. Any person served with such subpoena shall attend such hearing. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 16A-6.)

 

5.12.070 Hearing—Procedure.
        The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the city manager with the following provisions:

A.    The applicant, licensee, or permittee may have the assistance of counsel or may appear by counsel and shall have the right to present evidence;

B.     In the event that the applicant, licensee or permittee, or counsel representing same, fails to appear at the hearing, the evidence of the existence of facts which constitute grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license shall be considered unrebutted;

C.     The hearing officer may:

1.     Uphold the city manager’s decision;

2.     Allow that which was denied; or

3.     Reverse any other city manager decision which is the subject of the appeal.

D.    A copy of the decision of the hearing officer specifying findings of fact and the reason for the decision shall be furnished to the applicant or licensee or designated representative. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final ten days from the hearing officer’s action except as provided in Section 5.12.077.

(Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 16A-7.)

 

5.12.075 Appeal—Stay of effect.
        The effect of the city manager’s decision shall be stayed while an appeal is pending or until the time for filing such appeal has expired. The effect of a decision the hearing officer shall be stayed while an appeal to the city council is pending or until the time for filing such appeal has expired. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

5.12.077 Appeal to city council.
        The applicant, licensee, permittee, and city manager shall have the right to appeal the hearing officer’s decision pursuant to Chapter 1.36 (Administrative Hearings) of this code. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

5.12.080 Notice of council decision.
        Within fifteen days of the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall announce its decision and findings by resolution. A copy of such resolution shall be mailed to the applicant and any other persons requesting notice of the action. (Prior code § 16A-8.)

 

5.12.090 Action by council conclusive.
        The action by the city council on the issuance, suspension or revocation of any permit or license shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 16A-9.)

Chapter 5.16 SPECIAL OPERATION LICENSE
5.16.010 Purpose.
        Apart from, and in addition to, business licenses required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code for the sole purpose of raising revenue for municipal use, a special operation license, imposed for purposes of regulation, is hereby required of those businesses and activities enumerated in Section 5.16.030. Said businesses and activities are such that regulation is necessary to adequately protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a procedure for the issuance of such special operation licenses. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.020 Required.
        It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business or engage in any activity enumerated in Section 5.16.030 without first having procured a special operation license from the city.

        This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a special operation license prior to obtaining a business license as set forth in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code, nor shall this section be construed to require any person to obtain a special operation license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.030 Applicability.
        The following businesses and activities shall be licensed according to the procedure specified in this chapter:

A.    Businesses and activities not involving the exercise of First Amendment rights, including the following:

1.     Escort services;

2.     Junkyards;

3.     Massage parlors;

4.     Pawnbrokers1;

5.     Poolrooms;

6.     Private patrol services;

7.     Secondhand stores and kiosks1;

8.     Swap meet operation;

9.     Vehicles for hire;

10.   Alcohol and tobacco-free public dances;

11.   Towing service for city police towing purposes;

12.   Closing-out sales;

13.   Ambulances;

14.   Penny arcades and other games of skill or amusement; and

15.   Card rooms as provided for in Chapter 5.28.

B.     Businesses and activities that may involve the exercise of First Amendment rights, including the following:

1.     Cabarets;

2.     Public dances;

3.     Sound trucks; and

4.     Fortune-telling and related occupations.

 

1 Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers are subject to Chapter 5.48.

 

(Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.040 Application.
        Every applicant for a special operation license to carry on a business or engage in an activity enumerated in Section 5.16.030 shall submit the application to the department of finance. Applications submitted shall be under oath. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.050 Application & Investigation Fees.
        All applications for licenses to be issued under this chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee and investigation fee as established by resolution of the city council. Fees are non-refundable except as may be required by law. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.060 Approval Authority.
        The department of finance shall submit each application under this chapter to the chief of police and other appropriate departments of the city for investigation. Within sixty days after the receipt of such application, the chief of police or other department head shall file with the city manager a report in writing concerning the result of the investigation. Within ten business days after receipt of the report, the city manager shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Notification of the decision shall be transmitted to the applicant in writing. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in writing to the city council. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.070 Appeal Process.
        The conditional approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to the city council. Such an appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 10 days of the date of the city manager’s decision. The filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of city manager action, until such time as the council has acted on the appeal. The city council shall conduct a public hearing to review the application and all the facts, and shall set forth its findings and its decision in a resolution of record. The decision by the city council is final. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.080 Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation—Licenses for activities in Section 5.16.030A.
        Any special operation license to carry on a business or to engage in an activity enumerated in Section 5.16.030A may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the city manager if one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A.    The business or activity does not comply with all health, zoning, fire, building and safety codes, requirements and standards of the laws of California and ordinances of the city.

B.     Applicant or persons having direct management, or employees, are not proper persons to carry on the business for which a license is sought. This determination shall be made with reference to, among other things, whether such persons have ever been convicted of any offense relating to the conduct of the type of business or activity for which the license is sought.

C.     The premises proposed are deemed not a proper place to carry on such a business.

D.    The objections of private residents in the immediate vicinity warrant denial of the license or permit.

E.     The issuance of a license or permit would be contrary to the public peace or morals.

F.     The issuance of a license or permit would be contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare.

        An application for the same request by the same individual(s) at the same location may not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months following denial of a license under this section. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.090 Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation—Licenses for activities in Section 5.16.030B.
        Any special operation license to carry on a business or to engage in an activity enumerated in Section 5.16.030B may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the city manager if one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A.    The operation, as conducted by the applicant, does not comply with all the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of California and ordinances of the city applicable to such business operation.

B.     That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager:

1.     Has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment, within the last five years, of:

a.     An offense involving lewd conduct, or

b.     An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another;

2.     Has violated any provision of this chapter.

C.     The applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, or manager has knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for permit, or in a report or record required to be filed with any city agency.

D.    The applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause and has not shown a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.100 Suspension or Revocation.
        A special operation license may be suspended or revoked pursuant to Sections 5.16.080 or 5.16.090 upon a written determination by the city manager. Notification of the decision shall be transmitted to the applicant in writing. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.110 Renewal.
        A special operation license is renewable each year following the date of issuance. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.120 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for in this chapter, are subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.130 Enforcement of chapter.
A.    It shall be the duty of the department of finance to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the department of finance or the city manager.

B.     The department of finance, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon it hereunder, and acting through its deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine, or cause to be examined, all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

 

5.16.140 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 5014 § 3, 2014.)

Chapter 5.20 WORK PERMITS
5.20.010 Purpose.
        Work permits are required for all persons employed in businesses or activities enumerated in Section 5.20.040. Said enumerated businesses and activities are such that regulation by the city council of the employees thereof is necessary to adequately protect and promote the health, safety, and the general welfare of the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a procedure for the issuance of said work permits. (Prior code § 16C-1.)

 

5.20.020 Required.
        It is unlawful for any person to be employed by any business or engage in any activity enumerated in Section 5.20.040 hereof without first having procured a work permit from the city.

        This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a work permit prior to employment in the business or activity enumerated in Section 5.20.040 if such requirement conflicts with the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state of California. (Prior code § 16C-2.)

 

5.20.030 No fee required.
        No fee, nor any tax whatsoever shall be required for a work permit. (Prior code § 16C-3.)

 

5.20.040 Applicability.
        Work permits are required for all employees doing business within the city in the following businesses and activities:

A.    Cabarets and public dances;

B.     Escort services;

C.     Massage parlors;

D.    Merchandise coupon sales or advertising;

E.     Private patrol services, except those duly registered under the provisions of the Business & Professions Code of the state of California;

F.     Vehicles for hire;

G.    Alcohol and tobacco free public dances.

(Ord. 4483, 1995; Ord. 4476, 1995; Ord. 3364 § 3, 1979; prior code § 16C-4.)

 

5.20.050 Application—Contents—Investigation.
        Applications for work permits shall be filed with the police department, shall be under oath, and shall contain all information deemed necessary by the city manager to determine whether the permit should be issued or denied, including, in every case, a full set of fingerprints.

        Each application under this chapter shall be submitted to the chief of police and other appropriate departments of the city for investigation. Within twenty days after the receipt of such application, the chief of police or other department head shall file with the city manager a report in writing concerning the result of his investigation. Within five days after receipt of the report, the city manager shall approve or deny said application. If said application is approved by the city manager, a work permit shall be issued. If said application is denied by the city manager, the city manager shall make available to the applicant, upon request, a written statement of the grounds upon which the denial is based. An appeal may be taken to the city council by the applicant pursuant to the procedure set forth in Sections 5.12.040 through 5.12.090 of this code. (Prior code § 16C-5.)

(Ord. No. 4483, Amended, 08/15/95)

 

5.20.060 Temporary work permit.
        Within forty-eight hours after application for a work permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall be issued a temporary work permit unless it appears that one or more of the grounds set forth in Section 5.12.030 is found to exist by the city manager. Except as otherwise provided herein, the temporary work permit shall entitle the applicant to work as an employee in any business or activity set forth in Section 5.20.040 until such time as the application for a permanent work permit is approved or denied.

        The entitlement of the temporary work permit shall terminate automatically upon notice of denial of a permanent work permit, or, in the alternative, upon issuance of the permanent work permit. The temporary work permit may be revoked pursuant to Section 5.20.080. (Prior code § 16C-5.5.)

 

5.20.070 Temporary work permit—Denial.
        An application for a work permit shall be approved by the city manager unless one or more of the grounds set forth in Section 5.12.030 is found to exist by the city manager:

A.    The misrepresentation of a material fact in the application for a permit by an applicant;

B.     The violation by the applicant of any provisions of this code under which such permit was issued;

C.     When the issuance of a work permit would be contrary to the public peace or morals;

D.    When the issuance of a work permit would be contrary to the public health, welfare or safety.

(Prior code § 16C-6.)

 

5.20.080 Revocation.
        A work permit shall be revoked by the city manager when one or more of the grounds set forth in Section 5.12.030 is found to exist by the city manager. Prior to the revocation of any work permit, the city manager shall cause written notice to be served upon the permittee notifying the permittee of the city’s intent to revoke the permit, setting forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based, and notifying the permittee of the revocation procedure as follows:

A.    That unless the permittee requests a hearing as provided hereinbelow, permittee’s work permit shall be revoked by the city manager five days after receipt of the notice provided for herein;

B.     That, prior to the revocation of the permit, the permittee is entitled to a hearing before the city council pursuant to Sections 5.12.040 through 5.12.090 of this code, if the permittee so requests;

C.     That if said request is made, the permit can only be revoked pursuant to the above cited sections.

(Prior code § 16C-7.)

 

5.20.090 Duration.
        A work permit shall be valid until revoked or suspended consistent with grounds as outlined under Section 5.12.030. (Ord. 3474 § 1, 1980: prior code § 16C-8.)

 

5.20.100 Waiver.
        The provisions of Section 5.20.050 may be waived by the city manager if an applicant has a valid work permit from another governmental agency. (Prior code § 16C-9.)

 

5.20.110 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3647 § 4, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 6, 1975: prior code § 16C-10.)

 

5.20.120 Violation by employment.
        Any person who knowingly or intentionally employs any person known to said employer to be in violation of Section 5.20.110 above shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3647 § 4, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 6, 1975: prior code § 16C-10.1.)

 

5.20.130 Rules and regulations.
        The city clerk may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 16C-11.)

 

5.20.140 Enforcement of chapter.
A.    It shall be the duty of the city clerk, and he is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the city clerk or the city council.

B.     The city clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine, or cause to be examined, all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.

(Prior code § 16C-12.)

Chapter 5.24 CABARETS, DANCE HALLS, PUBLIC DANCES
5.24.010 Cabaret defined.
        The word “cabaret” means a cafe, restaurant, bar, or other public establishment where alcoholic beverages are served, sold, consumed or distributed, and where entertainment is provided by a performer or performers who dance, sing, play musical instruments or present any other form or kind of entertainment. Such an establishment is a cabaret even though the entertainment is provided only at certain times. (Ord. 3829 § 1, 1985: prior code § 4-40.1.)

 

5.24.020 Public dance and public dance hall defined.
        The term “public dance hall” means any room, place or space, excepting a private residence or home, where dancing is permitted or carried on, whether admission be charged or not. The term “public dance” means any dance not held or given in a private home or residence. (Prior code § 4-40.2.)

 

5.24.030 License—Required—Tax.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct a cabaret or dance hall in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Prior code § 4-40.3.)

 

5.24.040 License—Classes.
        The classes for licenses under this chapter shall be:

A.    Class A. A class A license shall be required where dancing is permitted other than on an occasional basis or by special arrangement, and where entertainment groups consist of three or more persons.

B.     Class B. A class B license shall be required where dancing is permitted other than on an occasional basis or by special arrangement, and where entertainment groups consist of no more than a single or double act.

C.     Class C. A class C license shall be issued where dancing is permitted other than on an occasional basis or by special arrangement, and where there is to be no live entertainment.

D.    Class D. A class D license shall be issued where no dancing is permitted but where entertainment groups consist of three or more persons.

E.     Class E. A class E license shall be issued where dancing occurs occasionally or by special arrangement and where there is to be no live entertainment.

F.     Class F. A class F license shall be issued where no dancing is permitted but where entertainment groups consisting of a single or double act are employed.

(Prior code § 4-40.8.)

 

5.24.050 Right of entry of peace officers.
        Any peace officer of the city or the state or any officer of the United States government charged with the duty of enforcing the public laws of the United States government shall have free access at all times to any cabaret or dance hall licensed under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-40.9.)

 

5.24.060 Conduct of employees.
        It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any employee, concessionaire or employee of any concessionaire to dance or drink with or otherwise entertain patrons, guests or customers in any cabaret or dance hall licensed under the provisions of this chapter, except in the manner lawfully contracted for under the provisions of this chapter.

        It is also declared to be unlawful for any employee provided for in this chapter to leave the cabaret or dance hall where he or she may be employed or to in any way associate with any guest, patron or customer of such cabaret or dance hall during the hours of employment; nothing herein contained shall be construed, however, to prevent any employee of a cabaret or dance hall licensed under the provisions of this chapter from selling or serving food or drink to a customer, patron or guest of such cabaret or dance hall. (Prior code § 4-40.10.)

 

5.24.070 Certain conduct prohibited.
        Boisterous conduct and profanity shall be prohibited in cabarets or dance halls and in the hallways leading thereto. No dance of any immoral or vulgar character shall be permitted in any cabaret or dance hall and no person shall be permitted to conduct himself or herself in a vulgar or improper manner in such cabaret or dance hall. No undue familiarity shall be permitted. (Prior code § 4-40.11.)

 

5.24.080 Permitting prohibited behavior.
        It is unlawful for any person conducting, managing, operating or maintaining any establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or any employee thereof, to harbor, admit or receive, or to permit to be or remain in or about such cabaret or dance hall, any lewd or dissolute person of either sex, any intoxicated or boisterous person, or any person under the influence of intoxicating liquors, or any person whose conduct while in such cabaret or dance hall tends to create a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the laws of this city or the state, or which tends in any way to corrupt the good morals of any person or persons attending such cabaret or dance hall, or in any way interferes with the proper management or control of such cabaret or dance hall. (Prior code § 4-40.12.)

 

5.24.090 Minors—Misrepresentation of age.
        It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret or dance hall licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or for any employee of such cabaret or dance hall, to harbor, admit, receive or permit to be in or remain in or about such place, during hours when dancing is actually being carried on, conducted or permitted, any person under the age of eighteen years, unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent, spouse or legal guardian; provided, however, that the foregoing provisions shall not prohibit the entry of such persons into any dining room located in or about the premises occupied by a hotel or inn of sixty rooms or more and actually maintained and operated as a bona fide part of such hotel business.

        It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years falsely to represent himself or herself as being of the age of eighteen years or more for the purpose of obtaining admission to any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter.

        It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to falsely represent, state or declare that such person is of the age of eighteen years or over, or for any parent, guardian or any person to aid and abet in such false representation in order for such minor to obtain employment in any cabaret or public dance hall licensed hereunder. (Ord. 3306 § 1, 1978: prior code § 4-40.13.)

 

5.24.100 Loitering by minors and intoxicated persons prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any of the following persons to be or remain in or about any cabaret or public dance hall licensed under the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Any minor under the age of eighteen years, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;

B.     Any lewd or dissolute person of either sex;

C.     Any drunken or boisterous person or persons under the influence of intoxicating liquors;

D.    Any person whose conduct while present in such cabaret or dance hall tends to create a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the laws of the city or of the state, or which tends in anyway to corrupt the good morals of any person or persons attending such cabaret or dance hall, or in any way interferes with the proper management and control of such cabaret or dance hall.

(Ord. 3306 § 2, 1978; prior code § 4-40.14.)

 

5.24.110 Requirements for entertainment.
        It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge, or any employee of a cabaret or dance hall, licensed under the provisions of this chapter, to harbor, admit or receive, or to allow or permit in such cabaret or dance ball any entertainment except that which is furnished by the person or persons who own and operate the business conducted at such cabaret or dance hall, and such entertainment must be only upon a stage, platform or dance floor, and the patrons, guests or customers shall at all times be excluded from such stage, platform or dance floor during the progress of the entertainment. The owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret or dance hall licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall provide a reasonable passageway through any part of the room used by customers, guests or patrons for ingress and egress of the entertainers to the stage, platform or dance floor where such entertainment is being presented. It is unlawful for any paid entertainers to mingle with the patrons, guests or customers of such cabarets or dance halls during the period of time they are employed.

        No entertainment shall be given in any cabaret or dance hall in the city of a lewd, suggestive, vulgar or immoral type. Entertainers shall not use objectionable or obscene language, and shall not sing songs of lewd, obscene or vulgar character. (Prior code § 4-40.15.)

 

5.24.120 Minimum floor space.
        It is unlawful for any person, as principal, agent or otherwise, to carry on, maintain or conduct, or assist in carrying on, maintaining or conducting, any public dance hall or public dance in connection with any business or at any place wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served in any room, place or space which does not contain a floor space allotted to dancing of at least four hundred square feet; provided, however, if in any specific case the city manager shall recommend to the city council, based upon the report and findings of the chief of police made after conducting the investigation hereinabove provided for, that the floor space allotted to dancing be less than four hundred square feet, then and in that event the council may in its discretion, by motion adopted by a majority of the council members present, determine and declare the size of the area of floor space allotted to dancing that shall be required; but unless such a motion shall be adopted, no lesser area than four hundred square feet shall be permitted; provided further, that this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the conducting or maintenance of such public dance in any room, place or space wherein dancing is authorized at the effective date of this section. (Prior code § 4-40.16.)

 

5.24.130 Closing hours.
        All cabarets and public dance halls shall be closed and cleared of all guests and patrons and employees on or before the hour of two a.m. It is unlawful to provide or permit any music, dancing or entertainment in or about any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter between the hours of two a.m. and eleven a.m. (Prior code § 4-40.17.)

 

5.24.140 Cleanliness—Lighting—Ventilation.
        The holder of a cabaret or dance hall license shall keep such cabaret or dance hall in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition at all times, and have the stairways and other passages and all rooms and places connecting with such cabaret or dance hall at all times open, adequately lighted and properly ventilated during the hours such cabaret or dance hall is open for business. (Prior code § 4-40.18.)

 

5.24.150 Use, sale or presence of alcoholic beverages prohibited—Exception.
A.    It is unlawful for any patron, customer or visitor to bring, carry or transport into any room, place or space wherein dancing is permitted under the terms of this chapter, during hours when dancing is actually being conducted or carried on therein, any bottle or other container containing any alcoholic beverage.

B.     It is unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any patron, customer or visitor to bring, carry or transport into any room, place or space wherein dancing is actually being conducted or carried on therein any bottle or other container containing any alcoholic beverage.

C.     It is unlawful for any person, in any room, place or space wherein dancing is permitted under the terms of this chapter, to sell, serve, give away or distribute in bottles any alcoholic beverage, with the exception of beer or wine.

(Prior code § 4-40.19.)

 

5.24.160 Furnishing of dance partners prohibited.
        It is declared to be unlawful for any person who holds any license under the provisions of this chapter to operate a public dance hall or for an agent, representative or employee of such person to have, employ, furnish or keep in or about such dance hall any person of either sex to act in the capacity of a dance partner. It is unlawful for any person holding a license under this chapter or for their agents, representatives or employees to engage, keep or employ on a salary percentage or otherwise any persons of either sex to act as dance partners for the patrons of such public dance hall. It is unlawful for any person to be in or about such dance hall for the purpose of acting as a dance partner with the patrons of such dance hall for hire on a salary percentage or other method of employment. (Prior code § 4-40.20.)

 

5.24.170 Certain dances excepted from chapter provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any private residence in which a private dance given or held by the owner or occupant of such private residence is given or held.

        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any dance by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, state, county or municipal organization or association when the receipts of any such dance are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or organization was formed. (Prior code § 4-30.21.)

 

5.24.180 Notices of chapter provisions to be posted.
        The chief of police shall furnish and cause to be furnished printed notices containing a summary or synopsis of the provisions of this chapter to the proprietors or managers of every cabaret licensed under the provisions of this chapter. Such notices shall be printed in type of not less than twelve points in size, and it shall be the duty of the owner, proprietor and person having the charge and control of such cabaret to post one of the notices in each ladies’ dressing room and one in each gentlemen’s dressing room where patrons are admitted; one in each male entertainer’s room, and one in each female entertainer’s room.

        It is unlawful for any cabaret licensed under the provisions of this chapter to be open or to remain open for use of the public unless such notices are kept posted as herein provided. It shall be considered a violation of this section for a proprietor, owner or manager or person having the charge of such business to refuse to immediately replace any notice therein provided for, upon demand of any peace officer of the city or state. (Prior code § 4-40.22.)

 

5.24.190 Employees—Regulations generally.
        Every person conducting, operating or managing, either as principal or agent, any cabaret or public dance hall where alcoholic beverages are dispensed or served in the city shall comply with the following conditions covering the employment of persons in or about such establishments or premises. (Prior code § 4-40.23.)

 

5.24.200 Employees—Work permit required.
        No person shall be employed in a cabaret or dance hall without having secured a valid work permit pursuant to Chapter 5.20. (Prior code § 4-40.24.)

 

5.24.210 Employees—Prohibited acts.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to procure, employ or permit any person employed in or about a cabaret, or public dance hall, whether such person be compensated by a straight salary or by any other mode of compensation, to drink or dance or associate with any patron or to consume any alcoholic beverage in or about such premises.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to compensate any person employed in or about a cabaret or public dance hall at a rate determined by a percentage of moneys received or sales made or to permit any person so employed to be so compensated.

C.     It is unlawful for any person employed in any capacity in or about a cabaret or public dance hall to consume any alcoholic beverage in or about such premises. No person shall accept employment in or act in any capacity in the operation or maintenance of a cabaret or public dance hall without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police of the city authorizing such employment.

D.    It is unlawful for any person conducting, operating or managing, either as principal or agent, any establishment to which an on-sale beer, beer and wine, or general license has been issued under the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act to permit any employee to drink, dance or mingle with any patron of such establishment, whether such employee be compensated by a straight salary or by any other mode of compensation.

(Ord. 2905 § 1, 1975: prior code § 4-40.25.)

 

5.24.220 Private security officer or uniformed private security officer required during live entertainment.
        It is the duty of every owner, lessee, proprietor, manager or occupant of any public dance hall, room, building or cabaret licensed under the provisions of this chapter to have personally present upon the premises at all times during which live entertainment is being provided, a private security officer or uniformed private security officer, approved by the chief of police for such position, who shall see that no violation of the law or breach of peace or drunkenness or other illegal or unlawful conduct is carried on therein; and whose duty it shall be to arrest any person or persons engaged in violating any of the laws of the state, or of this code, or any ordinances of this city, in or on such premises so licensed hereunder. (Ord. 3791 § 1, 1984: prior code § 4-40.26.)

 

5.24.230 Waiver of requirement.
        Licensees may annually petition the city manager for waiver of the private security officer or uniformed private security officer requirement. Upon granting of such waiver, licensee need not comply with such requirement during the calendar year for which such waiver was granted. (Ord. 3791 § 1, 1984: prior code § 4-40.27.)

 

5.24.240 Revocation of waiver.
        The city manager may, at his discretion, suspend, deny or revoke any such waiver upon any of the following grounds:

A.    The misrepresentation of a material fact in the application for a waiver by an applicant;

B.     The violation by the licensee of any provisions of this chapter;

C.     When the granting or the continuance of the waiver would be contrary to the public peace or morals;

D.    When the granting or the continuance of the waiver would be contrary to the public health, welfare or safety.

(Ord. 2905 § 2, 1975: prior code § 4-40.28.)

 

5.24.250 Right of appeal.
        Upon a determination by the city manager adverse to any licensee, such licensee may make written request to the city council for a hearing to determine whether or not such licensee shall be granted a waiver of the requirement for private security officer or uniformed private security officer as hereinabove provided. The city council shall appoint a time for said hearing within not less than five days nor more than thirty days after receipt of such request, and shall notify the licensee of such hearing date not less than five days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 3791 § 1, 1984: prior code § 4-40.29.)

 

5.24.260 Hearing—Swearing of witnesses—Presentation of evidence.
        At such hearing the city council may, at its discretion, require witnesses to be sworn. The licensee or his agent may present evidence in support of the granting or continuation of a waiver. Any other person may, at the discretion of the city council, be allowed to participate at the hearing and present evidence. (Prior code § 4-40.30.)

 

5.24.270 Action by council conclusive.
        The action by the city council on the issuance, suspension or revocation of such waiver of the private security officer or uniformed private security officer requirement shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 3791 § 1,

 

1984: prior code 4-40.31.)

 

5.24.280 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.28 CARD ROOM – NON-GAMBLING
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding gaming, see Pen. Code § 330.

 

5.28.010 Card room – Non-gambling defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, a card room is any space, room or enclosure furnished or equipped with one or more tables, spaces, or other implements used or intended to be used as card tables or locations for the playing of cards and similar games, and the use of which is available to the public or any portion of the public. This term shall not apply to public parks and city community recreation centers, where visitors occasionally play cards and similar games for recreational purposes. (Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

 

5.28.020 Restrictions on ownership.
        It is unlawful to own or operate a card room within the city, except as a use accessory to one of the two following primary uses: 1) a restaurant establishment, or 2) a bona fide club, society, professional organization, union hall, fraternal organization, and similar use, having adopted rules or bylaws, and having members selected by established criteria. Further, the primary use must either possess all applicable discretionary permits, or have nonconforming status pursuant to Chapter 17.120 of this code for the use. (Ord. 4990 § 3, 2013.)

 

5.28.030 Special Operation License Required.
        No card room shall be established unless the owner first obtains a special operation license pursuant to Chapter 5.16 of this code. A maximum of eight card rooms may be authorized to operate at any one time. (Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

 

5.28.040 Card Room Development and Operational Performance Standards.
A.    Card rooms shall be established and operated in conformance with Title 17 of this code.

B.     Violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be grounds for revocation of a special operation license.

(Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

 

5.28.050 Licenses – Suspension and revocation.
        In addition to the provisions noted Section 5.28.040 above, any special operation license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked as provided in Chapter 5.12 of this code. (Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

 

5.28.060 Licenses – Nontransferable.
        No special operation license issued for a card room shall be assignable or transferable. (Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

 

5.28.070 Violation of state law not authorized.
        It is not the intention of this chapter to license any card room for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the state. (Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

 

5.28.080 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4979 § 2, 2012.)

Chapter 5.30 TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA ESTABLISHMENTS
5.30.010 Definitions.
A.    “Tobacco paraphernalia establishment” means any premises where tobacco paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold, and which devotes more than a two foot by four foot (two feet in depth maximum) section of shelf space for tobacco paraphernalia.

B.     “Tobacco paraphernalia” is defined as:

1.     Including, but not limited to, one or more of those items identified in that list set forth in subdivision (3) below, and any device intended or designed primarily for use by individuals for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco, notwithstanding that the device may also be used for the smoking or ingestion of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine or any other “controlled substance,” as that term is defined in the Health and Safety Code.

2.     A device “designed primarily for” the smoking or ingestion set forth in subdivision (1) above, is a device that has been fabricated, constructed, altered, adjusted, or marked especially for use in the smoking or ingestion of tobacco, and is peculiarly adapted to that purposes by virtue of a distinctive feature or combination of features associated with tobacco paraphernalia, notwithstanding that the device may also be used for the smoking or ingestion of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine or any other “controlled substance,” or for some other purpose.

3.     Includable items or devices:

a.     Electronic vapor devices designed with a heating element, a battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the user in a manner that simulates smoking tobacco products, shisha, herbs or any other product that produces smoke;

b.     Electronic vapor inhalation substance products including cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers, vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic vapor devices;

c.     Hookah pipes used for vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, non-flavored tobacco, shisha, dried fruits, or other substances in which vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin before inhalation;

d.     Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens (permanent or otherwise), heads or punctured metal bowls;

e.     A device constructed so as to prevent the escape of smoke into the air and to channel smoke into a chamber where it may be accumulated to permit inhalation or ingestion of larger quantities of smoke that would otherwise be possible, whether the device is known as a “bong,” or otherwise;

f.      A smokable pipe constructed with a receptacle or container in which water or other liquid may be placed into which smoke passes and is cooled in the process of being inhaled or ingested;

g.     A smokable pipe which contains a heating unit, whether the device is known as an “electric pipe,” or otherwise;

h.     A device constructed so as to permit the simultaneous mixing and ingestion of smoke and nitrous oxide or other compressed gas, whether the device is known as a “buzz bomb,” or otherwise;

i.      A canister, container or other device with a tube, nozzle or other similar arrangement attached and so constructed as to permit the forcing of accumulated smoke into the user’s lungs under pressure;

j.      A device for holding burning material, such as a cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand, whether the device is known as a “roach clip,” or otherwise; and

k.     Lighters and matches not possessing any of the characteristics described in subsection (B)(3)(a) through (g), above shall be excluded from the definition of tobacco paraphernalia.

(Ord. 5010 § 3, 2014.)

 

 

 

 

5.30.020 Prohibition against entry by minors.
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any tobacco paraphernalia establishment to knowingly allow or permit a person under the age of eighteen, not accompanied by their parent or legal guardian, to enter or remain within any tobacco paraphernalia establishment.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of a tobacco paraphernalia establishment to fail to display and maintain, or fail to cause to be displayed and maintained, at least one sign stating that a person under the age of eighteen may not enter the premises unless accompanied by their parent or legal guardian. These signs shall be not less than ten inches by eighteen inches in size, with lettering of not less than forty-eight point font size, and shall be placed in a conspicuous location near each public entrance to the tobacco paraphernalia establishment.

C.     In the event that a sign or signs have been posted as required in subsection (B) above, it shall be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen to enter or remain in any tobacco paraphernalia establishment, unless he or she is accompanied by their parent or legal guardian.

(Ord. 4911 § 1, 2008)

 

5.30.030 Retail sales and display of tobacco and drug paraphernalia.
A.    Retail sales and display of tobacco paraphernalia shall only take place in an enclosed building or tobacco paraphernalia establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or display for sale tobacco paraphernalia at a fair, street market, event or location other than in an enclosed building or tobacco paraphernalia establishment.

B.     Except as provided in subsection (C), below: (1) no tobacco paraphernalia may be displayed in cases, shelves, or in any locations visible to passers by of the tobacco paraphernalia establishment; and (2) no tobacco paraphernalia may be displayed to patrons or visitors of the tobacco paraphernalia establishment within twenty feet of non-tobacco paraphernalia merchandise (including, but not limited to, sweatshirts, sweaters, jackets, tee-shirts, ball caps, woolen caps and other apparel, embroidered patches, lighters, matches, posters, and books) bearing pictures, graphics, representations, messages, facsimiles, or literature reflecting or referring to controlled substances, including marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, methamphetamine, or any other controlled substances.

C.     The display restrictions set forth in subdivision (B)(1), above, shall not apply to tobacco paraphernalia such as tobacco pipes (made of briarwood, meerschaum, calabash gourd, corncob, or such other materials commonly used in the manufacture of tobacco pipes) or cigarette holders manufactured to hold a single, commercially created and machine rolled, cigarette.

(Ord. 4911 § 1, 2008)

 

5.30.040 Conflicts with other applicable laws.
        Nothing in the definition of tobacco paraphernalia establishments is intended to, nor shall be interpreted as legalizing or applying to the delivery, furnishing, transfer, possession or manufacture of drug paraphernalia or any use otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, including without limitation, Penal Code Section 308 and Health and Safety Code Sections 11014.5, 11364, 11364.5 and 11364.7. (Ord. 4911 § 1, 2008)

 

5.30.050 Severability.
        If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and adopted this chapter and each section, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 4911 § 1, 2008)

 

5.30.060 Violation—Enforcement.
        The penalties and provisions of Chapter 1.24 of this code shall apply to any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 4911 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 5.32 CLOSING-OUT SALE
5.32.010 Closing-out sale defined.
        Whenever used in this chapter, the term “closing-out sale” means any offer to sell to the public, or sale to the public, of goods, wares or merchandise upon the implied or expressed representation that such sale is in anticipation of the ceasing, discontinuance or termination of a business, or that such sale is other than in the ordinary course of business. Without limiting the generality of the above, a closing-out sale shall include any sale advertised or represented, either specifically or in substance, to be any of the following: adjustor’s sale, administrator’s sale, bankrupt sale, creditor’s sale, close-out sale, executor’s sale, end of business sale, final sale, forced-out-of-business sale, insolvent sale, inventory close-out sale, inventory disposal, last-days sale, lease-expires sale, liquidation sale, lost-lease sale, must-vacate sale, quitting-business sale, receiver’s sale, inventory-liquidation sale, selling-out sale, stock disposal, stock sell-out, stock-liquidation sale, termination sale, wind-up sale, or any other term tending to convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued. (Prior code § 9-1.)

 

5.32.020 Licenses—Required.
        No person shall advertise or conduct a closing-out sale, or sell or offer for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise at a sale represented to be a closing-out sale, without first obtaining from the city clerk a license to conduct such closing-out sale. (Prior code § 9-2.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03\11\97)

 

5.32.030 Licenses—Applications.
        Application for the license required by Section 5.32.020 shall be filed with the director of finance by the person conducting the closing-out sale at least ten days prior to the commencement of such sale. Such application for a license shall be in writing, signed and verified under oath by the person who intends to conduct such sale and each application shall set forth and contain the following information:

A.    A description and the street location of the place at which such sale is to be held;

B.     The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership or lease or sublease, and if by lease or sublease, the effective date of termination of such tenancy;

C.     The means to be employed in publishing such sale, together with the proposed contents of such advertising;

D.    The facts in regard to the insolvency, bankruptcy, assignment, receivership or other cause for the dissolution of the business;

E.     An inventory or statement setting forth the quantity and description of all goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at such sale. All goods, wares and merchandise listed upon the inventory or statement shall be described in detail by lot, number, brand name and other additional detail so that the identity of such goods with the inventory listing may be readily determined. All consignment goods listed upon the inventory or statement shall be so designated. No consignment goods shall be included in the sale unless such consigned goods have been in the applicant’s possession for at least thirty days prior to the filing of the application as required by this section;

F.     In the event that such sale will be conducted at public auction, the name of the auctioneer who shall conduct such auction sale.

(Prior code § 9-3.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03\11\97)

 

5.32.040 Licenses—Issuance—Tax.
        Upon filing of the application the director of finance may make, or cause to be made, an examination or investigation of the statements put forth in such application, or of the applicant and his affairs in relation to the proposed closing-out sale. If the city clerk finds that the statements in the application are true, that the advertising to be used is not false, deceptive or misleading in any respect, and that the proposed methods of conducting the sale are not such that they would be fraudulent or deceptive, then the city clerk shall issue a license to conduct such a sale in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        A license for closing-out sales shall be paid as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Prior code § 9-4.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

5.32.050 Licenses—Term—Renewal.
        Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the conduct and advertising of the one type of sale named and at the location specified in such license for a period of not more than sixty calendar days; provided that the city clerk may, upon a verified application therefor, renew such license for a period not to exceed thirty days upon the payment of a renewal tax of twenty-five dollars.

        Such verified application for renewal shall include a listing of such remainder of goods, wares or merchandise remaining in stock from the original inventory. Such listing shall not contain any goods, wares or merchandise not named in the original application. (Prior code § 9-5.)

 

5.32.060 Sales at more than one location—Listing warehouse inventories.
        If a sale under this chapter is to be conducted at two or more locations, separate licenses shall be obtained for each location at which such sale takes place. The conditions prescribed in this chapter as precedent to the issuance of a license for one location shall be the same conditions to be satisfied for all licenses issued for more than one location. Stocks of merchandise in warehouses not located on the premises for which a license is issued shall be listed on separate inventories. If sale of merchandise is to be conducted at the warehouse location, a separate license shall be required for such location. (Prior code § 9-6.)

 

5.32.070 Minimum period of ownership by licensees.
        No person shall be granted a license under this chapter who has not been, for a period of at least three months, the owner of record of the business for which such license is sought. (Prior code § 9-7.)

 

5.32.080 Limitations of authority under licenses—Substitution, replenishment of stock.
        Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only for the advertising and conducting of sale of the particular goods, wares and merchandise described in the original application for such sale and during the particular time and at the particular location stated therein and by the particular applicant. Any renewal, replenishment or substitution of such goods, wares or merchandise or change of time or place of such sale, or change of person conducting such sale, shall be unlawful and shall render such license void. Every sale of goods, wares or merchandise which was not included in the original inventory shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 9-8.)

 

5.32.090 Records of sale.
        Suitable records of daily sales shall be kept by each licensee under this chapter, and shall be made available on request of the city clerk or appointed investigators. The city clerk, or appointed investigators, shall at all times have access to such records and shall be permitted to examine all merchandise on the premises for comparison with such records. (Prior code § 9-9.)

 

5.32.100 Applicability of chapter.
        The above provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following cases:

A.    Sales conducted by order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;

B.     Sales conducted by public officers such as marshals and sheriffs in accordance with their powers and duties;

C.     Sales made under an assignment for the benefit of creditors generally; provided that facts of such termination and liquidation be clearly set forth in the public announcement of such sales.

(Prior code § 9-10.)

 

5.32.110 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.36 JUNKYARDS
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding junk and junkyards, see Bus. & Prof. Code § 21600 et seq.

 

5.36.010 Applicability of chapter.
        It is expressly declared that this chapter shall apply to all existing junkyards and auto wrecking yards described in this chapter. (Prior code § 15-1.)

 

5.36.020 License required—Tax.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct a junkyard or auto wrecking yard in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Prior code § 15-2.)

 

5.36.030 Enclosed building or fence required—Construction standards.
        Every junkyard or wrecking yard shall be carried on, maintained or conducted entirely inside an enclosed building or on premises entirely enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height and constructed according to the requirements of the building code of the city and other applicable ordinances. (Prior code § 15-3.)

 

5.36.040 Fence to be kept in good repair.
        Every fence or wall referred to in Section 5.36.030 shall be maintained in a neat, substantial and safe condition and shall be painted, unless of masonry or rustproof metal. (Prior code § 15-4.)

 

5.36.050 Signs on fence or wall—Prohibited.
        No sign, picture, transparency, advertisement or mechanical device which is used for the purpose of, or which does advertise or bring notice to any person, article of merchandise, any business or profession or anything that is to be or has been sold, bartered or given away, shall be placed, or caused to be placed or maintained, upon the outward face of any fence or wall erected as provided in Section 5.36.030. (Prior code § 15-5.)

 

5.36.060 Fence or wall signs—Exception as to own business—Limitation as to size.
        Any business regulated by this chapter, carried on, maintained or conducted within such fenced or walled enclosure referred to in Section 5.36.030 and in accordance with the zoning ordinance may be advertised by use of a space not exceeding six feet in height and fifteen feet in length on each side of such enclosure. (Prior code § 15-6.)

 

5.36.070 Gates.
        Gates for access to the premises of junkyards and wrecking yards shall swing inwardly and such gates shall be kept closed when the premises are not open for business. (Prior code § 15-7.)

 

5.36.080 Height of junk piles.
        No junk or secondhand article shall be piled or permitted to be piled in excess of the height of the enclosing fence or wall referred to in Section 5.36.030. (Prior code § 15-8.)

 

5.36.090 Removal of inflammable liquids.
        All gasoline, oil or other inflammable liquids and all gas shall be drained and removed from any unregistered motor vehicle or other junk or secondhand article located in any building or premises all junkyards or wrecking yards. (Prior code § 15-9.)

 

5.36.100 Arrangement of junk to allow inspection.
        The material located in any junkyard or wrecking yard shall be so arranged that reasonable inspection or access to all of the premises can be had at any time by the proper fire, health, police and building authorities. (Prior code § 15-10.)

 

5.36.110 Records of purchase—Required.
        Every person licensed under this chapter shall keep a record in written English of each purchase made by the licensee where the purchase is initiated and completed and delivery is made by the vendor or his agent within the city. (Prior code § 15-15.)

 

5.36.120 Records of purchases—Description of seller required.
        The record referred to in Section 5.36.110 shall be made on forms approved by the chief of police, and shall show the name of the person from whom the goods were purchases, together with the address and description of the person from whom such goods were purchased and the license number and description of the vehicle in which the goods were delivered to the purchaser. (Ord. 3367 § 1, 1979: prior code § 15-16.)

 

5.36.130 Records of purchases—To be made in duplicate—Description of purchases.
        Such record referred to in Section 5.36.110 shall be made in duplicate, written, printed or typed in a legible manner and shall describe the thing purchased by the name of the article, the name of the manufacturer, if known, and the serial number and/or other identifying numbers if the article is one which is identified by such number. (Ord. 3367 § 1, 1979: prior code § 15-17.)

 

5.36.140 Records of purchases—To be kept available for inspection.
        Such records referred to in Section 5.36.110 shall be kept on file at the place of business of the licensee for a period of two years, and shall be available for inspection by the chief of police or any of his officers, or any peace officer of the state, at all reasonable times. Officers conducting such inspections are authorized to remove from the premises the duplicate copy of the original record of purchase as part of the inspection and control process. (Ord. 3367 § 1, 1979: prior code § 15-18.)

 

5.36.150 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.40 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.40.010 Title.
        This chapter may be referred to as the El Cajon massage establishment ordinance. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.020 Purpose and intent.
        It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of the massage establishment business in the city.

        This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. Unless otherwise specifically prescribed in this chapter, the following provisions shall govern its interpretation and construction:

A.    No license or permit holder shall have any recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or the enforcement thereof.

B.     This chapter does not relieve any licensee or permit holder of any requirement of any ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the city.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.030 Definitions.
        Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used they shall mean:

A.    “Bath” means any washing or soaking of the human body, including but not limited to Turkish, Russian, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, shower, or sponge baths.

B.     “Business license” means the license required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code.

C.     “City manager” means the city manager of the city, and any officer or employee of the city appointed by the city manager to act as the city manager’s agent.

D.    “Designated body parts” means human genitalia, pubic region, anus, perineum, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

E.     “Health department” means the Department of Public Health of the County of San Diego.

F.     “Holistic health practitioner” means nonmedical health care therapists who use a massage specialty and therapeutic approach in caring for clients, and who present to the finance department proof of satisfactory completion of one thousand hours of instruction in such specialty or therapeutic approach from a school with a state-accredited curriculum, and proof of membership in a state or nationally chartered organization devoted to the specialty or therapeutic approach. The practice of such health care therapists may include other services such as nutritional assistance or counseling, as long as all activities are directed toward health care.

G.    “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hand or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.

H.    “Massage establishment” means a business establishment having a fixed location wherein any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on any bath or massage as defined in this chapter for any form of consideration.

I.      “Massage technician” means any person, male or female, who gives or administers, or offers to give or administer, to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage or bath.

J.      “Off-premises massage” means a massage or bath given or administered for any form of consideration at a location other than a massage establishment.

K.    “Recognized school” means any school or institution of learning which has been approved pursuant to section 94311 of the Education Code of the state, and which has for its purpose and is competent to teach a course of instruction of no less than two hundred hours, to be given in not less than three calendar months, instructing in the theory, practice, ethics, and application of massage. The school must furnish, upon successful completion of the course of instruction, a degree, pursuant to section 94310 of the Education Code of the state. The course of instruction must be approved by the Superintendent of the Council for Private Postsecondary Educational Institutions of the Department of Education, pursuant to section 94311 of the Education Code of the state. Schools offering correspondence courses not requiring attendance at classes are excluded from this definition.

L.     “Special operation license” means the license required by Chapter 5.16 of this code.

M.    “Work permit” means the permit required by Chapter 5.20 of this code.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.040 Licenses required—Massage establishment.
        It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or allow to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, a massage establishment, unless a business license pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code, and a special operation license pursuant to Chapter 5.16 of this code have been duly issued for such an establishment. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.042 Investigation fee.
        The investigation fee required by section 5.16.100 of this code shall not be in lieu of, and shall be in addition to, any taxes required by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.050 Work permit required—Massage technician.
        It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician without a work permit. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.052 Application for work permit—Information required.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any applicant for a work permit to act as a massage technician shall submit to the city the following information:

A.    The full name and present address of applicant;

B.     The previous addresses of applicant for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application, and the dates of residence at each;

C.     Written statements of at least five persons over the age of eighteen years, together with their names, addresses, and telephone numbers where they may be conveniently contacted, stating that the applicant is of good moral character;

D.    Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen years;

E.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes, and color of hair;

F.     Three portrait photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches in size, taken within the last six months;

G.    The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application;

H.    All arrests or convictions of the applicant on a criminal matter, except minor traffic offenses, with an explanation of the circumstances thereof;

I.      Written proof that the applicant has received a certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the state of California, stating that the applicant has within the thirty days immediately preceding the date of the application been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease;

J.      Written proof that the applicant has received a degree in massage from a recognized school, or in lieu of a degree, that the applicant has successfully completed an examination prepared and conducted by the County of San Diego Department of Health Services, consisting of both a written test and a practical demonstration, testing the competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the occupation of massage, and which requires the applicant to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, and both manual and mechanical massage;

K.    The license or permit history of the applicant, relating to the operation of a massage establishment or employment as a massage technician, including whether the applicant has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefor, and the business, occupation, or employment of the applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation;

L.     The massage establishment, if any, at which the applicant expects to be employed;

M.    The chief of police may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of establishing identification; and

N.    Such other identification and information as the city manager may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified above.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.054 Work permit—Grounds for denial.
        A work permit to act as a massage technician shall be issued if all other provisions of this code are complied with by the applicant, unless one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A.    The applicant has not fulfilled the requirements of section 5.40.052 of this chapter.

B.     The applicant has knowingly made a false material statement in the applications required.

C.     The applicant has within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses: sections 266i, 315, 316, 318, or subdivision (b) of section 647 of the California Penal Code; an offense which requires registration as a sex offender with the chief of police under Penal Code section 290; any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; an offense in another state which, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; an offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; an offense involving theft, embezzlement, or moral turpitude; or any violation of a statute, ordinance, or regulation relating to a massage establishment, any substantially similar business operation, or the occupation of massage technician. For the purpose of this section, a plea of nolo contendere shall be deemed a conviction.

D.    The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.

E.     The applicant held a license or permit to act as a massage technician, and the license or permit was suspended for one year or more, or revoked within the three years immediately preceding the date of applying for the work permit; except that this subsection shall not be grounds for denial if the applicant can show a material change in circumstances, since the revocation or suspension, which eliminates the grounds for the suspension or revocation.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.060 Work permit does not authorize operation of massage establishment.
        Any person desiring to obtain a work permit to act as a massage technician shall submit an application as provided in this code. A work permit to act as a massage technician does not authorize the operation of a massage establishment. Any person obtaining a work permit to act as a massage technician who desires to operate a massage establishment must separately apply for the licenses therefor. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.070 Application for special operation license—Information required.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any applicant for a special operation license for the operation of a massage establishment shall submit to the department of finance of the city the following information:

A.    The full name and present address of applicant;

B.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporate applicants shall apply;

C.     The previous addresses of applicant for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application, and the dates of residence at each;

D.    If the applicant is a natural person:

1.     Written statements of at least five persons over the age of eighteen years, together with their names, addresses and telephone numbers where they may be conveniently contacted, stating that the applicant is of good moral character;

2.     Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

3.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes, and color of hair;

4.     Three portrait photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches in size, taken within the last six months;

5.     The business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application;

6.     All arrests or convictions of the applicant on a criminal matter, except minor traffic offenses, with an explanation of the circumstances thereof;

7.     A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the state of California, stating that the applicant has within the thirty days immediately preceding the date of the application been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease;

8.     Written proof that the applicant has received a degree in massage from a recognized school. In lieu of proof of a degree, the applicant must furnish proof of successful completion of an examination prepared and conducted by the County of San Diego Department of Health Services, consisting of both a written test and a practical demonstration, testing the competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the occupation of massage, and which requires the applicant to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, and both manual and mechanical massage;

E.     The license or permit history of the applicant, relating to the operation of a massage establishment or employment as a massage technician, including whether the applicant has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefor, and the business, occupation, or employment of the applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation;

F.     The names or designations under which the massage establishment will do business; and

G.    Such other identification and information as the city manager may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified above.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.080 Completion of application—Corporations and partnerships.
        If the applicant for a special operation license for the operation of a massage establishment is a corporation or partnership, the applicant shall designate one of its officers or partners to act as its responsible managing officer. The responsible managing officer shall complete and sign the license application required for the operation of a massage establishment. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.090 Special operation license—Massage establishment—Grounds for denial.
        A special operation license for the operation of a massage establishment shall be issued if all other provisions of this code are complied with by the applicant, unless one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A.    The applicant has not fulfilled the requirements of section 5.40.070 of this chapter.

B.     The applicant has knowingly made a false material statement in the applications required.

C.     The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders of five percent or more of the corporation’s stock, or partners, has within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses: sections 266i, 315, 316, 318, or subdivision (b) of section 647 of the California Penal Code; an offense which requires registration as a sex offender with the chief of police under Penal Code section 290; any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; an offense in another state which, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; an offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; an offense involving theft, embezzlement, or moral turpitude; or any violation of a statute, ordinance, or regulation relating to a massage establishment or a substantially similar business operation.

D.    The massage establishment as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire, and safety requirements.

E.     The applicant is not at least eighteen years of age.

F.     The applicant held a license or permit in connection with the operation of a massage establishment, escort service, rap establishment, nude photo studio, or substantially similar type of business, or held a license or permit to act as a massage technician, and the license or permit was suspended for one year or more, or revoked, within the three years immediately preceding the date of applying for the license required for the operation of a massage establishment; except that this subsection shall not be grounds for denial if the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the revocation or suspension which eliminates the grounds for the revocation or suspension.

G.    The applicant has not fulfilled the requirements of Chapter 5.16 of this code.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.100 Massage establishment operating requirements.
        All massage establishments operating pursuant to this code must meet each and all of the following requirements:

A.    Each person acting or employed as a massage technician shall have a valid work permit;

B.     Massage establishment operations may be carried on, and the premises may be open, only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. each day;

C.     A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. Each service shall be described in readily understandable language. No other services may be performed, or offered to be performed, on the premises;

D.    The massage establishment’s special operation license and a copy of the work permit of every massage technician employed by or working in the massage establishment shall be posted in an open and conspicuous place on the premises;

E.     A minimum of one toilet and wash basin shall be provided for the patrons in every massage establishment. Hot and cold running water shall be provided to all wash basins, bathtubs, showers, or similar equipment. Each wash basin shall be provided with soap or hand detergent, and sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each bathroom;

F.     Clean and sanitary towels, sheets, and linens shall be available for the use of each patron receiving massage services. Towels, sheets and linens may only be used once, by only one person, before being laundered. Re-use is allowed only after laundering. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that it is used only once, for only one person, and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle;

G.    Any instruments used in performing massage shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe condition by means of disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment;

H.    Pads used on massage tables shall be covered in an adequate manner with durable washable plastic or other waterproof material;

I.      Clean, sanitary, and opaque clothing shall be provided to all patrons, capable of covering the patron’s designated body parts. The clothing may be reused only after being laundered;

J.      No owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge or in control of a massage establishment shall permit a massage to be given or administered unless the patron’s designated body parts are covered during the entire massage by the clothing specified in subsection I of this section;

K.    Except for bathrooms or dressing rooms providing complete visual privacy, no owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge or in control of a massage establishment shall permit any person in the massage establishment to expose their designated body parts;

L.     No owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge or in control of a massage establishment shall permit any massage technician to be in the presence of a patron, or to be on the premises of a massage establishment during its hours of operation, unless the massage technician is clothed from a point not exceeding four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck. The clothing shall be of an opaque material and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;

M.    No owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge or in control of a massage establishment shall permit any massage technician to massage or intentionally touch the designated body parts of another person while on the premises.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.110 Work permit required.
        It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge or in control of a massage establishment to employ, or permit any person to act as a massage technician, who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked work permit issued for such purpose. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.120 Records of services.
        Each person operating a massage establishment pursuant to this code shall, for a period of ninety days following the issuance of the special operation license required by this code, maintain a written record of the date and hour of each massage service provided, the fee charged, and the name of the massage technician providing the service. The record shall be open to inspection by officials of the city charged with the enforcement of this chapter, and only for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. The information secured as a result of such inspection shall be confidential. Any willful unauthorized use or disclosure of such information by an officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor, and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of section 5.40.230 of this chapter. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.130 Inspections.
        The health department and the officials of the city charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall have the authority, as otherwise provided for by law, to enter a massage establishment during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to ensure compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, and health regulations, in addition to the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not be construed so as to restrict or limit the authority, already possessed under the laws, of an agency to enter or inspect premises. The costs and expenses of inspections by the health department shall be paid by the owner of the massage establishment examined. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.140 Limitations—Food, beverages and non-massage business.
        It is unlawful, on the premises of a massage establishment, to:

A.    Sell or serve food or beverage; or

B.     Conduct any business other than a massage establishment.

        In the event that the premises possesses or is qualified to possess a certificate of occupancy issued by the city, then the prohibitions of this section shall only apply to the portion of the premises devoted to the conduct of massage establishment business. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.145 Massage establishment location standards.
A.    Massage establishments shall be located pursuant to the following minimum proximity requirements:

1.     No massage establishment shall be located within one thousand feet of any other massage establishment or adult entertainment establishment as defined in section 17.90.040.

2.     No massage establishment shall be located within five hundred feet of any parcel of land zoned for residential use.

3.     No massage establishment shall be located within six hundred feet of any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land uses:

a.     Church;

b.     Courthouse;

c.     Public playground/park/recreation area;

d.     School.

B.     Distance, without regard to intervening structures shall be:

1.     A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any massage establishment to any other massage establishment, or adult entertainment establishment as defined in section 17.90.040.

2.     A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any massage establishment and to the closest property line of a church, courthouse, public playground/park/recreation area, school, or residential zone.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.150 Business name.
        No person licensed to operate a massage establishment shall conduct massage establishment business under any name or designation not specified in the application required by section 5.40.070. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.160 Change of location—Fee.
        A change of location of a licensed massage establishment may be approved by the city manager, provided all applicable provisions of this code are complied with, and a change of location fee of twenty-five dollars to defray in part the costs of investigation and report has been paid to the city. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.170 Sale or transfer may nullify license.
        Upon the sale or transfer of a thirty percent or more interest in a massage establishment, the special operation license required by this code shall be null and void. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.180 Off-premises massages prohibited—Exceptions.
        It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, the business of massage in any hotel room, motel room, guesthouse, or other place of public accommodation. This section shall not be construed to prohibit:

A.    Maintaining a licensed massage establishment upon the premises of a place of public accommodation; or

B.     The holder of a work permit from giving or administering massage within hospitals, convalescent centers, rest homes, or the private home of a patron.

(Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.190 Applicability of regulations to existing businesses.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein, whether established before or after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.200 Exclusions.
A.    Exempted Individuals. This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals and no permit shall be required of such persons while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions; nor shall a license be required for the establishment at which a massage is administered or under the control and direction of such persons:

1.     Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturist, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license;

2.     Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license;

3.     Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license;

4.     Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team;

5.     Holistic health professionals as defined by section 5.40.030(F) of this chapter;

6.     All individuals who use a massage specialty and therapeutic approach in caring for clients while under the “control and direction” of any of the exempted classes of individuals as listed above in sections 1 through 5 must have a valid work permit and comply with all the requirements of section 5.40.052.

B.     Exempted Entities.

1.     An exempt entity may commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage establishment without having a special business license and without complying with the regulations of other sections of this chapter, so long as all massages that are part of the entity’s massage business comply with each of the following requirements:

a.     The individual who gives or administers, or offers to give or administer, the massage, is either exempt from the requirements of this chapter or holds a valid work permit;

b.     The massage is given or administered under the control and direction of the exempted entity within the scope of the exempted entity’s category;

c.     The massage is given or administered on the site of the exempted entity; and

d.     No person involved in the activities of the entity has been convicted of a crime within five years which would allow the city to deny an application for a special operation license or business license as required by this chapter.

2.     Exempt Entities. So long as the requirements of subsection(B)(1) are being met, an entity within one or more of the following categories qualifies as exempt:

a.     An amateur, semiprofessional, or professional athletic organization where massages are given to athletes only as part of the entity’s athletic program.

b.     A hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, or other health care facility duly licensed by the state of California where massages are given only within the scope of the entity’s state or federal licenses.

c.     An accredited high school, junior college, or college where massages are given to the entity’s students within the scope of the entity’s educational program.

d.     A business which provides health and physical fitness facilities and services and which:

i.      Does not have more than five percent of its floor area designed, set aside, or used as a site for the giving or administering of massages; and

ii.     Did not, during the twelve months prior to the then current calendar year, receive more than twenty percent of its gross revenues from massage related activities.

        This section shall not be construed to allow any nurse or other person not licensed by the Medical Practice Act of the code of the state to give or administer a massage, for any form of consideration, without a work permit. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.210 Suspension or revocation of special operation license.
        Should any person holding a special operation license issued pursuant to this chapter violate, or cause to be violated, any provision of this chapter or the provisions of any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating massage establishments the city manager may, upon recommendation by the chief of police and in addition to other penalties provided by ordinance, suspend or revoke the license. Subject to section 5.40.215, the action of the city manager will be final ten calendar days after the date of decision unless a licensee makes a written request for a hearing pursuant to section 5.12.035. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.215 Emergency—Expedited hearing.
        If the city manager suspends or revokes a special operations license pursuant to section 5.40.210, (s)he may expedite a license revocation or suspension if, in light of all circumstances, there is a substantial threat to public health, safety, or welfare, and the licensee is provided not less than three days’ notice of a hearing pursuant to section 5.12.055. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.220 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

 

5.40.230 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 5072 § 3, 2018.)

Chapter 5.42 BATHHOUSES
5.42.010 Adopted by reference.
        Ordinance No. 7448 (New Series) of the county of San Diego, incorporating Chapter 6 of Division 6 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances, is adopted by reference as the bathhouse ordinance of the city, setting forth the minimum requirements for the establishment and maintenance of a bathhouse. The regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Chapter 6 of the San Diego County Code are referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein. One copy of said Chapter 6 of the San Diego County Code is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4090 § 4, 1988.)

 

5.42.020 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code or any other penalty adopted by the city council. (Ord. 4090 § 4, 1988.)

Chapter 5.44 MECHANICAL MUSIC DEVICES
5.44.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Mechanical musical instrument” means any amusement machine, apparatus or device designed or constructed for the purpose of producing or reproducing or playing any musical tones, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening.

B.     “Premises open to the public” includes clubs, headquarters and meeting places of fraternal or other societies, associations and bodies.

(Prior code § 4-58.)

 

5.44.020 Licenses required for mechanical musical instruments.
        No person shall maintain or operate, or permit to be maintained or operated upon his premises, which premises are open to the public, any mechanical musical instrument unless a license therefor shall have first been obtained from the city as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 4-59.)

 

5.44.030 Applications for licenses.
        All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be in writing and directed to the department of finance, and shall be accompanied by the amount of money required for the period of time to be covered by the license. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 4-60.)

 

5.44.040 Revocation of licenses.
        The license for a mechanical musical instrument may be revoked pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this code upon the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the grounds set forth in Chapter 5.12, or upon the grounds that such mechanical musical instrument is or has been operated or maintained in such a manner as neighborhood. (Prior code § 4-61.)

Chapter 5.48 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
5.48.010 Purpose.
        The operations of secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers require further regulation to provide necessary safeguards to ensure that the businesses operate in such a manner to reduce the traffic of stolen merchandise in the City of El Cajon. The intent of this chapter is to limit the hours of operation of such businesses to daytime hours when such activities can be monitored more effectively and establish procedures for the purchase of secondhand merchandise that deter the purchase of stolen property. The regulation of these businesses is necessary to adequately protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. (Ord. 5014 § 5, 2014.)

 

5.48.020 Licenses required.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer business in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, obtained a state secondhand dealer or pawnbroker license, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code and all applicable state or federal regulations. (Ord. 5014 § 5, 2014.)

 

5.48.030 Definitions.
        “Pawnbroker” is defined as every person engaged in the business of receiving goods, including motor vehicles, in pledge as security for a loan as defined in the California Code of Finance Section 21000.

        “Secondhand dealer” includes any person, co-partnership, firm, or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property as defined in the California Business and Professions Code Section 21626.

        “Tangible personal property” shall have the meaning as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 21627 and includes, but is not limited to, all secondhand tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription or which, at the time it is acquired by the secondhand dealer, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription. (Ord. 5014 § 5, 2014.)

 

5.48.040 General regulations.
        Every person who engages in any of the activities for which a license is required by Section 5.48.010 shall be governed by the following regulations:

A.    Hours of Operation

It shall be unlawful for a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to conduct such business activities between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

B.     Record Keeping

Secondhand Merchandise Dealers and Pawnbrokers shall keep records of the purchase, taking in of pawn, and trading in of secondhand tangible personal property. Records shall be kept and submitted daily on forms approved by the Police Department.

C.     Compliance with Applicable Laws

The activity must comply with all health, zoning, fire, building and safety codes, requirements and standards of the laws of California and ordinances of the city applicable to this operation.

(Ord. 5014 § 5, 2014.)

 

5.48.050 Violations; Public nuisance.
A.    Violations of this chapter are subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code.

B.     In addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties for violations as provided in Section 1.24.010 of this code, any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code.

(Ord. 5014 § 5, 2014.)

Chapter 5.52 COMMUNITY EVENT PERMIT
5.52.010 Definitions.
        “Community event” means any organized activity, including but not limited to amusement attractions, athletic events, carnivals, circuses, parades, concerts, public dances, fairs, fireworks displays, fund raising events, marathons, walkathons, triathlons, other running events, bicycling events, trade shows, or other events (not construction related) which result in or require any modification to traffic flow patterns or traffic parking regulations.

        “Community event area” means the location of the community event, including, but not limited to: assembly area, route, and dispersing area.

        “Community event permit” refers to the permit approved or sought to conduct the community event. (Ord. 5033 § 3, 2015.)

 

5.52.020 Community event permit required.
A.    Community event permits are required for each community event. Certain community events require temporary use permits in accordance with Chapter 17.75 of the zoning code, including, but not limited to, the following: amusement attractions, carnivals, circuses, and fairs. Fireworks displays require a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.115.070 of the zoning code.

B.     Applications submitted for use permits, use of city parks or recreation facilities, or pursuant to city policies, ordinances or similar existing permit systems shall be deemed equivalent to community event applications for the purposes of this chapter.

(Ord. 5033 § 3, 2015.)

 

5.52.030 Prohibitions.
        No person described in Section 5.52.020 shall engage in any activity described therein:

A.    In any manner or location which obstructs the orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on or about the community event area on the day of the community event;

B.     From any street constituting or adjoining the community event area from fifteen minutes before the start of the community event until the community event has ended.

(Ord. 5033 § 3, 2015.)

 

5.52.040 Denial, revocation, suspension—Hearing.
A.    If an application for a community event permit is denied, a written appeal from the denial may be filed by the applicant with the city clerk not less than ten (10) days after the denial. The matter will be scheduled for hearing before the city council at a council meeting within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. The city council shall determine whether the community event permit applied for shall be issued. The hearing rules shall be as provided in Sections 5.12.050 through 5.12.090 of this code.

B.     A community event permit shall be revoked by the city manager when one or more of the grounds set forth below is found to exist:

1.     When the city manager or designee has reasonable cause to believe that the community event permit was issued in error or issued in reliance on false or erroneous information; or

2.     When the city manager or designee has reason to believe that such community event permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of persons or property because:

a.     Such community event permit would be incompatible with other uses;

b.     Such community event permit would cause or promote hazards.

3.     When the city manager or designee has information that there is a violation of any other provision of this code.

4.     When the continuance of a community event permit would be contrary to public health, safety, welfare, peace or morals.

C.     Prior to the revocation of any community event permit, the city manager or designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the permittee notifying the permittee of the city’s intent to revoke the permit, setting forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based, and notifying the permittee of the revocation procedure as follows:

1.     That unless the permittee requests a hearing as provided below, permittee’s community event permit shall be revoked by the city manager or designee five days after receipt of the notice provided for herein;

2.     That, prior to the revocation of the community event permit, the permittee is entitled to a hearing before the city council pursuant to Sections 5.12.040 through 5.12.090 of this code, if the permittee so requests;

3.     That if said request is made, the community event permit can only be revoked pursuant to the above cited sections.

(Ord. 5033 § 3, 2015.)

 

5.52.050 Penalty for violation.
        Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 5033 § 3, 2015.)

 

5.52.060 Other obligations.
        No provision set forth in this chapter shall relieve any person from the obligations otherwise imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code to pay a license tax and post bond, or from compliance with Title 17 or other provisions of this code.

        It is the responsibility of the community event permit applicant to comply with all city ordinances, policies and regulations governing the specific community event. (Ord. 5033 § 3, 2015.)

Chapter 5.56 POOLROOMS
5.56.010 License required—Tax.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct a poolroom or billiard room in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Prior code § 4-63.)

 

5.56.020 Minors prohibited from premises where alcoholic beverages sold.
        No proprietor, manager, or agent of such proprietor of any poolroom or billiard room shall permit any person under the age of twenty-one years to remain in any such licensed pool or billiard room where any alcoholic or intoxicating liquors of any kind or character are served or consumed in the premises used for such a poolroom or billiard room.

        No person under the age of twenty-one years shall be or remain in any licensed poolroom or billiard room to witness any game of pool or billiards or other games played therein where alcoholic or intoxicating liquors of any kind or character are served or consumed in the premises used for such a poolroom or billiard room. (Prior code § 4-70.)

 

5.56.030 Gambling in poolrooms or billiard rooms.
        No proprietor, manager or agent of such proprietor shall permit any gambling of any kind or character to be carried on in a licensed poolroom or billiard room or permit any betting or wagering to take place or occur therein upon any game of pool or billiards or other game played in such licensed poolroom or billiard room.

        Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any two or more persons from deciding by the result of the game of pool or billiards played by them who shall pay the fee or amount charged by the proprietor for the use of the pool or billiard table at which persons play. (Prior code § 4-71.)

 

5.56.040 Presence of persons under sixteen years of age prohibited—Exception.
        In any poolroom or billiard room where alcoholic or intoxicating liquors or beverages are not served or consumed in the premises, the proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any such poolroom or billiard room shall not admit any person under the age of sixteen years, unless the person under the age of sixteen years is accompanied by and under the supervision and control of his parent or legal guardian.

        However, notwithstanding the above, a person having a valid license under this chapter may apply under Chapter 17.70 of the zoning ordinance for a conditional use permit allowing persons under the age of sixteen years to be present in a poolroom or billiard room and to engage in or play pool or billiards in such premises where no alcoholic or intoxicating liquors or beverages are served or consumed. (Prior code § 4-72.)

 

5.56.050 Violations by minors.
        In any poolroom or billiard room where alcoholic or intoxicating liquors or beverages are not served or consumed in the premises, no person under the age of sixteen years shall be or remain in such licensed premises to witness any game of pool or billiards or other games played therein unless accompanied by and under the supervision and control of his parent or legal guardian. (Prior code § 4-73.)

 

5.56.060 Hours of operation.
        The hours of opening and closing poolrooms or billiard rooms shall be from six a.m. to two a.m. (Prior code § 4-74.)

 

5.56.070 Applicability.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply either to any private family keeping one pool or billiard table exclusively for family use or to any public or nonprofit agency, including, but not limited to, the boys’ club of the city, and schools and recreation departments where the playing of pool is controlled and supervised by authorized employees of the public, charitable or nonprofit agencies. (Prior code § 4-75.)

 

5.56.080 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.60 PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE
Note
*       For the statutory authority of cities to regulate street patrol services, see Bus. & Prof. Code § 7523.

 

5.60.010 Private patrol service defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, a “private patrol service” shall mean any person or owner of a private patrol service who, for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to furnish or furnishes a watchman, guard, patrolman or other person to protect persons or private property or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or private property of any kind. The term shall also mean a person who performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman or other person for any of the above purposes. (Prior code § 22-1.)

 

5.60.020 License required—Taxes—Compliance with regulations.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct a private patrol service in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Prior code § 22-2.)

 

5.60.030 Employee’s work permit required.
        All employees of any private patrol service shall obtain a work permit from the city clerk as provided in Chapter 5.20 of this code. (Prior code § 22-6.)

 

5.60.040 Fingerprints required for applications for licenses and work permits.
        The application for a license or a work permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a copy of fingerprints of the applicant. Such fingerprints shall be taken by the police department. (Prior code § 22-10.)

 

5.60.050 Membership—Uniforms.
        No person shall operate or conduct a private patrol service in violation of any of the following regulations and rules:

A.    Such operator shall be a member in good standing with the bureau of private investigators and adjusters, as defined in Article 3, Chapter 11, of the Business and Professions Code of the state.

B.     No licensee or employee of a licensee shall use a title, badge, uniform or other insignia which is likely to be confused with that of the police department of the city, or of any regular police agency of the county, or any political subdivisions of the county.

(Prior code § 22-11.)

 

5.60.060 Making arrests.
        A person licensed only as a private patrol operator shall not make arrests, except as a private citizen, with the exception of those arrests which are incidental to the investigation of theft, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of any property, or any other thing enumerated in Section 5.60.010 which he has been hired or engaged to protect, guard or watch. (Prior code § 22-12.)

 

5.60.070 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.64 SWAP MEETS
5.64.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Identifiable goods” means tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription.

B.     “Operator” means any person owning, conducting or operating the business of a swap meet on a premises in the city.

C.     “Swap meet” means the activity carried on in a building, structure, enclosure, lot or other area into which persons are admitted to display, exchange, barter, buy, sell or bargain for new or used merchandise.

D.    “Vendor” means any person selling goods at a swap meet.

(Prior code § 26A-1.)

 

5.64.020 License required—Taxes.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct a swap meet in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16 of this code, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Prior code § 26A-2.)

 

5.64.030 Vendor of new merchandise—License required.
        No vendor shall sell new merchandise at a swap meet without first having made application for and procured a license from the city to do so, or without paying to the city all taxes prescribed in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code. (Prior code § 26A-6.)

 

5.64.040 Reporting requirements for sale of new or used personal property.
        The reporting of all personal property offered or displayed for sale or exchange shall be in accordance with state law. (Ord. 3303 § 1, 1978: prior code § 26A-7.)

 

5.64.050 Trading area.
        Swap meet activities shall be conducted only in a building, structure, enclosure, lot or other area enclosed by a permanent fence which is sufficient to enable the operator, or his employees or agents, to effectively control the ingress and egress of persons and merchandise. (Prior code § 26A-8.)

 

5.64.060 Prohibited items.
        It is unlawful for any vendor to exchange, barter, trade or sell at a swap meet the following items of personal property:

A.    Firearms, ammunition, explosives;

B.     Nondomestic animals and livestock;

C.     Any item of personal property from which the serial number or identifying number has been removed;

D.    Any and all other items of personal property which are prohibited from being exchanged, bartered, traded or sold by the code of the city or the laws of the state of California;

E.     Stun guns (as defined by the California Penal Code).

(Ord. 4264 § 1, 1991: prior code § 26A-9.)

 

5.64.070 Duties of operator.
        The operator shall take reasonable steps to notify all participants of the regulations and prohibitions contained in this chapter, including but not limited to each of the following:

A.    The operator shall post or cause to be posted notices in conspicuous places on the premises.

B.     The operator shall install and maintain a public address system of sufficient volume to be heard in all parts of the premises during the conduct of the business.

(Prior code § 26A-10.)

 

5.64.080 Inspection during operation.
        All merchandise admitted to the swap meet area shall be arranged so that the chief of police and the fire chief may have access for inspection at all times during hours of operation. (Prior code § 26A-11.)

 

5.64.090 Reports of violations.
        The operator, his employees or agents, upon observing or becoming aware of a violation of this chapter, shall immediately communicate with the El Cajon police department and report such violation. (Prior code § 26A-12.)

 

5.64.100 Hours of operation.
        Swap meets shall be conducted only during daylight hours between one hour after sunrise and one hour before sunset. (Prior code § 26A-13.)

 

5.64.110 Giving false information or failure to furnish information.
        The furnishing of false information, or failure to furnish information where information is required by the provisions of this chapter, except for Section 5.64.040, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3303 § 2, 1978: prior code § 26A-14.)

 

5.64.120 Suspension or revocation of license.
        The city council shall have the power at any time to suspend or revoke the license issued under this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.12 of the code of the city upon violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the grounds set forth in Chapter 5.12. (Prior code § 26A-15.)

 

5.64.130 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.68 VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1]
5.68.010 Definitions.
A.    “Limousine” means an automobile or motor-propelled vehicle for hire which:

1.     Transports six or less passengers or parcels, or both, over the public streets of the city;

2.     Follows a fixed route of travel between specified points, with the fare based on a per capita charge established in its permit, in the discretion of the city manager;

3.     Is made available to passengers only at specified locations upon its route.

B.     “Owner” means every person, firm or corporation having use or control of any passenger-carrying automobile, or motor-propelled vehicle as herein defined.

C.     “Taxicab” means an automobile or motor-propelled vehicle for hire which:

1.     Transports passengers or parcels, or both over the public streets of the city;

2.     Is made available for hire on call or demand, through cruising, at taxi stands, or by telephone;

3.     Charges fare on a distance traveled/time consumed basis as indicated through the use of a taximeter.

D.    “Vehicle for hire” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon the street, except:

1.     A device moved exclusively by human power;

2.     A device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks;

3.     Mass transit vehicles;

4.     Vehicles involved in an organized car pool not available to the public;

5.     Emergency medical care vehicles.

(Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.020 Regularity of operation.
        Every vehicle for hire operated under the provisions of this chapter shall be operated regularly to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand for transportation services. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.030 Schedule of fares.
        Every applicant for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall file with the city council a schedule of the fares proposed to be charged by such applicant in the event the application is granted; the fares, when approved by the city council, shall become a part of the permit, and may not thereafter be changed except with the written consent and approval of the city council. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.040 Parking in areas not designated.
        Any vehicle for hire parked in a location other than those provided by the city council, or by the terms of the operating license, shall be subject to all of the laws and ordinances of the city in respect to the parking of motor vehicles upon the public streets of the city. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.050 Liability insurance.
        No person shall operate any vehicle for hire in the city unless there shall be on file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance by a company approved by the city attorney in conformance with city council policy. (Ord. 4063 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3999 §§ 1, 2, 1986; Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.060 Drivers to possess state licenses.
        All vehicles for hire operated within the city under provisions of this chapter shall be operated by drivers licensed for that purpose under the vehicle code of the state. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.070 Employee—Work permit required.
        All employees who operate a vehicle for hire shall obtain a work permit pursuant to Chapter 5.20. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.080 License required.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain, or conduct a vehicle for hire service in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapters 5.16 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.090 Fingerprints required for applications for license and work permit—Taxi driver permit issued by San Diego County sheriff’s office acceptable.
A.    The application for a license or a work permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a copy of fingerprints of the applicant. Such fingerprints shall be taken by the police department.

B.     Notwithstanding any of the above, an applicant who has met the requirements of the county of San Diego and is in good standing and holds a valid taxi driver permit issued by the San Diego County sheriff’s office shall be deemed to have complied with all of the requirements of this chapter with respect to a taxi driver’s work permit.

(Ord. 3461 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.100 Condition and cleaning of vehicles.
A.    The operator shall maintain vehicles in such a manner that passengers or pedestrians or vehicles or other property in the vicinity of the operation of such vehicle shall not be exposed to any hazard from defective equipment or malfunction of equipment in or on the vehicle.

B.     The operator shall have each vehicle thoroughly cleaned on the inside once every twenty-four hours. Once each week the inside of each vehicle shall be cleaned with a disinfectant solution.

(Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.110 Taximeters.
A.    All vehicles for hire operating as taxis shall be equipped with taximeters or other measuring instruments for the purpose of gauging or indicating distance traveled or waiting time, or for the purpose of fixing rates to be collected from the public.

B.     The use of any inaccurate taximeter or other measuring instrument is prohibited, and it shall be the duty of the operator of any taxicab to keep the taximeter or other measuring instrument accurate at all times.

C.     Every taximeter or other measuring instrument used for the purpose of gauging or indicating distance traveled or waiting lime, or for the purpose of computing fares to be collected from the public shall be subject to inspection at all times by the chief of police or his authorized representatives. The chief of police may at any time detail police officers to inspect any or all taximeters or other measuring instruments so used when, in his opinion, such instruments are inaccurate. A police officer shall immediately investigate and report to the chief of police upon the complaint of any person that the fare charged is more than the legal fare. The chief of police shall cause the taximeter or other measuring instrument upon the taxicab complained of to be inspected. Any person, firm, or corporation who knowingly maintains any taximeter or other measuring instrument which registers charges in excess of the legal fare, and who collects such fare, shall have the certificate covering such taxicab revoked by the city council.

(Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.120 Limousine—Unauthorized stops.
        It is unlawful for any limousine to stop or otherwise solicit patronage along the route except at the previously established pick-up points. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.130 Limousine—Alteration of route.
        If a limousine operator wishes to alter the approved fixed route, he must apply in writing to the city manager requesting approval to alter the route. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.140 Ordering restoration of service after discontinuance by permittee.
        In the event the service supplied by a permittee operator is discontinued, except for causes beyond the control of such permittee, or in the event such permittee operator fails to operate regularly to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand, the city council may give written notice to such permittee to restore such service or to operate such service regularly and to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand. (Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

 

5.68.150 Revocation—Suspension.
        The following shall constitute just cause for revocation or suspension of a permit for operation of a vehicle for hire:

A.    Revocation of driver’s license;

B.     Failure to operate vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

C.     Operation at a rate of fare other than that approved by the city council;

D.    Suspension of operation for a period of thirty consecutive days without permission of the council;

E.     Conviction of a traffic offense involving reckless or negligent disregard for the safety of others;

F.     A finding by the city council that such revocation or suspension is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of El Cajon.

(Ord. 3361 § 1, 1979.)

 

5.68.160 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

Chapter 5.72 ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO FREE PUBLIC DANCES
5.72.010 Legislative intent.
        It is the intention of the city council in revising this chapter to prescribe the exclusive procedure for the licensing of alcohol and tobacco free public dances. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.1.)

 

5.72.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Alcohol and tobacco free public dance” means any dance not held or given in a private home or residence where alcoholic beverages are not served, sold, consumed or distributed and tobacco products are not sold, used or distributed.

B.     “Department” means the city police department unless otherwise specifically designated.

C.     “Private security officer” means any private security officer licensed by the city.

(Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.2.)

 

5.72.030 License required—License tax—Qualifications for obtaining permit.
        No person shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct an alcohol and tobacco free public dance in the city without first having applied for and secured a license pursuant to Chapter 5.16, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such business provided in this code. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.3.)

 

5.72.040 Classes of permits.
        The department may issue the following classes of alcohol and tobacco free public dance permits:

A.    A class A permit which is issued for a period of one calendar year or portion thereof;

B.     A class B permit which is issued for one day or one night only.

(Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.4.)

 

5.72.050 Work permit required.
        No person shall be employed in the business of conducting an alcohol and tobacco free public dance without having secured a valid work permit from the department pursuant to Chapter 5.20. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.5.)

 

5.72.060 Exceptions to dance permit requirements.
A.    A permit is not required for any agency or department of the city, county, board of education or other political subdivisions of the state which are normally engaged in youth or child-serving activities.

B.     A permit will not be required for a youth dance held in a private home.

C.     A permit will not be required for a private alcohol and tobacco free public dance closed to members of an organization and their invited guests only; provided, the number of guests shall not exceed the number of members present.

(Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.7.)

 

5.72.070 Expiration and renewal of dance permit.
        A permit issued pursuant to Section 5.72.040B shall expire at midnight of the date for which it was issued. Such permit shall not be renewed, but a new application must be filed with the department to obtain a new permit. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.10.)

 

5.72.080 Lighting—Dance halls.
        All places where alcohol and tobacco free public dances are held shall be adequately lighted at all times when open for dancing, and the intensity of illumination shall not be less than one footcandle power in all parts of the building and premises accessible to participants. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.12.)

 

5.72.090 Lighting—Parking area.
        All of the off-street parking facilities available for participants of an alcohol and tobacco free public dance shall be adequately lighted at all times during such dances and thereafter as provided in Section 5.72.120. The intensity of illumination in any event shall be not less than two footcandle power. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.13.)

 

5.72.100 Readmittance of patrons prohibited.
        No minor admitted to an alcohol and tobacco free public dance shall be permitted to leave and thereafter reenter the dancing area during the course of the dance unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.14.)

 

5.72.110 Sale, use or availability of alcoholic beverages, tobacco and electronic vapor device products prohibited.
        Alcoholic beverages, tobacco and electronic vapor device products shall not be sold, used, consumed or distributed on the premises in or about which any alcohol and tobacco free public dance is held. Admission to an alcohol and tobacco free public dance shall be denied to any person showing evidence of being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs or any person who has any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug on his or her person. (Ord. 5010 § 5, 2014.)

 

5.72.120 Closing times.
        All alcohol and tobacco free public dances shall be closed and the building cleared of participants on or before the hour of twelve midnight on Fridays, Saturdays, and evenings preceding holidays and on or before the hour of eleven p.m. on Sundays and holidays, and all teenagers shall be off the premises within one-half hour after the close of such dance. Provided, however, that upon special occasions the closing hour may be extended to one a.m. by the department with the approval of the chief of police. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.16.)

 

5.72.130 Advertising prohibited prior to issuance of permit.
        No alcohol and tobacco free public dance shall be advertised by use of any media of public advertising prior to the issuance of the alcohol and tobacco free public dance permit authorizing such dance. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.20.)

 

5.72.140 Right of entry of law enforcement officers.
        Any officer of the department or any member of the fire department charged with the duty of law enforcement shall have free access at all times to any alcohol and tobacco free public dance issued a permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.21.)

 

5.72.150 Private security officer required—Number.
        The permittee shall employ, and there shall be on duty at all times during any alcohol and tobacco free public dance, at least one private security officer for every one hundred participants, with a minimum of one private security officer for every exit and entrance and one private security officer for every one hundred participants’ vehicles parked in off-street parking lots. All private security officers shall first be approved by the chief of police and have a current work permit. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.22.)

 

5.72.160 Department may make rules and regulations.
        The department is authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 4483, 1995; prior code § 4-41.23.)

 

5.72.170 Public nuisance.
        Any business which is established or maintained in violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4483, 1995; Ord. 4318 § 4, 1991.)

 

5.72.180 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4483, 1995)

 

5.72.190 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4483, 1995)

 

5.72.200 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4483, 1995)

Chapter 5.76 TRAMPOLINE CENTERS
5.76.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Trampoline” means a device of canvas fabric or other material attached to a framework by springs, rubber coils or other elastic material, upon which a person can jump or otherwise perform tricks, stunts or acrobatics.

B.     “Trampoline center” means a place of business open to the public, having as its principal business the offering of the use of trampolines for a period of time for hire.

C.     “Trampoline supervisor” means a person over the age of eighteen years placed in charge of a trampoline center by its owner.

(Prior code § 4-46.)

 

5.76.020 Construction requirements for trampolines—Centers to be adequately lighted.
        All trampolines used in a trampoline center shall at all times be maintained in a good state of repair. The framework of each trampoline shall be completely padded with sufficient padding to provide adequate safety. All trampoline pits shall be on level ground or terraced to provide a minimum level area of at least four feet on both sides and five feet on both ends, measured from the point at which springs are connected to the frame. The trampoline pits shall be a minimum of thirty-nine inches deep at the center and so constructed as to preclude the touching of the bottom while anyone is jumping, bouncing or tumbling upon or otherwise using the trampoline. The ground surrounding a trampoline shall be covered by a minimum of two inches of pea gravel on bare ground or three inches of pea gravel on blacktop or cement. The center of each trampoline shall be clearly marked with a cross or bull’s-eye. Each trampoline center shall be surrounded by a fence of at least five feet in height or by any structure equivalent thereto. All trampoline centers operated after dark shall be adequately lighted. (Prior code § 4-47.)

 

5.76.030 Regulations for use of trampolines.
        No more than one person shall at any time use a trampoline. No person shall use a trampoline in a manner dangerous to others.

 

        No persons shall interfere with the use of a trampoline by another. (Prior code § 4-48.)

 

5.76.040 Supervision—Persons prohibited from use of trampolines.
        A trampoline supervisor shall be on duty at all times in trampoline centers, and all trampolines shall be clearly visible to the supervisor. If the trampoline center contains more than twelve trampolines, there shall be an additional trampoline supervisor for each additional twelve trampolines, or fraction thereof.

        A trampoline supervisor shall not allow any child four years of age or under to use a trampoline unless there is present and observing such child, the parent of such child or a responsible person designated by the parent. The trampoline supervisor shall not allow the use of trampolines by persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-49.)

 

5.76.050 Insurance.
        At all times during the operation of a trampoline center, the owner thereof shall have in full force and effect liability insurance for personal injury in the limits of at least one hundred thousand dollars for any one occurrence, with at least fifty thousand dollars for any one person per occurrence. (Prior code § 4-50.)

Chapter 5.80 BINGO GAMES
5.80.010 Authorization.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution, in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions in the following sections of this chapter, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.020 Definitions.
        Wherever, in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Bingo” is a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.

B.     A “licensee” is a nonprofit, charitable organization to which a license to conduct bingo games has been issued pursuant to this chapter.

C.     “Minor” is any person under the age of eighteen years.

D.    “Authorized organization” is an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701 a, 23701 b, 23701 d, 23701 e, 23701 f, 23701 g and 23701 l, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, a mobile home park association or a senior citizen’s organization; and provided that the proceeds of such games are to be used by such organizations only for charitable purposes.

(Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.030 License—Required.
        It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo game or games in the incorporated area of the city unless such person is a member of, and acting on behalf of, an “authorized organization” as defined in Section 5.80.020, and has a current license issued under this chapter. (Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.040 License—Application.
        Application for a license shall be filed with the finance director not less than twenty days prior to the proposed date of the commencement of holding any bingo game or games. Such application shall include the following:

A.    A list of all members who will operate the bingo game or games, including full names of each member, date of birth, place of birth, physical description, and driver’s license or social security number;

B.     The dates and places of the proposed bingo game or games;

C.     Proof that the organization is an “authorized organization” as defined in Section 5.80.020.

(Ord. 4593 § 1, 1998; Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.050 License—Application—Investigation.
A.    The finance director shall submit each application under this chapter to the chief of police for investigation.

        The chief of police may send copies of such application to any office or department which the chief of police deems essential in order to conduct a proper investigation of the applicant.

        The chief of police and every officer and/or city department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the applicant, and may examine the premises to be used for the bingo game.

B.     Within ten days after the receipt of such application, the chief of police shall file with the city manager a report in writing concerning the result of his investigation. Within three days after receipt of the report, the city manager shall transmit such report to the city council, and shall recommend to the council the approval or denial of the application.

(Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.060 License—Application—Hearing upon denial or conditional approval.
        Upon receipt of the original application and reports from the city manager, the city council shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve said application. If the application is denied or conditionally approved, upon written request of the applicant, the city council shall appoint a time within not less than five days, nor more than thirty days, for a hearing to determine if the license or permit applied for under this chapter shall be issued. (Ord. 4593 § 2, 1998; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.070 License—Application—Grounds for denial or revocation.
        The city council may deny an application for a bingo license, or suspend or revoke a license if it finds the applicant or licensee or any agent or representative, or any member who will operate or staff the game or games has:

A.    Knowingly made any false or misleading statement of a material fact in the application or any record or report required to be filed pursuant to this chapter;

B.     Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;

C.     Been convicted of any provision of state law relating to unlawful gambling or theft.

(Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.080 License—Term—Fees.
        The term of a bingo license is six months. The city manager, or his or her designee, may subsequently renew a bingo license for additional six month periods.

        The fee for an original application shall be fifty dollars. The fee for each renewal shall be ten dollars. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application or renewal and shall be used to defray the cost of issuance of the license. If an application or renewal for a bingo license is denied, one-half of the license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 4593 § 3, 1998: amended 9/12/94; Ord. 3265 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.090 License—Not transferable.
        Each license issued under this chapter shall be issued to a specific authorized organization to conduct a bingo game or games at a specific location, and shall in no event be transferable from one location to another, nor from one organization to another. (Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.100 Limitations.
A.    No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

B.     An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by or whose use is donated to the organization be used or leased exclusively by or donated exclusively to such organization.

C.     All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit, charitable organization.

D.    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such a game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. However, employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game is permitted.

E.     No individual corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.

F.     With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701 d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

        With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

1.     Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

2.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deductions for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel.

G.    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.

H.    The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game or games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.

I.      No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and eight a.m.

J.      Within thirty days after any bingo game is held, the licensee shall file with the chief of police a full and complete financial statement of all moneys collected, disbursed, and the amount remaining for charitable purposes, or if the licensee conducts bingo games on any ongoing basis, the licensee may file such a statement every three months. The financial statement shall also contain a statement that no persons other than those listed on the application for the permit were involved in operating the games. The financial statement shall be sworn under penalty of perjury. The chief of police shall have the power to inspect all books, records and papers of the authorized organization which pertain to the operation of bingo games.

(Ord. 3621 §§ 1—3, 1982; Ord. 3169 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

 

5.80.110 Inspection.
        Any peace officer of the county shall have free access to any place where a bingo game licensed under this chapter is being held. The licensee shall have the bingo license and lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo games, at the site of the bingo game. (Ord. 2993 § 1, 1976.)

Chapter 5.82 MOBILE HOME RENT MEDIATION
5.82.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A.    “Appropriate party” means a resident or owner of the park, located in the city of El Cajon, subject to a rental increase which has been determined by either committee to be unreasonable.

B.     “Cost of living” means an increase in an amount no greater than that of the Consumer Price Index for San Diego, California for all urban consumers, based on the previous one-year period for which data is then available.

C.     “Mobile home park owner committee” is comprised of three owners of mobile home parks located in El Cajon, who are appointed or elected by owners of mobile home parks in El Cajon.

D.    “Mobile home resident committee” is comprised of three persons who are mobile home park residents in the city of El Cajon and who are appointed or elected by mobile home park residents of El Cajon.

E.     “Mobile home resident group” is comprised of persons subject to a proposed rent increase who have filed a petition in accordance with this chapter.

F.     “Owner” means owner of a mobile home park in the city of El Cajon.

G.    “Resident” means mobile home park resident of the city of El Cajon.

H.    “Rent” means the consideration paid for the use or occupancy of a mobile home space, excluding property tax increases, actual charges for consumption of electricity, gas, water, sewer, trash, cable TV, and governmental mandated per-space charges.

(Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.020 Rent increase subject to review—Exemption.
        Only rent increases exceeding the cost of living (excluding property tax increases, actual charges for consumption of electricity, gas, water, sewer, trash, cable TV, and governmental mandated per-space charges) which are proposed to take effect on or after January 1, 1991 shall be subject to this chapter. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.030 Notices.
        Sixty days prior to any increase in rents, the owner shall provide each resident with written notice setting the amount of the proposed increase, the then current rent, and whether or not in the owner’s opinion such increase is exempt from review under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.040 Initiation of rent review.
        Any resident who will be or has been subjected to a proposed rental increase, not exempted by the provisions of Section 5.82.020, may initiate a rent review hearing by filing a petition, within twenty days of notice of rent increase, signed by residents representing fifty percent of the spaces plus one which will be subject to the increase. Such petition must be served by certified mail or personal service upon the mobile home resident committee, the mobile home park owner committee, the city manager and the owner initiating the increase. Personal service on the park manager may be substituted for service on the owner.

        That portion of the requested and noticed rental increase (and only that portion) which is equivalent to the Consumer Price Index shall take effect after the sixty-day notice period has expired. The balance of such rental increase shall become effective (if at all) upon completion of mediation, or ninety days after the initial rental increase notice, whichever is sooner. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.050 Petition contents.
        A petition for rent review must be filed on the form prescribed by the city and must be accompanied by such supporting material as is necessary to clearly support the request. The petition must include names, addresses, and telephone numbers of authorized mobile home resident group representatives. All petitions shall contain the following certification: “I certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.” The petition shall be dated and subscribed by the mobile home resident group representatives, and the place of execution shall be specified. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.060 Initial review.
        Petitions submitted in accordance with this chapter shall be independently reviewed by the mobile home resident committee and by the mobile home park owner committee. Each committee when formed shall provide the names, addresses and phone numbers of committee members to the office of the city manager. Such information shall be updated within fifteen days of any changes in committee members or other information provided. The city manager’s office shall keep such information on file.

        It shall be the responsibility of the above committee to independently review the proposed rent increase and determine whether the increase is reasonable or unreasonable. A brief one-page substantiation of the determination is to be filed with the city manager’s office within fifteen days of service of the petition on such committees. Failure to submit the report shall be deemed a determination that the proposed rent increase is unreasonable.

        If both committees determine that the proposed increase is reasonable, no further action will be necessary. If either committee determines that the increase is unreasonable, an appropriate party may file a request for mediation with the city manager’s office. If no request for mediation is timely filed, the city manager shall report the committee determinations to the city council. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.070 Request for mediation—Fees.
        The request for mediation shall be filed with the city manager’s office within ten days of the final determinations of the mobile home resident and park owner committees. The request shall be on a form prescribed by the city, and shall state that a determination has been made that the proposed rent increase is unreasonable and that the request for mediation is being made by an appropriate party.

        A request for mediation must be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars for the owner and one hundred dollars for the mobile home resident group. The city will pay the balance of the fee for two days’ mediation. The parties shall equally bear mediation costs in excess of two days. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.080 Mediation.
        Upon receipt of a timely filed and completed request for mediation, the city manager shall refer the matter to the American Arbitration Association for mediation. Mediation shall be conducted in accordance with the American Arbitration Association Commercial Mediation Rules with the following exceptions:

A.    Selection of Mediator. The American Arbitration Association shall provide a list of three mediators with background information to the owner (or manager) and the designated mobile home resident group representative(s). Both parties will eliminate names of those mediators which are unacceptable. If none are acceptable, the American Arbitration Association shall provide a second list of three names. Parties will be permitted to eliminate names from the second list only upon factual objections relating to conflicts of interest. Parties will rank the mediators on the second list in order of preference. The American Arbitration Association may appoint anyone on the second list not found by the American Arbitration Association to have an actual conflict of interest.

B.     Secrecy. If no agreement is reached during mediation, the mediator will make a finding that the increase was either reasonable or unreasonable and provide a written statement in support of such finding to the city council.

C.     Attendance. Only the appointed mediator and no more than three representatives each for the mobile home park owners and three representatives each for the mobile home resident group may attend the mediation. Non-participation by one party will not affect the proceedings. The participating parting shall attend the scheduled mediation and present any information.

(Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

 

5.82.090 Completion of mediation.
        Mediation is to be completed no later than thirty days after the request for mediation has been served on the city manager’s office. (Ord. 4267 § 1, 1991.)

Chapter 5.84 ALARM SYSTEMS
5.84.010 Purpose and scope.
        The city council finds and declares that:

A.    Inadequately regulated alarms systems present a growing danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.

B.     The volume and frequency of falsely activated alarm systems is a condition which has persisted so as to become an increasingly hazardous public nuisance and a serious drain upon limited emergency services and equipment needed at other locations.

C.     Every residence and business property is entitled to the safety and protection afforded by local law emergency service.

D.    The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this chapter is declared to be a matter of public policy in the pursuance of security and promoting the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents.

(Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

5.84.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A.    “Agent” means any natural person who is employed or authorized by an alarm business or company to sell, lease, rent, install, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace or remove any alarm system.

B.     “Alarm system” means a device or system of interconnected devices, including hardware and related appurtenances, designed to give warning of fire or activity indicative of criminal conduct or unauthorized entry upon premises protected thereby.

C.     “Alarm system panel” means any machine or device in which two or more separate and distinct alarm systems, as specified in this chapter, may be maintained, controlled, tied-in, accommodated, or monitored.

D.    “Alarm user” means any person on whose property, dwelling, building, structure, residence, motor vehicle, institution or any other facility an alarm system is maintained within the city. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this chapter are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of a fire or an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of alarm system and shall be subject to this chapter.

E.     “Annunciator” means that part of an alarm system which communicates that fact that the system has been triggered.

F.     “Audible annunciator” means an annunciator which gives alarm by means of a bell, siren, buzzer or similar sound-producing device mounted at some location other than entirely within a building, or which, when activated, is clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet or more outside of any building in which it is mounted.

G.    “Chief” means the chief of police or the fire chief of the city.

H.    “Emergency services” means any city departments authorized to respond to an alarm.

I.      “Exempt alarm system” is an alarm system owned, maintained, and monitored by any governmental law enforcement agency in furtherance of law enforcement duties.

J.      “False alarms” means any activation of an alarm system not resulting from fire or criminal activity or unauthorized entry, upon or following which communication is made to emergency services that an alarm has been triggered. If units responding to an alarm and checking the protected premises according to standard emergency services operating procedure are unable to discover any evidence of fire or unauthorized entry or criminal activity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the alarm is false.

K.    “Telephonic alarm system” means any alarm system as specified in this chapter which will activate a prerecorded telephone dialing device programmed to dial a telephone number maintained by emergency service.

L.     “Visual annunciator” means an annunciator installed entirely on the protected premises and which gives inaudible warning by means of a flashing light or other visible signal.

(Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

5.84.030 General provisions and prohibitions.
A.    No alarm system shall be installed, used or maintained in violation of any of the requirements of this code, or of any applicable statute, law or administrative regulation of the United States of America, the state of California, or any administrative rule-making body thereof.

B.     The holder of an alarm system license shall be responsible for training and retraining all employees, family members and other persons who may make regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the normal course of their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger an alarm. Such training shall include procedures and practices to avoid accidental alarms, and steps to follow in the event the system is accidentally triggered.

C.     The holder of an alarm system license shall, at all times, be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the system, and for the repair or replacement of any component, method of installation, design feature, or like condition which may give rise to a false alarm.

D.    On or after sixty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, notification of an unauthorized or illegal entrance by a person into a building, dwelling, structure, residence, motor vehicle, institution, or any other facility containing a security alarm system, shall be made by personnel of the alarm business or company directly to a telephone number maintained by emergency services.

1.     Prerecorded telephonic alarms by means of a programmed automatic dialer shall be prohibited and therefore will not activate a response.

E.     On or after one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in the chapter, no alarm user shall have in operation an audible alarm, unless said alarm shall be capable of terminating its operation within thirty minutes of its activation.

F.     On or after sixty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there shall be prominently displayed upon any building, dwelling, structure, residence, motor vehicle, institution, or any other facility upon or within which an alarm has been installed, the telephone number at which communication may be made with the owner of the premises or the alarm system agency.

G.    Employees of the city emergency services shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm installed in any building, dwelling, structure, residence, motor vehicle, institution or other facility, if said alarm does not terminate its operation within thirty minutes of its activation.

H.    The provisions and prohibitions of this section do not pertain to the following:

        Alarm systems which are not intended or designed to alert directly or indirectly emergency services or others outside the protected building, structure, or facility, but are designed solely to alert security personnel or others directly connected with or employed by the owner or operator of the protected building, structure, or facility.

(Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

5.84.040 License required.
        No alarm user shall have, install, operate or maintain any alarm system without first having applied for and secured a license, paid license taxes as specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and complied with all regulations pertaining to such activity provided in this code. (Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

(Ord. No. 4446, Amended, 7/5/94; ; Ord. No. 4472, Amended, 05/23/95)

 

5.84.050 Permit required for alarm systems.
        Effective January 1, 1978, no alarm user shall have or maintain any alarm system unless a permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the city as provided in this chapter. Where the alarm system is in operation prior to the effective date of this chapter, the alarm user shall be responsible for contacting the city manager and obtaining said permit (Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

5.84.060 Application for permit.
        All applications for permits under this chapter shall be made on a form prescribed by the city manager, and shall contain the following information:

A.    The name, address, and telephone number of the principal of the protected premises;

B.     The type of premises (home, office, variety store, etc.) and any business name by which the premises is known;

C.     The address of the protected premises, including if it is in a residential, commercial or industrial complex (office building, apartment house, shopping center, etc.), and any name by which the complex is commonly known;

D.    The names, addresses and telephone numbers, including home phone numbers, of all agents.

(Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

5.84.065 Alarm permit tax.
        Upon receipt of the permit application and the appropriate tax, the city manager or designee shall issue an alarm permit. The current schedule of taxes shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

 

5.84.070 Permit—Term.
        Each alarm permit shall be valid until revoked or suspended or until there is a significant change in the alarm system or a change in principal for the protected premises. (Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3526 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4446, Renumbered, 07/05/94, 5.84.090; Ord. No. 4446, Renumbered, 07/05/94, 5.84.080)

 

5.84.080 Current information required.
        Within ten days following any change of circumstances which renders obsolete any of the information submitted pursuant to Section 5.84.060, the permittee shall file an amendment to the application setting forth the currently accurate information. (Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

(Ord. No. 4446, Renumbered, 07/05/94)

 

5.84.090 Grounds for suspension.
        The following shall be grounds for suspension of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

A.    Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit application;

B.     Programming of an automatic dialer to select an emergency services line;

C.     Maintenance, installation or use of an alarm system in violation of any applicable law, ordinance or regulation, including the requirements of this chapter;

D.    Failure to provide current information as required by Section 5.84.090, or to post the notice required by subsection F of Section 5.84.030;

E.     Failure to pay the business license tax for a false alarm within ten days of demand.

(Ord. 4103 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3246 § 2, 1978.)

 

(Ord. No. 4446, Rep&ReEn, 7/5/94; Ord. No. 4446, Amended, 7/5/94; Ord. No. 4446, Renumbered, 07/05/94, 5.84.100; Ord. No. 4472, Amended, 5/23/95; Ord. No. 4472, Amended, 05/23/95)

 

5.84.100 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this title is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code.

Chapter 5.88 REPEALED
5.88.010 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.020 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.030 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.040 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.050 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.060 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.100 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.110 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.120 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.130 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

 

5.88.200 Repealed.
(Ord. 3556 § 3, 1981.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Repealed, 07/11/95)

Chapter 5.90 CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION
5.90.010 Purpose.
        The city council finds and declares that:

A.    There exists in the area of solicitations and sales solicitations for charitable and religious purposes a condition which has worked fraud, deceit and imposition upon the people of the city which existing legal remedies are inadequate to correct.

B.     Many solicitations or sales solicitations for charitable and religious purposes have involved situations where funds were solicited from the citizens of this city for such purposes, but an insignificant amount, if any, of the money solicited is actually received by any charity or religion.

        Provisions of this chapter relating to solicitations and sales solicitations for charitable and religious purposes are, therefore, necessary for the public welfare and to safeguard the public against fraud, deceit and imposition. The purpose of this chapter is also to foster and encourage fair solicitation and sales solicitation for charitable and religious purposes wherein the person from whom the money is being solicited knows what portion of the money will actually be utilized for charitable or religious purposes. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.020 License requirement.
        No organization, fund, or religion shall solicit contributions or make sales solicitations for charitable or religious purposes within the city without a license authorizing such solicitation issued by the finance department of the city. Said license shall be valid for the period during which solicitation shall occur, as stated and sworn on license application form, but in no event shall such period extend beyond one year. Said license shall be issued to applicants within a reasonable time from the date of application unless there exist grounds for denial of application as set forth in Section 5.90.080. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.030 Charitable, religious solicitation license application—Investigation.
        An application for license to solicit for charitable and/or religious purposes shall be made to the business license division of the department of finance. The application shall contain the following information:

A.    The name of the soliciting organization;

B.     The address of the soliciting organization headquarters, or if there is no headquarters, of the principal or chief officer of the soliciting organization;

C.     The name and address of the combined campaign, each organization, religion or fund on behalf of which all or any part of the money collected will be utilized for charitable or religious purposes;

D.    The nature of the solicitation (cash donation, donation of tangible goods, sales solicitation), and if sales solicitation, description of item to be sold;

E.     The amount stated as a percentage of the total purchase price or gift which will be used for charitable purposes; if the solicitation is not a sales solicitation, an audited financial statement of such fund-raising expenses may be provided instead;

F.     Proof of the soliciting organization or fund’s status as a nonprofit corporation organized under Division 2 of Title I of the California Corporations Code (Section 5002, et seq.) or a nonprofit association as defined in Section 21000 of the California Corporations Code; if the money or funds are being solicited for organizations or funds other than the soliciting organization, then proof of the nonprofit status of the organizations or funds for which the money is being solicited;

G.    The percentage of the total gift or purchase price which may be deducted as a charitable contribution under both state and federal law;

H.    The name and address of the paid individuals doing actual soliciting in this city;

I.      The dates on or during which solicitation shall occur (The period of solicitation shall not exceed one year.);

J.      The signature and date, under penalty of perjury, of an individual who is a principal, officer, or staff member of the soliciting organization or religion swearing to the truth of the assertions made in the application form.

        The truth of the assertions made in the application shall be subject to investigation by the police department. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.040 Charitable or religious solicitation identification card requirement.
        No individual solicitor shall solicit contributions or make sales solicitations for charitable or religious purposes within the city without an identification card as provided in Section 5.90.050. Said card will be supplied to individual solicitors by, and at the expense of, the soliciting individual, organization, fund, or religion on behalf of which the individual solicits. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.050 Identification card—Information required.
        Any person soliciting contributions and/or making sales solicitations for charitable or religious purposes shall at all times when soliciting display an identification card which shall clearly state on the face thereof the following:

A.    “Solicitation or Sale for Charitable or Religious Purposes Card”;

B.     The name of the soliciting organization;

C.     The name of the combined campaign, organization, fund and/or religion on behalf of which all or any part of money or goods collected will be used for charitable purposes;

D.    Whether the person soliciting is paid or volunteer;

E.     The name and signature of the soliciting individual;

F.     The percentage of the total gift or purchase price that will be used for charitable purposes;

G.    The percentage of the total gift or purchase price which may be deducted as a charitable contribution under federal and state law.

        A volunteer who receives no compensation of any type from, or in connection with, a solicitation by a charitable organization which has qualified for a tax exemption, and who is eighteen years of age or younger, is not required to make any disclosures pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.060 Religious solicitation exempt.
        Solicitations or sales solicitations for religious purposes are exempt from the requirements of this chapter if the solicitations are conducted among the members of the religion for which the solicitations are being made, and if the solicitations are made by other members thereof voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations. Solicitations in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any religion are also exempt. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.070 Conditions for exemption—License tax—Bond.
        A license for solicitation or sales solicitation for charitable or religious purposes, exempt from tax, shall be issued to organizations, funds, and/or religions which show proof of compliance with the requirements of Section 5.04.100. If the license tax is exempted, the requirement for filing of a bond pursuant to Section 5.08.110 is waived. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

 

5.90.080 Grounds for denial or revocation of license.
        Grounds for denial and/or revocation of a charitable or religious solicitation license shall include:

A.    The failure to show proof of nonprofit status of the organization, fund or religion soliciting the money or goods; and/or the failure to show proof of nonprofit status of the organization, fund and/or religion for which the money or goods are being collected if the contributions are being solicited for organizations, etc. other than the soliciting organization;

B.     The misrepresentation of a material fact in the application for a license by an applicant;

C.     The knowing misrepresentation to the public in any way of the purpose of the solicitation by any principal, officer, and/or solicitor of the soliciting organization;

D.    Violation by the soliciting organization, fund, and/or religion of any city ordinance, state or federal law.

        Such denials of applications or revocation of licenses may be appealed according to the procedures outlined in Sections 5.12.040 through 5.12.090 of this code. (Ord. 3889 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3585 § 1, 1982.)

Chapter 5.94 SOUND TRUCKS
5.94.010 Definitions.
A.    “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.

B.     “Sound-amplifying equipment,” as used herein, means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Sound-amplifying equipment, as used herein, shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.

(Ord. 3790 § 1, 1984.)

 

5.94.020 Noncommercial use of sound trucks—Registration required.
        No person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial purposes in the city before filing a registration statement or obtaining a license. The registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following:

A.    Name and home address of the applicant;

B.     Address of place of business of applicant;

C.     License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by applicant;

D.    Name and address of person who owns the sound truck;

E.     Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck;

F.     Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck;

G.    The purpose for which the sound truck will be used;

H.    A general statement as to the section or sections of the city in which the sound truck will be used;

I.      The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck;

J.      The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck;

K.    A general description of the sound amplifier and of each accessory unit to be used with it.

(Ord. 3790 § 1, 1984.)

 

5.94.030 Regulations for use.
        Use of sound trucks in the city with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations:

A.    The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.

B.     Operations are permitted between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m. or after nine p.m. during public events and affairs of interest to the general public.

C.     Sound shall not be issued within one hundred yards of hospitals, schools, churches, or courthouses.

D.    The volume of sound shall be controlled so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility and so that the volume of sound shall not exceed a sound level of sixty-five decibels (on the “A” scale) at a distance of fifty feet from the sound amplifying equipment as measured by a sound level meter which meets Standard No. 5.14 of the U.S.A. Standards Institute.

E.     No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated unless the axis of the center of any sound-reproducing equipment used shall be parallel to the direction of travel of the sound truck; provided, however, that any sound reproducing equipment may be so placed upon said sound truck as to not vary more than fifteen degrees either side of the axis of the center of the direction of travel.

F.     No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be driven on the same street past the same point more than twice in a period of one hour.

(Ord. 3790 § 1, 1984.)

 

5.94.040 Commercial use sound truck regulated—License required.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any sound truck in the city for commercial advertising purposes with sound-amplifying equipment in operation unless an application has been made and a license has been obtained from the license tax collector.

B.     In the event said sound truck is found to be in violation of any regulatory provision contained in Section 5.94.030, said violation shall be cause for revocation of such license.

C.     The license tax or permit fee set forth in Section 5.08.040 shall be paid.

(Ord. 3790 § 1, 1984.)

Chapter 5.98 SPECIAL EVENT SHOWS
5.98.010 Definitions.
A.    Collector’s Show. The term “collector’s show” means any offer, by five or more vendors, to sell to the public goods, wares or merchandise which are mass produced and which are traditional collector’s items. Without limiting the generality of the above, a show may include any of the following: coin show, baseball card show, stamp show, and other shows similarly dedicated to collectible cultural objects other than antiques, vehicles and works of art. Articles abovementioned, when offered for sale in the following settings, shall be deemed to be shows: exhibition, display, exhibit, fair or exposition.

B.     Craft Show. The term “craft show” means any offer to sell to the public goods, wares or merchandise with the implied or express representation that such goods are individually crafted rather than mass produced. Such goods, wares or merchandise may be made by one or more persons, from one or several components; provided, that the final item is finished or enhanced in such a way as to impart its characteristic hand-crafted nature. Such finishing or enhancing of the final item may not, for the purposes of this chapter, occur in a manufacturing setting which employs six or more persons on a full or part-time basis. Without limiting the generality of the above, a show may include any of the following: craft show, bazaar, art show, antique show, and hobby show. Articles abovementioned, when offered for sale in the following settings, shall be deemed to be shows: exhibition, display, exhibit, fair or exposition. For purposes of this chapter, articles more than one hundred years old are assumed to be handcrafted.

C.     Special Event Show. The term “special event show” shall mean both collector’s shows and craft shows unless otherwise indicated.

D.    Sponsor. The term “sponsor” means those organizations or individuals which act on behalf of the vendor(s). As defined herein, a sponsor may be a vendor, an association, or group of vendors, or an entity with no direct connection with the displaying individuals. A sponsor may also include those individuals or organizations that permit said show to operate at a given location, whether by right of ownership, contract, agreement, or default.

E.     Vendor. The term “vendor” means the individual participant in the show who places his or her wares, or a representation of his or her wares, on display with the intent to sell.

(Ord. 4128 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3904 § 1, 1985.)

 

5.98.020 License—Required.
        No vendor shall sell or offer to sell any individually crafted or collector’s goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining the proper license necessary for compliance with the provisions of this or any other chapter of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 4128 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3904 § 1, 1985.)

 

5.98.030 License—Application.
        Application for the license required by Section 5.98.020 shall be filed with the director of finance by the sponsor on behalf of the vendor(s). It is the intent of Chapter 5.98 to license special event vendors through the sponsors of said shows. Any sponsoring individual or organization shall be licensed under the ordinary business license provisions of Title 5 of this code. This section and/or any other portion notwithstanding, sponsors claiming exemption under Chapters 5.04 and/or 5.90 shall make application under the provisions of those chapters. (Ord. 3904 § 1, 1985.)

 

5.98.040 Licenses—Issuance.
        Upon filing by the sponsor, there shall be issued by the director of finance a coupon or series of coupons that shall be deemed to be the license(s) for said show. The fee for the issuance of said license(s) shall be five dollars per day per individual vendor, paid for by the sponsor at the time of application. The sponsor will issue a license coupon to each vendor, except that any vendor qualifying for exemption under Section 5.04.100 or Chapter 5.90 will not be liable for the license fee.

        Each vendor license shall contain the following information:

A.    The name of the sponsor;

B.     The location at which the show is to be held;

C.     Name and signature of the individual vendor, certifying under penalty of perjury the correctness of the information;

D.    Date the show is to be held;

E.     Type of goods offered for sale;

F.     Whether exemption is claimed under Section 5.04.100 or Chapter 5.90.

        The vendor shall keep the license prominently displayed at all times. (Ord. 3904 § 1, 1985.)

 

5.98.050 Term of license.
A.    The vendor shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. The term of the license shall be as defined in Section 5.04.250E. License fees are due for each day during which the show is open to the public.

B.     Vendors (1) holding a valid business license, (2) having a fixed location of business within the city limits, (3) who display their regular business license during the special event show, shall not be required to obtain a special event license.

(Ord. 4128 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3904 § 1, 1985.)

 

5.98.060 Termination procedures.
        Within ten days of the closing of each show, the sponsor shall return to the director of finance copies of the licenses that were issued to each vendor, and any unissued coupons for which a refund is requested. (Ord. 3904 § 1, 1985.)

 

5.98.070 Bond—Exemption.
A.    Special event collector’s show vendors shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 5.08.110 of this code if the sponsor posts a single bond, covering all vendors, in the amount of five thousand dollars.

B.     Special event craft show vendors shall not be required to post any bond.

(Ord. 4128 § 2, 1988.)

TITLE 5 ENDNOTES
 

1.     For statutory provisions authorizing cities to license businesses for purposes of revenue and regulation, see Gov. Code § 37101; for authority for cities to license businesses in the exercise of their powers, see Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 16000-16003.

 

2.     For statutory provisions regarding gaming, see Pen. Code § 330.

 

3.     For statutory provision regarding junk and junkyards, see Bus. & Prof. § 216— et seq.

 

4.     Prior ordinance history; Ord. 2905 § 4 (repealed), Ord. 3063 (repealed). History of repealed ordinances has been retained at the city’s request. Prior code sections, still listed in the various ordinance history notes of Chapter 5.40, have also been repealed.

 

5.     For the statutory authority of cities to regulate street patrol services, see Bus. & Prof. Code § 7523.

 

6.     For statutory provisions allowing local authorities to license and regulate the operation of any vehicles for hire and taxi drivers, see Veh. Code §§ 16501 and 21100; for the provisions regarding financial responsibility requirements for vehicles for hire, see Veh. Code § 16500.

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.08 RABID ANIMALS
Chapter 6.12 DOGS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.16 DOGS—LICENSES AND TAGS
Chapter 6.20 DOGS—IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 6.22 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Chapter 6.24 GUARD DOGS
Chapter 6.26 ENFORCEMENT
TITLE 6 ENDNOTES

Chapter 6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.04.005 Health officer defined.
        For the purposes of this Title, “city health officer”, “public health officer,” and “health officer” means the director of public health and any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the department of public health, or any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the department of public health of the county of San Diego, or any other person contractually designated by the city to perform such duties, and the animal control officers of the city. (Ord. 4031 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3666 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 11, 1982.)

 

6.04.010 Keeping animals or fowl prohibited—Ownership.
        No person shall own, keep, harbor, or maintain livestock, animals, poultry or fowl within the city in violation of the provisions of this code. Any person who keeps, harbors, or maintains livestock, animals, poultry, or fowl for more than thirty-five days shall be deemed the owner and shall comply with all aspects of this code and other applicable laws. (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 4491, 1995; prior code § 5-1.)

 

6.04.015 Keeping, maintaining or feeding animals on public property—Limitation.
        No person shall keep, maintain, or feed domestic or nondomestic animals upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city so as to threaten the public health and safety. (Ord. 4528 § 61, 1997.)

 

6.04.020 Animals running at large.
        No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any horse, mule, jack, cow, hog, sheep, goat or other domestic animal shall permit the same to be at large and not under the control of some person. No person shall picket such animal in such a manner that the animal can go upon or across the traveled portion of the street or otherwise upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds within the city. (Prior code § 5-2.)

 

6.04.030 Keeping pigs prohibited.
        No person shall keep or maintain any hogs, sows, pigs or shoats within the city, unless otherwise provided by Title 17 of this code. (Ord. 4410, 1993; prior code § 5-3.)

 

6.04.035 Maximum number of cats which may be kept in places other than kennels.
        Unless permitted under Section 17.70.040, no person shall keep, house, confine or maintain more than two adult cats in any place in the city, other than in a kennel. Under no circumstances shall a person keep more than three adult cats. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

6.04.040 Manure—Accumulations.
        Refuse, excrement and manure from animals, poultry, fowl or any livestock shall not be permitted to accumulate on any premises in the city for periods in excess of five days and shall be removed from such premises at not less than five-day intervals unless spread upon and buried in the earth.

        This section shall not apply to commercial supplies of fertilizer dealers’ stock; provided, that such supplies are packaged in fly-tight containers, nor shall this section apply to poultry pens or houses where the deep litter process is used within such poultry house or pen. (Ord. 1, 1994; Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 5-4.)

 

6.04.050 Manure—Piling pending removal.
        Pending its removal from the premises, refuse, excrement or manure from animals, poultry, fowl or livestock shall be piled in a well-drained area on a base at least four inches above the surrounding levels, to the end that storm or surface waters will flow away from, rather than into, the pile. (Prior code § 5-5.)

 

6.04.060 Dead animals and fowl to be kept in containers pending removal.
        Dead animals, fowl or poultry, and offal, pending removal from the premises, must be kept in fly-tight containers. (Prior code § 5-6.)

 

6.04.070 Excessive amount of flies.
        Upon inspection, should the public health officer discover flies in unreasonably excessive numbers, the officer shall require further controls through the use of insecticides, chemicals or other means. (Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 2896 § 4, 1975: prior code § 5-7.)

 

6.04.075 Offensive odors.
        Indecent or offensive odors caused by animal excrement or other animal waste shall not be permitted to continue in or about any premises in the city for periods in excess of five days and shall be eliminated from such premises at not less than five-day intervals.

        This section shall not apply to commercial supplies of fertilizer dealers’ stock; provided, that such supplies are packaged in fly-tight containers, nor shall this section apply to poultry pens or houses where the deep litter process is used within such poultry house or pen. (Ord. 4528 § 55, 1997.)

 

6.04.080 Provisions supplementary to other laws.
        The provisions of this title shall be in addition to all other federal, state, or local laws governing or regulating the keeping of animals, poultry, fowl or other livestock and not a limitation thereof. (Ord. 4528 § 56, 1997: prior code § 5-13.)

 

6.04.090 Violations—Nuisance abatement.
        Persons convicted of repeated violations of this title shall be subject to having the conditions constituting such violation abated as a public nuisance. Three or more convictions of violations within one twelve-month period shall be prima facie evidence of a public nuisance subject to abatement resulting in the removal of all animals, poultry, fowl and other livestock from the premises. (Prior code § 5-14.)

 

6.04.100 Wild animals.
        Any nondomestic animal which is wild and potentially dangerous in its natural state shall not be kept within the city without the prior written consent of the city council. Said animal may be transported through the city if it is confined in such a manner as to pose no threat of injury or harm to persons in the city. (Prior code § 5-14.1.)

 

6.04.110 Pet shops—Permit required—Fee.
        A pet shop governed by the California State Retail Food Production and Marketing Establishment Law must have a valid public health permit. Such permit shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in Chapter 8.36 of this code. The fee for each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be set pursuant to city council resolution. Said permit shall be in addition to any other permit or license required by this code and other applicable law. (Ord. 4528 § 57, 1997; Ord. 3714 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 12, 1982.)

 

6.04.114 Kennels—Permit required—Fee.
        Any kennel, as defined in Section 6.12.010 of this chapter, must have a valid public health permit. Such permit shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in Chapter 8.36 of this code. The fee for each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be set pursuant to city council resolution. Said permit shall be in addition to any other permit or license required by this code and other applicable law. Veterinary businesses and small animal hospitals shall be exempt from this section. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

6.04.120 Inhumane treatment and abandonment.
        No person shall treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner or willingly or negligently cause or permit any animal to suffer unnecessary torture or pain. No person shall abandon any domestic animal without care on any public or private property. (Ord. 3991 § 1, 1986.)

 

6.04.125 Noise.
        The keeping of any animal which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort of any person in the vicinity within the city is declared to be a public nuisance. Every person who owns, keeps, maintains or permits to be maintained any animal on any premises within the city, who repeatedly violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter if such person, after having been requested to restrain such animal from creating such a public nuisance, suffers or permits such public nuisance to continue. (Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

6.04.130 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this title is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 7, 1991.)

Chapter 6.08 RABID ANIMALS
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding rabies control, see Health & Safety Code § 1900 et seq.

 

6.08.010 Destruction by health officer.
        If it appears to the city health officer or officer representative, upon an examination, that any dog or other animal has rabies, (s)he shall cause such animal to be destroyed forthwith. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 5-8.)

 

6.08.020 Reporting, confinement, and isolation.
A.    Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the facts immediately to the health officer or officer’s representative. The health officer shall likewise be notified when any person is bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies.

B.     Any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or biting dog or cat shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the health officer. Dogs and cats must be observed for ten days, commencing the day after the occurrence, while other animals must be observed at least fourteen days.

C.     The health officer may approve an alternative to the ten-day isolation for dogs and cats and allow the dog or cat to be observed in strict isolation under proper care by a licensed veterinarian and be released from isolation after a thorough physical examination is completed by the veterinarian on the fifth day or more after the infliction of the bite. The veterinarian must certify that there are no clinical signs or symptoms of the disease. The owner of the dog or cat shall assume any and all charges for this alternative.

(Ord. 4031 § 2, 1987: prior code § 5-9.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.08.030 Confinement and examination of animals which have bitten persons or other animals.
        Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person or animal, or is suspected of having bitten any person or animal the owner or person having custody or possession of such biting dog or other animal shall, upon order of the city health officer, quarantine it and keep it tied up or confined for a period not to exceed fourteen days, and shall allow the health officer or officer’s representative to make an inspection or examination of such dog or other animal at any time during such period; provided, that upon the request of the owner, who shall assume any charges therefor, any dog or other animal with a valid vaccination may be confined by a licensed veterinary for observation, and a written release from such veterinary shall be required.

(Prior code § 5-10.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.08.040 Animals bitten by rabid animals.
        Whenever any animal is bitten by an animal having rabies, the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal so bitten shall immediately notify the health officer and shall restrain or confine such animal so as to make it impossible for such animal to bite any other animal or person.

        The animal shall then be quarantined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a period of six months or destroyed, with the exception that the following alternatives are permitted in the case of dogs or cats as follows:

A.    If a dog over one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within thirty-six months, but not less than thirty days, with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the State Department of Health Services for a maximum immunity duration of at least thirty-six months, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within forty-eight hours) in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Health Services and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a period of thirty days following revaccination.

B.     If a dog under one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within twelve months, but not less than thirty days, with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the State Department of Health Services, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within forty-eight hours) in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Health Services and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a period of thirty days.

C.     If a cat has been vaccinated within one year but not less than thirty days with an annual type feline rabies vaccine, or if a cat has been vaccinated under one year of age with a thirty-six-month type of feline rabies vaccine within twelve months, but not less than thirty days, the cat may be revaccinated immediately (within forty-eight hours) in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Health Services and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a period of thirty days following revaccination.

D.    If a cat over one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies and has been vaccinated within thirty-six months, and more than thirty days, with a thirty-six-month type of feline rabies vaccine, the cat may be revaccinated immediately (within forty-eight hours) in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Health Services and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a thirty-day period following revaccination.

(Ord. 4031 § 2, 1987: prior code § 5-11.)

 

6.08.050 Quarantine by health officer.
        The health officer or representative shall have the power to quarantine any animal bitten or suspected of having been bitten by a rabid animal for a period of six months, or order it destroyed. The city shall be entitled to a fee established by city council resolution from the owner of any animal quarantined, and a further daily sum as may be established by city council resolution for feeding and caring for such animal each day such animal is quarantined. Any fees incurred for veterinary services shall be paid by the owner or authorized custodian.

(Ord. 4031 § 2, 1987: prior code § 5-12.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.08.060 Immunization for dogs over four months.
        All dogs over four months of age shall be immunized against rabies in the manner set forth in Sections 6.08.070 through 6.08.090, and Chapters 6.16 through 6.20. (Ord. 3808 § 4, 1984; Ord. 2836 § 1, 1975: prior code § 5-26.)

 

6.08.070 Immunization method.
        Immunization or vaccination with the canine rabies vaccine, one injection or other approved method, may be performed by the health officer, officer’s representative or any duly qualified, licensed physician or veterinarian. (Prior code § 5-27.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.08.080 Certificates of rabies vaccination—Issuance.
        The person vaccinating each dog described in Section 6.08.060 shall issue a certificate of rabies vaccination. (Prior code § 5-28.)

 

6.08.090 Certificate of vaccination—Prerequisite to issuance of license.
        At the time of issuing the license required under Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20 for all dogs in the city, the license collector or other proper official shall require the applicant for such a license to produce a certificate of rabies vaccination. The validity of such rabies certificate must extend through the license period. (Prior code § 5-29.)

Chapter 6.12 DOGS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Note
*       For statutory provisions regarding regulation and licensing of dogs generally, see Agric. Code § 30501 et seq.; for the statutory authority of cities to impose a dog license tax, see Gov. Code § 38792.

 

6.12.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Dog” means a female as well as a male or neuter dog. A litter of pups less than four months of age shall not be included in computing the number of dogs provided in Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20.

B.     “Kennel” means any lot or parcel or land or place where three or more dogs or cats of four months of age or older are confined, treated, boarded, housed or cared for and also any lot, part of land or place where a person engages in, conducts, manages or maintains a veterinary business, pet shop or small animal hospital, regardless of the number of animals treated, kept, confined, boarded or cared for.

C.     “At large” means whenever a dog is elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or other person having the custody or control of such dog and is not restrained by a leash less than ten feet in length, under the control of a person capable of controlling such dog.

D.    “Cat” means a female, as well as male or neuter cat. A litter of kittens less than four months of age shall not be included in computing the number of cats provided in Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20.

(Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 4031 § 3, 1987; prior code § 5-15.)

 

6.12.020 Running at large—Prohibited generally.
        No dog shall run at large in the city. No person owning or having the control or custody of any dog shall permit or allow such dog to run at large within the city. (Ord. 4031 § 3, 1987: prior code § 5-17.)

 

6.12.030 Running at large—Citizens may capture and notify proper authority.
        A private citizen may capture and hold any dog found running at large in violation of Chapters 6.12 through 6.20. A private citizen who captures and holds any dog found running at large in violation of Chapters 6.12 through 6.20, shall notify the chief of police or other authorized employee who shall see that such dog is picked up and impounded. (Ord. 3808 § 3, 1984: prior code § 5-18.)

 

6.12.040 Maximum number which may be kept in places other than kennels.
        Unless permitted under Section 17.70.040, no person shall keep, house, confine or maintain more than two adult dogs in any place in the city, other than in a kennel. Under no circumstances shall a person keep more than three adult dogs. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 5-19.)

 

6.12.050 Kennels—Compliance with zoning regulations.
        No person shall maintain, have or operate a kennel in or upon any property within the city unless such property is zoned for such purpose. (Prior code § 5-20.)

 

6.12.060 Kennels—Sanitation.
        All kennels shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and shall be sprayed at least once a week with insecticide of sufficient strength to kill flies, fleas, ticks, and other similar insects. (Ord. 4031 § 3, 1987: prior code § 5-21.)

 

6.12.070 Kennels—Compliance with license requirements.
        No person shall keep, conduct or operate any kennel without a license as may be required under this code and other applicable law. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 5-22.)

 

6.12.080 Committing nuisance.
        No person in custody and control of a dog shall allow such dog to defecate or to urinate on public property or any improved private property other than that of the owner or person having control of the dog. It shall be the duty of all persons having control of a dog to curb such dog in order to carry out the intent of this section. The failure to do so or to immediately remove any feces to a proper receptacle constitutes a violation of this section. Unsighted persons while relying on a guide dog shall be exempt from this section. (Ord. 4031 § 3, 1987; Ord. 3991 § 2, 1986: prior code § 5-23.)

 

6.12.090 Entering, swimming in ditches, canals.
        No person shall allow or permit any dog belonging to, or under the control of, such person to enter, swim or remain in any drainage ditch within the city, or in any settling tank, ditch, canal or reservoir within the city. (Prior code § 5-24.)

 

6.12.100 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

6.12.110 Interference with enforcement.
        No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist the public health officer or deputies, the chief of police or deputies, any police officer, or any special officer or designated employee of the city, while engaged in the performance of the duties prescribed by the provisions of Chapters 6.04 through 6.24. (Ord. 3808 § 3, 1984: prior code § 5-16.)

 

6.12.120 Prohibiting interference with dogs utilized by the police department.
        It is unlawful for any person to willfully feed, touch without permission, tease, taunt, torment, strike, kick, mutilate, disable, or otherwise injure, or kill, or to interfere or meddle with any dog while such animal is being utilized by the police department, or any officer or employee thereof, in the performance of any function or duty of the department, or of such officer or employee. (Ord. 3720 § 1, 1983.)

 

6.12.130 Transportation of animals.
        No person shall transport or carry, on any public highway or public roadway, any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cab or container, secured cage, cross-tether, harness, or other device that will prevent the animal from falling from, being thrown from, or jumping from, the motor vehicle. (Ord. 3989 § 1, 1986.)

 

 

6.12.140 Animals in unattended vehicles.
        No person shall leave an animal in any unattended vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal’s health or welfare. (Ord. 4555, 1997; Ord. 3989 § 1, 1986.)

 

6.12.150 Walking licensed dogs on leash prohibited in Superblock, Expanded Civic Center, and Prescott Promenade areas.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to walk, carry, exercise control over or possession in any manner, a dog or dogs, licensed or unlicensed, on a leash or unleashed, at any time within any public facility or upon any public grounds in the Superblock, Expanded Civic Center, Judson Park, and Prescott Promenade areas; the areas being more particularly described as follows:

 

        Lots 1 through 5, inclusive, of Superblock Phase II in the city of El Cajon, county of San Diego, state of California, according to map number 9548, filed in the office of the recorder of said county February 6, 1980.

 

        Together with Lot 1 of El Cajon Civic Center in the city of El Cajon, county of San Diego, state of California, according to map number 8071, filed in the office of the recorder of said county February 14, 1975.

 

        Blocks 4 and 5 of map of El Cajon City, map number 597, filed in the office of the recorder of San Diego County, California, on April 28, 1886, together with that portion of Highland Avenue between Douglas Avenue and Lexington Avenue closed by the El Cajon City Council on February 3, 1987, Resolution No. 46-87.

 

        That certain parcel of land, commonly known as Judson Park and shows as “Park” on the map of Palm Acres in the city of El Cajon, county of San Diego, state of California, according to map number 1716, filed in the office of the county recorder of San Diego County on March 25, 1921.

 

        All publicly owned property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue, including that area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade.

 

B.     This section does not apply to any Seeing-Eye, signal or service dogs accompanied by an owner or trainer as defined by Penal Code Section 365.5.

C.     It is also unlawful for any person to have a dog or dogs in a vehicle within any public facility or upon any public grounds in the Superblock, Expanded Civic Center, and Prescott Promenade areas as described above unless such vehicle is passing through the public parking area.

(Ord. 4750 § 2, 2003; Ord. 4555, 1997.)

Chapter 6.16 DOGS—LICENSES AND TAGS
6.16.010 Required for certain dogs.
        All dogs over the age of four months shall be licensed in accordance with the requirements of Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20. (Ord. 2836 § 1, 1975: prior code § 5-30.)

 

6.16.020 Licenses—Fees.
        Every person owning or harboring a dog over the age of four months shall pay to the license collector or other proper official a license fee in an established amount. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        All fees for the issuance of dog license tags, all fines collected shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be used for those purposes set forth in Section 30652 of the California Food and Agriculture Code. (Ord. 4394, 1993; Ord. 4031 § 4, 1987; Ord. 3250 § 1, 1978; Ord. 2836 § 1, 1975: prior code § 5-31.)

 

6.16.030 Exemption for Seeing Eye dogs.
        No license fee shall be charged for Seeing Eye dogs whose owners are legally blind. (Prior code § 5-31.1.)

 

6.16.040 Expiration date.
        All dog licenses required by this chapter shall expire either one, two or three years from the date of vaccination. (Ord. 4031 § 4, 1987; Ord. 3250 § 1, 1978: prior code § 5-32.)

 

6.16.050 Penalty fee for delinquent renewal.
        If the license required by this chapter is not renewed within sixty days of the date of expiration, there shall be added to such license fee a penalty. The penalty shall be collected at the time of the renewal of said license. The current penalty schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 4394, 1993; Ord. 3250 § 1, 1978: prior code § 5-33.)

 

6.16.060 Tags furnished by collector—Contents.
        The license collector or other proper official shall deliver to the applicant for a dog license, as required under this chapter, a metal tag bearing the number of the license, stamped or engraved thereon, the year of expiration, and the words, “El Cajon, Ca.” (Ord. 4031 § 4, 1987: prior code § 5-34.)

 

6.16.070 Transferability of licenses and license tags.
        No license or license tag issued to one dog under this chapter shall be transferred to another dog. (Prior code § 5-35.)

 

6.16.080 Vaccination tags generally.
        The person vaccinating a dog pursuant to Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20 shall issue an official metal vaccination tag bearing the year such rabies vaccination was administered. (Prior code § 5-36.)

 

6.16.090 Dogs over four months—License and tag requirements.
        Every person who owns, keeps or maintains a dog over the age of four months shall obtain a license tag and a rabies vaccination tag for said dog. These tags shall be securely attached to the collar of the dog and worn at all times. (Ord. 2836 § 1, 1975: prior code § 5-37.)

 

6.16.100 Transfer and change of ownership fees.
A.    A dog license tag issued by any jurisdiction outside the city of El Cajon shall not be considered a valid license without payment of a transfer fee.

B.     New owners of any dog previously licensed in El Cajon shall be responsible for payment of an established change of ownership fee.

 

C.     The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

(Ord. 4394, 1993; prior code § 5-38.)

 

 

 

 

6.16.110 Duplicate tags.
        Duplicate tags, in case of loss, may be issued by the license collector or other proper official. Such tags shall be issued upon payment of an established fee. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Prior code § 5-39.)

 

(Ord. No. 4394, Amended, 03/02/93)

 

6.16.120 Use of tags other than those provided in this chapter.
        No tag or check shall be used on the collar of any dog other than those tags or checks provided for in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-40.)

 

6.16.130 Unauthorized removal of tags, collars.
        No person shall remove the collar or tag or check from any dog without the consent of the owner or the party to whom the license required under this chapter is issued. (Prior code § 5-41.)

Chapter 6.20 DOGS—IMPOUNDMENT
6.20.010 Impoundment duty and authority.
        The chief of police, or designee, and every person employed by the city council for that purpose shall promptly seize, take up and impound all dogs that may be found running at large, harbored or owned contrary to the provisions of this title.

(Prior code § 5-42.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.20.020 Dogs to be placed in comfortable place with food and water.
        All dogs running at large contrary to the provisions of this title shall be taken up and impounded or confined in a safe and comfortable place properly provided with food and water. (Prior code § 5-43.)

 

6.20.030 Notices of impoundment—Required to be given to owners when tags attached to dogs.
        In the event that there is attached to any impounded dog a license tag of the city for the current year, it shall be the duty of the person so designated and employed by the city council for such purpose to give notice of the impounding of such dog to the owner or the person claiming to own such dog, or to the person to whom such tag shall have been issued, as shown by the records of the city. (Prior code § 5-44.)

 

6.20.040 Notices of impoundment—Form—Content.
        The notice provided for in Section 6.20.030 shall be given by mailing to such person owning the impounded dog, postage prepaid, a notice in writing stating the fact that such dog has been impounded. Such notice shall be addressed to such person and address as shown by the city records. (Prior code § 5-45.)

 

6.20.050 Length of confinement—Dogs wearing license tags.
        The person designated and employed by the city council for such purposes shall keep confined as required by this chapter every impounded dog upon which a valid license tag is found for five days, unless such dog is sooner redeemed as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-46.)

 

6.20.060 Length of confinement—Dogs with no valid license tag.
        Every impounded dog upon which no valid license tag is found shall be confined for a period of three days, unless sooner redeemed. (Prior code § 5-47.)

 

6.20.070 Return of Animals to their owners—Microchip fee required.
A.    The owner of an impounded animal not subject to abatement action may claim it prior to other legal disposition by providing legal photo identification, meeting all requirements and paying the applicable redemption fees. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

B.     For each successive impound incident, the owner shall be charged an increased fee. Such increase attaches to the owner and will not be dependent upon the specific animal involved in the incident.

C.     Upon redemption of any lawfully impounded animal found at large and without identification, the department may require the owner to pay for the implantation of microchip identification in addition to other redemption fees. The department retains discretion to waive this requirement if the owner objects to the microchip implantation.

(Ord. 4790 § 2, 2004; Ord. 4031 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3250 § 2, 1978: prior code § 5-48.)

 

(Ord. No. 4394, Amended, 03/02/93)

 

6.20.080 Rabies and license tags to be procured for redeemed dogs.
        Any person redeeming any dog impounded under this chapter shall also procure a rabies tag and license tag, if such tags have not been issued for such dog as provided in Sections 6.08.060 through 6.08.090 and Chapters 6.12 through 6.20. (Prior code § 5-49.)

 

6.20.085 Fee for relinquishment - shelter or field.
        Any person who brings an animal into the shelter for relinquishment shall provide his or her name and address. Owners may also request a field relinquishment for an additional charge and have an animal picked up at the owner’s address. A fee shall be charged for each relinquished animal. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        Relinquished animals may be destroyed or adopted at the discretion of the chief of police or designee. (Ord. 3250 § 3, 1978.)(Ord. No. 4394, Amended, 03/02/93)

 

6.20.090 Disposition of unredeemed dogs.
        Every dog which is not redeemed within the time specified in this chapter shall be disposed of in the manner set forth in this chapter by the chief of police, or designee. (Prior code § 5-50.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.20.100 Killing and disposing of dogs when necessary for public health and safety.
        Each officer and person mentioned in Section 6.20.010 is authorized and empowered to cause the death of such dogs in a painless and humane manner, and to dispose of the bodies in accordance with the regulations of the director of public health, if in the judgment of such officer the same is necessary for the preservation of health and safety in the city. (Prior code § 5-51.)

 

6.20.110 Sale of impounded animals.
        In the event any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter is not claimed by its owner within the time limits specified in this chapter, or is relinquished by its owner or custodian, the officer or person mentioned in Section 6.20.010 may, in lieu of destroying such animal, offer that animal for sale to the general public upon payment of an established fee. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        Sale for experimentation, resale, guard dog, or commercial uses is prohibited. (Ord. 4031 § 5, 1987: prior code § 5-52.)

 

(Ord. No. 4394, Amended, 03/02/93)

 

6.20.120 Redemption of rabid dogs.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as permitting the redemption of any dog having or suspected of having, or found afflicted with, rabies or hydrophobia. (Prior code § 5-53.)

 

6.20.140 Spay or neuter deposit.
        In accordance with the provisions of the California Food and Agriculture Code Section 30503 and 31751, no cat or dog may be adopted unless the animal has actually been spayed or neutered or a spay or neuter deposit has been paid to the shelter. Animals under six months of age must be spayed or neutered within six months of adoption. Animals over six months of age must be spayed or neutered within 60 days of adoption. The amount of such deposit shall be kept on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        Failure of an owner to provide proof of compliance within the established time limits will result in a forfeiture of the deposit. Such forfeiture does not relieve the owner of responsibility to comply with the intent of the legislation and provide proof of compliance or certification from a veterinarian that compliance is not feasible.

        All dog or cat spay or neuter deposits shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be used for those purposes set forth in Sections 30503 and 31751 of the California Food and Agriculture Code. (Ord. No. 4394, Enacted, 03/02/93)

Chapter 6.22 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
6.22.010 Definition of “dangerous animal.”
A.    For the purposes of this chapter, “dangerous animal” means an animal which:

1.     Is owned or harbored for the purpose of fighting; or

2.     Has twice within a forty-eight-month period bitten a person engaged in a lawful activity; or

3.     Has once bitten a person engaged in a lawful activity, causing death or serious injury; or

4.     Has twice within a forty-eight-month period shown the disposition, tendency, or propensity to attack, bite, or otherwise cause injury to a person engaged in a lawful activity; or

5.     Has three times within a forty-eight-month period killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise attacked any animal off the property of the owner or keeper; or

6.     Has twice within a forty-eight-month period killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise attacked any animal, on the property where that animal is kept; or

7.     Has been declared a “dangerous animal” by the chief of police pursuant to Section 6.22.020 of this chapter.

B.     A “serious injury” is defined as any injury which involves the breaking of the skin of the victim, or which requires medical attention.

C.     A “dangerous animal” within the meaning of this section is hereby deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to the provisions of this code relating to dangerous animals and public nuisances for the remainder of its life.

D.    This chapter does not apply to licensed kennels, humane society shelters, Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals shelters, veterinarians, or licensed trainers of guard dogs.

(Ord. 4111 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3991 § 3, 1986; Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.020 Declaration and possession of dangerous animal.
A.    General provisions.

1.     If the chief of police or an authorized representative has cause to believe that an animal is a “dangerous animal” within the meaning of § 6.22.010 A, B, or C, (s)he may find and declare such animal a “dangerous animal.”

2.     Upon finding and declaration that an animal is a “dangerous animal,” the chief or representative shall notify the owner and/or possessor of the finding and declaration.

3.     The notice shall inform the owner and/or possessor of that animal that (s)he may request a hearing within five working days to contest the finding and designation.

4.     Failure of the owner and/or possessor to request a hearing pursuant to subsection 3 shall result in the declaration becoming final.

5.     A finding at the hearing that the animal does fall within subsections A, B, or C of § 6.22.010 shall result in the declaration becoming final.

6.     The chief of police or an authorized representative is hereby authorized and empowered to impound and/or abate any “dangerous animal” independently of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof by any reasonable means necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, the destruction of the animal or by the imposition upon the owner and/or possessor specific reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the animal. The restrictions and conditions may include, but are not limited to:

a.     Obtaining and maintaining liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) and furnishing a certificate or proof of insurance by which the city clerk shall be notified at least ten days prior to cancellation or nonrenewal, or at the owner’s option, the filing with the city clerk of proof of a bond in the amount of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000), to be able to respond in damages;

b.     Requirements as to size, construction and design of enclosure;

c.     Location of the animal’s residence;

d.     Requirements as to type and method of restraints and/or muzzling of the animal;

e.     Photo identification or permanent marking of the animal for purposes of identification;

f.      Payment of a reasonable fee to recover the costs of the city clerk or chief of police or authorized representative in verifying compliance and enforcing the provisions of this section.

        The chief of police or authorized representative may also commence proceedings in accordance with the abatement procedure in § 6.22.060 of this chapter.

B.     Notification of right to hearing.

        At least five working days prior to the impoundment and/or abatement, the owner or custodian of record shall be notified of their right to a hearing to determine whether grounds exist for such impoundment and/or abatement. If a hearing is requested, the impoundment and/or abatement hearing may be held in conjunction with the hearing provided for in subsection A of this section. If the owner or custodian of record requests a hearing prior to impoundment and/or abatement, no impoundment and/or abatement shall take place until the conclusion of the hearing, except as noted in subsection C.

C.     Immediate impoundment.

        When, in the opinion of the chief of police or authorized representative, immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the animal has been impounded under other provisions of this code or state law, the preimpoundment hearing shall be waived; however, the owner or custodian of record shall be given a notice allowing five working days to request an abatement hearing. If requested, a hearing shall be held within five days of the request, and the animal shall not be       disposed of prior to the conclusion of the hearing. If, after five working days, no request for a hearing is received from the owner or custodian of record, the animal in question shall be disposed of under applicable provisions of law.

D.    Change of ownership, custody, and/or residence.

        Owners of a dangerous animal who sell or otherwise transfer the ownership, custody or residence of the animal shall, at least ten days prior to the sale or transfer, inform the chief of police or authorized representative in writing of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, custodian and/or residence, and the name and description of the animal. The owner shall, in addition, notify the new owner or     custodian in writing of the details of the animal’s record, terms and conditions of maintenance, and provide the chief of police or authorized representative with a copy thereof containing an acknowledgment by the new owner or custodian of his/her receipt of the original. The chief of police or authorized representative shall notify the new owner or custodian in writing of any different or additional restrictions or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection A 6 as a result of the change of ownership, custody, or residence.

E.     Possession unlawful.

        It is unlawful to have custody of, own or possess a dangerous animal within the meaning of § 6.22.010 A, B, or C, whether or not the animal has been declared a “dangerous animal” by the chief of police, unless it is restrained, confined, or muzzled so that it cannot bite, attack or cause injury to any person.

F.     Declared dangerous animal.

        It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or possessor of an animal declared dangerous pursuant to subsection A to fail to comply with any requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection A 6. If a declared “dangerous animal” escapes, the owner/possessor shall immediately notify the chief of police and make every reasonable effort to recapture it.

G.    Violation.

        Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. 3991 § 3, 1986; Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96; Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.22.030 Restraint required.
        It is unlawful to own or possess an animal that has been declared a dangerous animal unless the animal is restrained, confined, or muzzled so that it cannot bite, attack, or cause injury to any person. (Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.040 Failure to comply with restrictions and conditions unlawful.
        It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or possessor of an animal declared to be a dangerous animal pursuant to this chapter to fail to comply with the restrictions and conditions imposed by the chief of police pursuant to subsection (A)(6) of Section 6.22.020. (Ord. 3991 § 3, 1986; Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.050 Public protection from animals.
A.    Animal owners shall at all times prevent their animals from biting or harassing any person engaged in a lawful act and from interfering with the lawful use of public or private property. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     Any person owning or having custody or control of a dangerous animal is guilty of a misdemeanor if, as a result of that person’s failure to exercise ordinary care, the animal injures or shows the disposition, tendency, or propensity to attack or cause injury to a person engaged in lawful activity and the owner or custodian knew or should have known of the dangerous nature or propensity of the animal. This section does not apply to animals used in military or police work while they are actually performing in that capacity.

(Ord. 3991 § 3, 1986; Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.060 Violation—Abatement.
        The chief of police or other authorized employee may abate any dangerous animal kept in violation of this chapter by any reasonable means, including, but not limited to:

A.    Impoundment followed by redemption pursuant to Chapter 6.20 of this code, subject to any and all restrictions and conditions imposed by the chief of police pursuant to subsection (A)(6) of Section 6.22.020; or

B.     Killing and disposition pursuant to Section 6.20.100 of this code.

(Ord. 3991 § 3, 1986; Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.070 Notice and hearing prior to abatement.
        At least three business days prior to abatement, the owner and/or possessor of the animal, if known, shall receive actual notice stating:

A.    The fact that the animal will be abated, including the scheduled date and time of abatement;

B.     Whether abatement will be by impoundment or by killing and disposition; and

C.     That the owner and/or possessor has a right to a hearing before the chief of police, or designated representative, to determine if the animal has been kept in violation of this chapter.

        If the owner and/or possessor requests a hearing prior to the scheduled time of abatement, no abatement shall take place until the conclusion of the hearing, except as provided in § 6.22.090. Said hearing shall take place within two business days of the request. If no hearing is requested, abatement may occur at the scheduled time. (Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96; Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

6.22.080 Hearing.
        If a hearing is requested and at the conclusion of the hearing it is found that the animal has been kept in violation of this chapter, abatement may take place as provided in Section 6.22.060. (Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.090 Summary abatement.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the animal control officer, the chief of police, or any officer or employee of the city authorized to act for them, are hereby authorized to summarily abate any animal when necessary for the preservation of the health or safety of the public or the animal. Such abatement may be by any means reasonably necessary, including but not limited to, impoundment or destruction of the animal.

        In such a case, or if impoundment is proper under any other chapter of this code or under state law, no notice or hearing shall be required. (Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.100 Change of ownership.
        Upon a change in the ownership or possession of an animal declared to be a dangerous animal, the police department shall be informed, within ten days of such change, of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner and/or possessor, and the name and description of the animal. The previous owner and/or possessor shall, in addition, notify the new owner and/or possessor in writing of the incidents which caused the animal to be declared a dangerous animal, and any and all restrictions and conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (F) of Section 6.22.020 of this chapter, and shall provide the police department with a copy containing an acknowledgment by the new owner and/or possessor of the receipt of said notification. (Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.110 Violation—Misdemeanor.
        Any owner and/or possessor allowing an animal to be kept in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.22.120 Repealed.
(Ord. 3808 § 1, 1984.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

Chapter 6.24 GUARD DOGS
6.24.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A.    “Guard dog” means:

1.     A “sentry dog” as defined in The Dog Act of 1969 (Health and Safety Code Section 25971).

2.     Any dog furnished for hire for use in guarding, patrolling, or protecting any area, yard, or premises, with or without supervision, to deter or detain unauthorized persons. The term “hire” shall include, but not be limited to, the renting or leasing of the services of a dog with or without a dog handler, or the sale of a dog with an option to repurchase.

B.     “Guard dog operator” means:

1.     A “sentry dog company” as defined in The Dog Act of 1969 (Health and Safety Code Section 25974).

2.     Any person who furnishes a dog for hire for use in guarding, patrolling, or protecting any area, yard, or premises, with or without supervision, to deter or detain unauthorized persons. The term “hire” shall include, but not be limited to, the renting or leasing of the services of a dog with or without a dog handler, or the sale of a dog with an option to repurchase.

C.     “Protection dog” means any attack trained dog, any dog trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any premises, area or yard, or any dog trained to protect, defend, or guard any person or property with or without the necessity of direct human supervision.

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.24.020 General provisions.
        Any guard dog operator, in addition to any requirements of The Dog Act of 1969 (Health and Safety Code Section 25970 et seq.) shall:

A.    Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and permit requirements affecting the keeping of a guard dog and/or the operation of a guard dog business. Upon demand by the city or any law enforcement agency, each guard dog operator must demonstrate compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and permit requirements affecting the keeping of a guard dog and/or the operation of a guard dog business.

B.     Notify the police and fire departments and the animal control services manager, in writing, of the location of the guard dog operator office, base facility, and/or kennel, where any dogs are maintained for any period.

C.     Ensure each dog furnished or assigned to any facility within the city of El Cajon is wearing a city dog license tag before such furnishing or assigning of the dog. This licensing requirement is in addition to the identification tag specified in (D) below. A guard dog operator shall obtain individual dog licenses for each dog, whether or not it is kept in a kennel as defined in this code.

D.    Ensure that each dog is wearing a durable identification tag in addition to a city license tag. The identification tag provided by the guard dog operator shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the guard dog operator furnishing the guard dog. The telephone number provided shall be to a telephone which is answered by a person 24 hours per day every day of the year. In addition, a dog handler shall be available at all times to respond in a timely manner to reports regarding a dog which has escaped, is injured, or presents a risk of harm to animal or public health, safety, or welfare.

E.     Provide positive identification for each dog by an individual tattoo number or implantation of a microchip of a type and in a manner approved by the city. Any tattoo shall be placed on the inside right groin area of the dog. The guard dog operator shall also provide the animal control services manager with a written list of dogs to be assigned to any facility within the city. Such list shall include each dog’s name and description, along with the license and identification numbers.

F.     Notify the police and fire departments and the animal control services manager, in writing, prior to but not more than fifteen (15) days before a dog is sent on an assignment, of the location and the duration of such assignment. In addition, notification of termination shall be provided within fifteen (15) days of the termination of any assignment.

G.    Ensure that dogs working with supervision, in an unfenced area, yard, or premises, be controlled on a leash. Dogs working without supervision shall be confined within a fenced or otherwise enclosed facility not open to the public. The fence or other enclosure shall be of sufficient structural strength and height with locked gates and/or doors to ensure the strict confinement of the dog and to prevent unauthorized access. The fence or other enclosure is subject to inspection and approval by the animal control services manager. The guard dog operator may be required to pay a reasonable fee to recover the costs of such inspection, as may be established by city council resolution from time to time.

        In addition, ensure that each dog, whether or not on duty, is visited at least once every twelve (12) hours and that each dog has adequate food, water and shelter. Any dog that is sick or injured shall be provided proper care and attention and, if on duty, shall be removed from the site. Dogs shall not be kept or maintained on a chain or tether. Dogs shall not be kept or maintained, for any period of time, in an enclosure area with less than twelve feet by five feet (12’ x 5’) floor space or in any enclosure area without adequate ventilation.

        Further, ensure that the dog is not knowingly overworked, or tortured, tormented, neglected, abandoned, deprived of necessary sustenance or care, drink or shelter, beaten, mutilated, or unjustifiably killed. The words “torment” and “torture” include every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted.

H.    Obtain and maintain liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to transact business in California which provides minimum limits of insurance of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for any one loss due to bodily injury or death and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for any one loss due to injury or destruction of property. The guard dog operator shall also furnish the animal control services manager with a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured and providing that in the event of expiration or proposed cancellation of such policy for any reason, the city shall be notified.

I.      Ensure that durable signs of sufficient size containing both a clear pictorial depiction of a guard dog and a legible written warning of the presence of a guard dog are conspicuously posted and maintained at every entrance and at reasonable intervals on the fence or other enclosure where the dog is to be assigned so as to be clearly visible. Signs shall also include the name and telephone number of the guard dog operator furnishing the guard dog. The telephone number provided shall be to a telephone that is answered by a person 24 hours per day every day of the year. In addition, a dog handler shall be available at all times to respond in a timely manner to reports regarding a dog that has escaped, is sick, injured, or presents a risk of harm to animal or public health, safety, or welfare.

J.      Provide a written statement to any person who hires a guard dog, prior to the dog being sent on assignment, containing the following:

 

        “In addition to other provisions of law, any person or business entity with custody of a guard dog is responsible for preventing the dog from being “at large,” within the meaning of the El Cajon Municipal Code, and from attacking or injuring a person engaged in a lawful act. Any person who hires a dog shall immediately notify the guard dog operator and El Cajon Animal Control in the event an escaped dog is not immediately recaptured.

        Chapter 6.08 of the El Cajon Municipal Code provides in part that any person owning or having custody or control of a dog which bites a person shall notify Animal Control as soon as possible thereafter.

        Guard dog operators and the keeping or maintenance of guard dogs are regulated in the City of El Cajon by the Animal Control Division, 1275 North Marshall Avenue, El Cajon, California, 92020.”

 

        The guard dog operator shall also provide the animal control services manager with a copy thereof containing an acknowledgement of receipt, signed and dated by the person who hired the dog. Such acknowledgement shall also include the printed name, address, and telephone number of the guard dog operator and the person who hires the dog.

K.    Transport the dog in a secure, humane manner that will reasonably prevent its possible escape.

L.     Make every reasonable effort to recapture an escaped dog and, if not immediately recaptured, notify El Cajon Animal Control.

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.24.030 Escape of guard dog.
        Any person who hires a guard dog shall immediately notify the guard dog operator and El Cajon Animal Control by telephone in the event an escaped dog is not immediately recaptured.

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.24.040 Sale, transfer or use of dangerous animal as guard dog.
        The sale, transfer, or use as a guard dog of any vicious or dangerous animal as defined in this code is prohibited whether or not the animal has been declared vicious or dangerous pursuant to this code.

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.24.050 Public nuisance.
        Any dog kept in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be impounded and/or abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.22 of this code.

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.24.060 Violation.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city.

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

Chapter 6.26 ENFORCEMENT
6.26.010 Authorization of animal control officers to cite.
        Duly designated animal control officers of the city are hereby authorized to issue citations in the manner set forth in Chapter 5C, Sections 853.6 through 853.8, of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the state, for violations of Title 6 of this code, and violations relating to dogs and cats in the Food and Agriculture Code, Health and Safety Code, and Penal Code of the State of California. (Ord. 4031 § 6, 1987; Ord. 3632 § 1, 1982.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.26.020 Arrest by police department.
        If any person refuses to present identification or sign a written promise to appear to a duly designated animal control officer in the enforcement of Title 6 of this code, said animal control officer shall notify the El Cajon police department, who may arrest said person. (Ord. 3632 § 1, 1982.)

 

(Ord. No. 4503, Enacted, 01/23/96)

 

6.26.030 Violation—Misdemeanor.
        Any owner or possessor allowing a dog to be kept in violation of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code.

        The chief of police, or a representative of the chief, may enter upon any property pursuant to law to ascertain if any of the provisions of this ordinance or any state law relating to the care, treatment or impound of animals is being violated. (Ord. 4031 § 6, 1987.)

TITLE 6 ENDNOTES
 

1.     For statutory provision regarding rabies control, see Health & Safety Code § 1900 et seq.

 

2.     For statutory provisions regarding regulation and licensing of dogs generally, see Agric. Code § 30501 et seq.; for the statutory authority of cities to impose a dog license tax, see Gov. Code § 38792.

Title 7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 7.02 VIDEO FRANCHISES

Chapter 7.02 VIDEO FRANCHISES
7.02.010 Regulation of state video franchises and city video franchises.
        Under state law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) has the authority to grant state video franchises. The city will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (“PEG”) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. The city will retain authority, without change, over all city video franchisees until such time as they no longer hold a valid city franchise, or are no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. The city may continue to grant, modify, renew, extend or terminate city franchises for video service until January 1, 2008. After January 1, 2008, the city may not grant new franchises, but may modify, renew, extend or terminate existing city franchises. For purposes of this chapter, the terms “city video franchise” and “city video franchisee” shall have the same meaning as the terms “city cable franchise” and “city cable franchisee.” (Ord. 4906 § 2, 2007.)

 

7.02.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
A.    For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city, there shall be a fee paid to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.

B.     For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city, there shall be an additional fee paid to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which shall be imposed under the terms and conditions set forth in the Act. This fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law.

C.     Gross revenue, for the purposes of A and B above, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860, as amended from time to time.

(Ord. 4906 § 2, 2007.)

 

7.02.030 Audit authority.
        Not more than once annually, the city manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 7.02.020. (Ord. 4906 § 2, 2007.)

 

7.02.040 Customer service penalties.
A.    The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B.     The city manager or his or her designee shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager or his or her designee will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer and service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each occurrence of the violation.

2.     For a second occurrence of a violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each occurrence of the violation.

3.     For a third or further occurrence of a violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each occurrence of the violation.

C.     A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager or his or her designee to the city council within sixty days of the initial assessment. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, city council will vote to uphold, modify, or vacate the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final.

(Ord. 4906 § 2, 2007.)

 

7.02.050 City response to state video franchise applications.
A.    Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the city clerk, and one complete copy to the city manager.

B.     Within thirty days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise.

(Ord. 4906 § 2, 2007.)

 

7.02.060 Extension of existing city video franchises.
        Any entity providing video service under an expired city video franchise on January 1, 2007, shall have the terms of its city video franchise extended on the same terms and conditions until January 2, 2008. The extension of a city video franchise does not preclude the city from further modifications, renewals, extensions or termination of that city video franchise. (Ord. 4906 § 2, 2007.)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Note
Chapter 8.02 HEALTH SERVICES
Chapter 8.04 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL—BURNING REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.08 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 8.10 RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE EXPENSES
Chapter 8.11 RECOVERY OF SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT POLICE RESPONSE EXPENSES
Chapter 8.12 REGULATION OF PERMANENT AND MOBILE FOOD FACILITIES
Chapter 8.13 FOOD HANDLER TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 8.14 FOOD CATERERS AND CATERING EQUIPMENT RENTALS
Chapter 8.16 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS—MEAT LOCKERS AND REFRIGERATION PLANTS
Chapter 8.20 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS—FOOD HANDLERS
Chapter 8.21 REGULATION OF WHOLESALE FOOD WAREHOUSES
Chapter 8.22 TRASH BINS AND DROP OFF BOXES
Chapter 8.24 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
Chapter 8.26 MEDICAL WASTES
Chapter 8.28 SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 8.30 SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS AND SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
Chapter 8.32 REGULATION OF SMOKING AND SECONDHAND SMOKE IN CERTAIN PUBLIC AREAS AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
Chapter 8.33 LICENSURE OF TOBACCO RETAILERS
Chapter 8.34 REGULATION OF TATTOO BUSINESSES
Chapter 8.36 APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND FEES
Chapter 8.40 RENTAL OF BUILDING USED FOR DRUG ACTIVITY
Chapter 8.44 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED
TITLE 8 ENDNOTES

Note
Editor’s Note: Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.

Chapter 8.02 HEALTH SERVICES
8.02.020 Health service fees and charges—Generally.
        Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, every person applying for any county health permit(s) in the city of El Cajon under the provisions of this title shall at the time of making application for such permit pay a fee, including any late charges or penalties added thereto, which shall be determined by the county of San Diego and kept on record by the county department of health services and on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of El Cajon. (Ord. 4323 § 1, 1992.)

Chapter 8.04 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL—BURNING REGULATIONS
8.04.010 Burning restricted generally.
        A person shall not build, light, maintain or cause or permit to be built, lighted or maintained any open or outdoor fire, use or cause or permit to be used any fire for clearing land, burn or cause or permit to be burned any brush, trash, rubbish, stubble or other flammable or combustible material, except under the following conditions:

A.    Where the burning is done in a gas combustion multiple-chamber incinerator as defined in this chapter;

B.     Where the fire is ignited by or with the prior permission of the city council. Such permission shall be granted only upon a determination that unusual circumstances creating a hardship exist. The fire chief or his representative shall consider each request for a permit prior to consideration by the council and forward such request to the council with his recommendations thereon within five days after the filing of such application;

C.     For the instruction of public employees in the methods of fire fighting;

D.    For the purpose of instruction of private employees in the method of fighting fires;

E.     Where the fire is contained within an exterior fireplace, barbecue device or other burner intended for use for cooking or entertainment. The use of such outdoor fireplaces, barbecues and other similar devices for the burning or disposal of combustible waste or other unwanted combustible material is prohibited.

(Prior code § 12A-1.)

 

8.04.020 Burning on public property—Permit required.
        No person shall ignite or burn any combustible waste matter on any publicly owned or controlled lot or parcel of land, public bridge, street or other public place which has not been set aside by public authority for such purpose without a permit to do so from the city council. (Prior code § 12A-2.)

 

8.04.030 Leaving unattended fire prohibited.
        No person shall leave or cause or permit to be left any outdoor or open fire unattended by an adult person or such person or persons as may be required in permit issued for such fire by the city council. Before leaving any such fire, such person or persons in charge of such fire shall thoroughly extinguish same by completely covering it with dirt, saturating it with water or otherwise treating it in such a manner to prevent rekindling of such fire. (Prior code § 12A-3.)

 

 

8.04.040 Regulations for open fires.
        In connection with open fires permitted pursuant to Section 8.04.010, no person shall cause or allow burning under any such permit if such burning will:

A.    Emit such smoke as will make the detection of other fires difficult and thereby be a hazard to public safety;

B.     Cause fear or panic in any institution or in any place of public assemblage;

C.     Constitute a public nuisance;

D.    Constitute a health menace;

E.     Create offensive smoke or odors.

(Prior code § 12A-4.)

 

8.04.050 Caution required.
        No person shall construct, erect, install, locate, equip, maintain or use any exterior fireplace or barbecue device, or burn any combustible material so as to constitute or occasion a fire hazard by the use or burning thereof or so as to endanger the life or property of any person thereby. (Prior code § 12A-5.)

 

8.04.060 Incinerators.
A.    Multiple-chamber Incinerator Defined. A multiple-chamber incinerator is any incinerator which is approved as such by the San Diego air pollution control district.

B.     Incinerator Construction, Maintenance and Operations. No person shall construct, erect, alter or install any incinerator without first having obtained an appropriate permit or permits for such construction, erection or installation from the building department. Construction, erection or installation of any incinerator shall be made only in accordance with all of the provisions of the code of the city and the San Diego air pollution control district regulations.

C.     Every incinerator and the appurtenant equipment thereof shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and shall be operated in accordance with the approved operating specifications for such equipment. Ashes and other materials shall not be allowed to accumulate in the firebox so as to restrict proper combustion.

D.    No person shall construct, erect, install, locate, equip, maintain or use any incinerator in such a manner that the use for burning is a fire hazard dangerous to life or property. The area adjacent to any incinerator shall be kept clear of rubbish, dry grass, weeds, vegetation or other combustible material.

(Prior code § 12A-6.)

 

8.04.070 Offensive odors or excessive smoke prohibited.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of the code of the city, no person shall at any place or time within the city build, light, maintain, or cause or permit to be built, lighted or maintained, any burning of garbage, hair, rubber, rags, animal waste matter or other materials likely to create offensive odors or excessive smoke. (Prior code § 12A-7.)

 

8.04.080 Permits—Fee.
        A fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of any burning permit. (Prior code § 12A-8.)

 

8.04.090 Permits—Issuance.
        Upon approval of the application for a burning permit by the city council the applicant must pay the required fee to the city clerk. The city clerk shall endorse upon such application the fact that such fee has been paid. The burning permit shall thereafter be issued by the fire chief or his designated representative. (Prior code § 12A-9.)

 

8.04.100 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Chapter 8.08 EMERGENCY SERVICES
8.08.010 Purpose.
        The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Prior code § 8-1.)

 

8.08.020 Emergency defined.
        As used in this chapter “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Prior code § 8-7.)

 

8.08.030 Disaster council—Membership—Officers.
        The El Cajon disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

A.    The mayor, who shall be chairman;

B.     The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman;

C.     The assistant director of emergency services;

D.    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

E.     Such representative of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council.

(Prior code § 8-3.)

 

8.08.040 Disaster council—Powers and duties.
        It shall be the duty of the El Cajon disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. (Prior code § 8-4.)

 

8.08.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services—Offices created.
A.    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

B.     There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director.

(Prior code § 8-5.)

 

8.08.060 Director and assistant director—Powers and duties.
A.    The director is empowered to:

1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2.     Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5.     Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a state-of-war emergency, the director is empowered:

a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee, and in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a state-of-war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

e.     To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by the ordinance codified in this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

B.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

C.     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency program of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director.

(Prior code § 8-6.)

 

8.08.070 Emergency organization.
        All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 8.08.060A6c of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Prior code § 8-7.)

 

8.08.080 Emergency plan.
        The El Cajon disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state-of-war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plans shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 8-8.)

 

8.08.090 Expenditures.
        Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 8-9.)

 

8.08.100 Punishment of violations.
        It shall be a misdemeanor for any person during an emergency to:

A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter;

B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.     Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.

(Ord. 3647 § 6, 1983: prior code § 8-10.)

Chapter 8.10 RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE EXPENSES
8.10.010 Purpose.
        The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for the recovery of expenses incurred during emergency responses. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.020 Definitions generally.
        For the purpose of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein, certain words, phrases and terms, and their derivatives, shall be construed as specified in this chapter. Words, phrases and terms used in this chapter, but not specifically defined herein, shall have the meanings stated therefor in the California Health and Safety Code. Where not defined in this chapter or elsewhere in the El Cajon Municipal Code, or in the California Health and Safety Code, such words, phrases and terms shall have the meanings stated therefor in Webster’s New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, Third Edition. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.030 Terms defined.
A.    “False alarm” means the intentional and willful report of an emergency or triggering of an alarm knowing there is no emergency. Alarm system malfunctions causing alarms are subject to the provisions of Chapter 5.84 and Section 5.08.280 of this code, and are not intended to be covered by this chapter.

B.     “Flammable material” means any material which constitutes a flammable material pursuant to the currently adopted Uniform Fire Code, which has been adopted by reference, with certain exceptions, by the city.

C.     “Hazardous substance” means any hazardous substance listed in Section 25316 of the California Health and Safety Code or in Section 6383 of the California Labor Code.

D.    “Hazardous waste” means any waste or combination of wastes that would constitute a hazardous waste pursuant to Section 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code, including an “extremely hazardous waste” as defined in Section 25115 of the Health and Safety Code.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.040 Emergency response costs—Cause of emergency condition.
        Those expenses of an emergency response action necessary to protect the public health or safety, or for the control and extinguishment of fire, or to prevent a substantial danger to domestic livestock, wildlife or the environment, incurred by officers or employees of the city to suppress, confine, prevent or mitigate the release, escape or burning of any hazardous substance, hazardous waste, or flammable material, are a charge against any person responsible for or causing the emergency conditions. The charge created against the person by this section is also a charge against the person’s employer, if the cause of the emergency condition occurs in the course of the person’s employment. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.050 Emergency response costs—Violation of law or notice.
        Those expenses of an emergency response action necessary to protect the public health or safety, or for the control and extinguishment of fire, or to prevent a substantial danger to domestic livestock, wildlife or the environment, incurred by officers or employees of the city to suppress, confine, prevent or mitigate the release, escape or burning of any hazardous substance, hazardous waste, or flammable material, are a charge against any person who causes such emergency conditions by violating or being in violation of any law or notice relating to the generation, transportation, treatment, storage, recycling, disposal or handling of such hazardous substance, hazardous waste or flammable material, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapters 6.5 to 6.7 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, or any permit, rule, regulation, standard or requirement issued or adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.060 Expenses collectible.
        Expenses reimbursable to the city pursuant to this chapter are a debt of the person or persons liable therefor, and shall be collectible as a lien or assessment on the subject property or pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.070 Expenses reimbursable.
        Expenses reimbursable to the city pursuant to this chapter include, but are not limited to, personnel costs, costs of equipment usage, the cost of supplies, contract service costs, administrative and overhead costs, and the cost of legal services incurred in the emergency response action, whether such action taken is in response to an actual emergency or to a false alarm. Actions which may be taken in an emergency response action include, but are not limited to, prevention, suppression, providing rescue or emergency medical services, extinguishment, abatement, removal, disposal, cleanup, mitigation, transportation, temporary storage, investigation, preparation of any reports and all activities reasonably related thereto, including testing, sampling and staff work necessary to assess, evaluate and characterize the emergency condition and to formulate appropriate plans for corrective actions. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.080 Cost of work to be charged to person responsible—Billing of person.
A.    Whenever emergency response expenses have been incurred by the city for the purposes specified in Sections 8.10.040 or 8.10.050 of this chapter, the fire chief shall prepare a report of the proceedings and an account of the costs to be filed with the city clerk. If such costs are for fire suppression (or emergency rescue or services related to fire suppression), the costs shall be set out separately to enable accurate billing. The city clerk shall then bill the person, or his agent, by mail for the costs of the emergency response and for any administrative costs as described in Section 8.10.070. The bill shall apprise the person that failure to pay the bill may result in a lien against his/her property and/or a joint and separate personal obligation.

B.     Not all emergency responses may result in a lien. Any costs incurred as a result of any person who negligently, or in violation of the law, (1) sets a fire, (2) allows a fire to be set, or (3) allows a fire kindled or attended by him/her to escape onto any public or private property shall constitute a personal obligation of that person, and is collectible in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.090 Noncompliance with notice—Notice of intent to lien.
A.    Within ninety days of completion of emergency services performed pursuant to this chapter or within ninety days of the failure, neglect or refusal of the owner(s) of the subject property to make payment within thirty days (as provided in Section 8.10.130) of the costs of emergency services rendered, the city clerk shall cause to be recorded with the county recorder a “notice of intent to lien,” in substantially the following form:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENT TO LIEN

 

        The following person(s) [list name(s)] have been determined responsible for the cause of an emergency condition requiring emergency response services on the below identified property pursuant to Chapter 8.08 of the El Cajon Municipal Code:

 

        [legal description]

 

        The City of El Cajon has caused certain work to be performed upon the property and pursuant to Chapter 8.10 will charge the expense of said work to the following property or person(s):

        [insert the above legally described property, if the owner is the person responsible for the emergency condition; insert the legal description of other property owned by the responsible person if such person is not the owner of the property requiring an emergency response; insert the name of the responsible person if there is no property owned by such person which can be charged.]

        The emergency services were performed on [insert date or dates] by [insert the name of the persons or organizations who performed the services]. The lawful and reasonable expense claimed for such services is [insert total cost of services rendered]. Failure of said owner(s) to pay such expense will result in a lien on said property.

 

        Dated:_______________

 

        CITY OF EL CAJON

 

        By_______________

        Fire Chief”

 

B.     The fire chief shall sign and verify a declaration by oath to the effect that the affiant believes the lien claimed is just.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.100 Lien—Notice and service.
        The notice of intent to lien pursuant to this chapter shall give notice to the owner that a lien for the costs of emergency services may be claimed. Service of the notice shall be made upon all persons identified in the notice either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the address of any such person cannot reasonably be ascertained, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to such person at the address of the location of the violation. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section shall be effective on the date of postmark. The notice shall also be posted on the subject property. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.110 Lien and personal obligation.
A.    Except as preempted by state law, the city shall have a lien for the cost of any emergency services performed pursuant to this code against the real property on which the emergency services were rendered if the owner of such property was responsible for causing the emergency condition, or against any other real property within the jurisdiction of the city which is owned by the person responsible for causing the emergency condition.

B.     The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it shall be on a parity.

C.     The costs of emergency services are also joint and separate personal obligations of any person in violation. The city attorney may collect the costs by use of all appropriate legal remedies.

D.    The lien and/or personal obligation provided by this section may be foreclosed and enforced by a civil action in a court having jurisdiction.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.120 Recording.
        The San Diego County recorder’s office shall record and index the notices of intent to lien described in this chapter. No lien created by this chapter binds the property subject to the lien for a period longer than three years after the notice of intent to lien has been filed, unless an action is commenced in the proper court within that time to enforce the lien. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.130 Time of hearing upon failure of owner of land to pay costs.
        Where the full amount due is not paid by such person within thirty days after the date of billing, the city clerk shall set the report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after such thirty-day period has expired. The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and account, and a notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the council chambers. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.140 Hearing—Council confirmation or modification.
A.    The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by interested parties. Any person affected by the proposed charge may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision of the city council on the report and the charge and on all protests or objections shall be final and conclusive.

1.     In the case of a person responsible for the emergency conditions on his/her own property, the amounts so approved shall be charged to the person on the next regular tax bill and shall be a lien upon the property involved.

2.     In the case of a person responsible for the emergency conditions on another’s property, when such responsible person owns other property within the taxing power of the city the amounts so approved shall be charged to the person on the next regular tax bill and shall be a lien upon any property so owned.

3.     In the case of a person responsible for the emergency conditions on another’s property, when such responsible person owns no other property within the taxing power of the city the amounts so approved shall be charged to the person as a lien, personal obligation or in accordance with other procedures specified in this code.

4.     In all cases involving the costs of fire suppression, including costs of rescue or emergency services related to such fire suppression, the amounts so approved shall be charged to the person as a personal obligation.

B.     The city council shall confirm such assessment, if applicable, and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.150 Time for accepting payment.
        The city finance department may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council hearing called for in Section 8.10.140. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.160 Certain costs or assessments paid in installments.
        The city council, in its discretion, may determine that costs or assessments in amounts of five hundred dollars or more shall be payable in not to exceed five equal annual installments. The council’s determination to allow payment of such costs or assessments in installments, the number of installments, whether they shall bear interest and the rate thereof shall be by a resolution. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.170 Interest on unpaid costs or assessments.
        All costs or assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the costs or assessments by the city council shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.180 Administrative fees.
A.    The person or business determined to be the responsible party for the emergency conditions shall be charged an administrative fee to cover costs incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk and shall be in such amount as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.190 Enforcement.
        If, after the hearing by the city council pursuant to Section 8.10.140, the person charged with payment of emergency service costs fails, neglects or refuses to pay such costs, the city clerk may:

A.    Refer the matter to the city attorney for prosecution under the provisions of this chapter; and/or

B.     Institute any appropriate action to collect the costs of emergency services assessed under this chapter; and/or

C.     Pursue any other appropriate remedy at law or equity.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.200 Alternative recovery rights.
A.    In addition to its rights to cost recovery under this chapter, the city shall retain the alternative rights to recover its costs by way of the city’s nuisance abatement procedure (Chapter 1.16 of this code), or by civil action.

B.     Nothing in this chapter is intended to conflict with the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section 13009. Where such conflict occurs, the collection of costs shall be in accordance with state law.

(Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.210 Authority to designate another body to recover costs.
        The city may authorize the Unified San Diego County Emergency Services Organization or other designated body to recover costs incurred under this chapter for and on behalf of the city. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

 

8.10.220 Severability.
        If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 4106 § 1, 1988.)

Chapter 8.11 RECOVERY OF SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT POLICE RESPONSE EXPENSES
8.11.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Party, gathering or event” is a group of individuals who have assembled or are assembling on private property for a social occasion or social activity.

B.     “Person responsible for the event” is the person who owns the property upon which the party, gathering or event takes place and/or the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the party, gathering or event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the minor’s parents or guardians will jointly and severally be liable for the costs of police services.

C.     “Police services” include the salaries of the police officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, handling all associated duties, or in remaining at the party, gathering or event at a rate established by the city manager; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property.

D.    “Special security assignment” is the assignment of police officers and services during the second or subsequent call to a location after the distribution of a written warning that the party, gathering or event violates the law.

(Ord. 4199 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.11.020 Notice of violation—First response.
        During a first response to a complaint of a disturbance at a party, gathering or event, the responding officer may, among other things, deliver to the responsible person a “Notice of Violation: First Response” which shall contain a message substantially as follows:

 

        “This notice of violation is given to you as a result of a first response by the City of El Cajon to a disturbance of the peace occurring on these premises:

 

        [insert address of premises]

 

        You will be charged all City personnel and equipment costs incurred as a result of any second or subsequent response by the police to this location.”

 

        The notice may also contain such other information as deemed necessary by the city manager to accomplish the purposes of this section. (Ord. 4199 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.11.030 Liability for second or subsequent response.
        When a party, gathering or event occurs on private property and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person(s) responsible for the event will be held liable for the cost of providing police services for the special security assignment during a second or subsequent response by the police after the first warning, to control the threat to the public, health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 4199 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.11.040 Police service fee.
        The police service shall include the cost of personnel and support, equipment damages, and cost of injuries to officers. The fee shall be no less than and shall not exceed the cost of police officers for a single event. The amount of such fees charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person or persons receiving said services and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorneys fees. In addition to the cost recovery procedure under this chapter, the city shall retain the alterative right to recover its costs through the city’s nuisance abatement procedure, or through civil action. (Ord. 4199 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.11.050 Billing.
        The chief of police shall notify the director of finance in writing, following the rendering of police services, of the names and address of the person responsible for the event, the date and time of the event, the services performed and the costs thereof, and such other information as may be required. The director of finance shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made. (Ord. 4199 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.11.060 Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by any decision of the chief of police to bill for police services rendered may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the date of the billing. Upon the filing of such request, the city clerk shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the appeal is filed. At the hearing any person may present evidence in opposition to or in support of the appellant’s case. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either grant or deny the appeal and the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 4199 § 1, 1989.)

Chapter 8.12 REGULATION OF PERMANENT AND MOBILE FOOD FACILITIES
8.12.010 Adoption of County ordinance by reference.
        The provisions of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permanent and mobile food facilities, at Title 6, Division 1 of the County Code, are incorporated into this Code by reference. (Ord. 4981 § 3, 2012)

 

8.12.020 Requirement of County fee.
        All persons and businesses required to obtain a health-related permit or related service from the County of San Diego, Department of Environmental Health (DEH) pursuant to this code shall pay the County the fee established in the County Code for that permit or service, including delinquent payment fees. (Ord. 4981 § 3, 2012)

Chapter 8.13 FOOD HANDLER TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
8.13.010 Adoption of Sections 61.204, 61.205 and 61.206 of the San Diego County Code.
        Sections 61.204, 61.205 and 61.206 of the San Diego County Code are incorporated in this section, to read as follows:

 

        “Sec. 61.204. FOOD SERVICE MANAGER. For the purposes of this Chapter, “FOOD SERVICE MANAGER” shall mean the owner, operator, licensee, or any other person who supervises all or part of food service operations within a food service establishment and is responsible for the actions of employees under his or her charge.

 

        “Sec. 61.205. FOOD HANDLER TRAINING. No person shall act as or be engaged as a food handler unless such person: (1) possesses a valid Food Handler Training Certificate as described in subdivision (a) of this Section, or (2) is working in an establishment under the supervision of a food service manager possessing a Food Service Manager Training Certificate as described in subdivision (b) of this Section, and possesses a Food Handler Card as described in subdivision (c) of this Section; provided, however, that a person may act as or be engaged as a food handler under the supervision of such a food service manager for up to ten (10) calendar days without a Food Handler Card.

        “(a) Food Handler Training Certificate. Food Handler Training Certificates or renewals thereof shall be issued by the Health Officer, or any other qualified person or agency as may be designated by the Health Officer, to persons who, immediately preceding such issuance, have successfully completed a food sanitation training course having a duration of at least three (3) hours, taught by an instructor approved by the Health Officer, and having a course content approved by the Health Officer. In order to successfully complete said course, a person must pass a proficiency test, approved by the Health Officer, with at least a 70% grade. The course of instruction shall include at least the following subjects:

        “(1) Microorganisms;

        “(2) Sources of foodborne disease microorganisms;

        “(3) Foodborne diseases;

        “(4) The means by which food is contaminated by microorganisms and toxic substances;

        “(5) Methods for protection of food to prevent foodborne illnesses;

        “(6) Control of the spread of disease through food;

        “(7) Personal hygiene for food handlers;

        “(8) The role of utensils and equipment in the transmission of diseases; and

        “(9) Dishwashing procedures.

        The Health Officer’s designation of persons or agencies to issue Food Handler Training Certificates and the Health Officer’s approval of instructors and course contents may be withdrawn by the Health Officer at any time. The Food Handler Training Certificate shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance.

        “(b) Food Service Manager Training Certificate. A Food Service Manager Training Certificate shall be issued by the Health Officer, or by a person or agency authorized by the

 

Health Officer, to any person who has (1) attended a food service manager’s training course, having a duration of at least 16 hours, taught by an instructor approved by the Health Officer, and (2) has passed a proficiency test, approved by the Health Officer, with at least a 70% grade. The course of instruction shall include at least the following subjects:

        “(1) Microbiology of foodborne disease;

        “(2) Methods of preventing foodborne diseases;

        “(3) Personal sanitation practices;

        “(4) Warewashing and sanitizing;

        “(5) Housekeeping and waste disposal practices;

        “(6) Food purchasing, transportation, receiving and storage;

        “(7) Food preparation and use;

        “(8) Sanitation of kitchens;

        “(9) Dining service;

        “(10) Legal regulations of the food industry; and

        “(11) Sanitation and safety management.

A Food Service Manager Training Certificate may also be issued to persons with any one of the following combinations of academic preparation and work experience, providing they pass the proficiency test specified above with at least an 85% grade:

        “A) A baccalaureate degree with at least a minor in food service occupations, environmental sanitation, biological sciences, hospitality services or related subjects and at least two years of occupational experience in said fields; or

        “B) An associate degree of 60 semester units of course work in food service occupations, environmental sanitation, biological sciences, hospitality services or related subjects and at least four years of occupational experience in said fields; or

        “C) A high school diploma or its equivalent or evidence of successful completion of secondary education and at least six years of occupational experience in the food service field. A Food Service Manager Training Certificate may be issued by the Health Officer to any person possessing formal education and practical experience in the application of food sanitation principles determined by the Health Officer to be equivalent to the formal education and practical experience to that of a registered sanitarian with ten (10) years experience in food sanitation.

        “The Health Officer’s designation of persons or agencies to issue Food Service Manager Training Certificates and the Health Officer’s approval of instructors course contents and proficiency tests may be withdrawn by the Health Officer at any time. The Food Service Manager Training Certificate shall not expire by passage of time.

        “(c) Food Handler Card. A Food Handler Card or a renewal thereof, in a form prescribed by the Health Officer, may be issued by a food service manager possessing a Food Service Manager Training Certificate to food handlers under the manager’s supervision, provided said food handlers pass a test relating to fundamental principles of sanitary food services practices, with at least a 70% grade. Said test shall be prepared by the Health Officer based on information contained in an informational booklet on sanitary food practices, which shall also be prepared by the Health Officer and which shall be distributed at cost by the Health Officer. Test records and records of the duration of the food handler’s employment, including the date that the food handler began to perform food handling services, shall be maintained on the premises where the food handler is performing such services. The Food Handler Card shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance, or until the food handler’s performance of food handling services at the establishment where the Card was issued ceases, or until the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date that the establishment ceases to have a food service manager possessing a Food Service Manager Training Certificate to supervise the food handler, whichever occurs the earliest.

 

        “Sec. 61.206. EMPLOYMENT OF FOOD HANDLERS. No person who owns or operates a business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Chapter 1 of Division 1 of this Title 6 shall permit or authorize any person to act as or be engaged as a food handler in said business, occupation or establishment unless such person is legally permitted to act as or be engaged as a food handler pursuant to Section 61.205.”

 

(Ord. 3515 § 4, 1981.)

Chapter 8.14 FOOD CATERERS AND CATERING EQUIPMENT RENTALS
8.14.010 Adoption of Sections 61.190 through 61.197 of Article 7, Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code.
        Sections 61.190 through 61.197 of Article 7, Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code are hereby incorporated in this chapter, to read as follows:

 

        “Sec. 61.190. DEFINITIONS. Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

        (a) CATERER. A business which prepares food for a catering function for events such as, but not limited to, picnics, weddings, banquets, parties, gatherings.

        (b) CATERING VEHICLE. A vehicle upon which food, beverages and related serving equipment are transported related to a catering function.

        (c) CATERING FUNCTION. Any event where a caterer provides food for a person or persons at other than an existing health regulated establishment. A catering function shall not include those functions that are conducted by persons engaged or employed in youth organizations, churches, church societies, private clubs or other nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic improvement, youth development, social, political, or educational nature which purchase food, food products, or beverages, for service without charge to their members, or for service or sale at a reasonable charge to their members or to the general public at fundraising events, for consumption on or off the premises at which the food, food products, or beverages are served or sold, if the service or sale of such food, food products or beverages does not constitute a primary purpose or function of the club or association, and if no employee or member is assigned full-time to care for or operate equipment used in such an arrangement.

        (d) CATERING EQUIPMENT RENTAL ESTABLISHMENT. A catering equipment rental establishment is an establishment that provides food service utensils, such as dishes, tableware, pots and pans, to caterers or to the public, but does not provide catering services.

        (e) DEPARTMENT. THE SAN DIEGO DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES.

 

        Sec. 61.191. APPLICATION OF ORDINANCES. The provisions of Division 1, Title 6 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances and the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL) relative to food handler training and the preparation and distribution of food apply to caterers and caterer operations.

 

        Sec. 61.192. HEALTH PERMITS AND FEES.

        Persons operating as caterers and catering equipment rental establishments are considered to be operating a health regulated establishment, and are subject to public health permit requirements as specified in Sec. 61.110 of this Code. Such persons shall pay the permit fees prescribed for restaurants in Sec. 65.107 (a) of this Code and shall be subject to penalties for delinquent fee payment as set forth in Sections 65.104 and 65.105 of this Code.

 

        Sec. 61.193. NOTIFICATION OF CATERING EVENTS. When requested by the Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services, caterers shall notify the Department of the time, date and location of each catering function in a manner specified by the Department.

 

        Sec. 61.194. POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS. All potentially hazardous foods as defined in Sec. 27531 of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law that are stored, held, transported or served by a caterer must be protected from contamination and kept at temperatures as required by California State law.

 

        Sec. 61.195. TOILET FACILITIES. Adequate toilet and handwashing facilities, as determined by the Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services, must be reasonably available in the vicinity of any location where food is prepared or served.

 

        Sec. 61.196. CATERING VEHICLES. No person or company shall operate or cause to be operated, a catering vehicle without complying with the following:

        (a) Such person or company shall have a valid health permit as required in Sec. 61.192 of this code.

        (b) Foods and food contains shall be carried in compartments with cleanable interior surfaces.

        (c) Vehicles shall be maintained in a clean condition.

 

        Sec. 61.197. CATERING EQUIPMENT RENTAL ESTABLISHMENT. No person or company shall operate or cause to be operated, a catering equipment rental establishment without complying with the following:

        (a) All food service equipment shall be stored in a building that meets the requirements of the California State law.

        (b) All food service equipment, such as dishes, glasses, tableware, pots and pans, shall be cleaned and sanitized by methods prescribed in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law.”

 

(Ord. 4117 §§ 1, 2, 1988.)

Chapter 8.16 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS—MEAT LOCKERS AND REFRIGERATION PLANTS
8.16.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Refrigeration permit” and “locker plant” includes any plant required to obtain a permit under this chapter.

B.     “City health officer” and “health officer” means the director of public health and any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the department of public health.

(Ord. 3637 § 4, 1982: prior code § 13-2.)

 

8.16.020 Permit required—Application—Fees.
        No person shall operate, maintain or keep in the city any facility or equipment used for the following purposes without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city health officer:

A.    The refrigerated storage, for compensation, of meat not owned by the person maintaining the refrigeration equipment;

B.     The sale of frozen meat at wholesale or retail.

        Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall make application therefor as prescribed in Chapter 8.36 of this code, and shall, at the time of making application, pay the fee pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 3714 § 6, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 5, 1982: prior code § 13-3.)

 

8.16.030 Permits—Penalties for delinquent applications.
        The penalties for delinquent applications for a permit required by this chapter shall be those prescribed by Sections 8.36.040 and 8.36.050 of this code. (Ord. 3637 § 6, 1982: prior code § 13-5.)

 

8.16.050 Permits—Revocation.
        Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city health officer upon proof of violation by the permittee of any provision of state law or this code, any other city ordinance or rule of the city health officer, pertaining to health or sanitation. (Prior code § 13-7.)

 

8.16.060 Plants to be maintained in clean and sanitary manner.
        Every refrigeration plant for which a permit is required under this chapter, where meat is stored, shall be maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary manner. (Prior code § 13-8.)

 

8.16.070 Plants to be open to inspection by health officer.
        Every plant for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be open at all times to inspection by the city health officer. (Prior code § 13-9.)

 

8.16.080 Marking uninspected meat—Beef, veal and lamb.
        All uninspected beef, veal or lamb kept or placed in any refrigeration plant shall be stamped immediately upon arrival with a roller stamp so as to be legibly marked “Uninspected Meat—Not for Sale.” (Prior code § 13-10.)

 

8.16.090 Marking uninspected meat—Pork.
        All uninspected pork kept or placed in any refrigeration plant shall be stamped immediately upon arrival with a hot stamp so as to be legibly marked “Uninspected Meat—Not for Sale.” (Prior code § 13-11.)

 

8.16.100 Marking uninspected meat—Inclusion of plant permit number in stamp.
        Every stamp required by Sections 8.16.080 and 8.16.090 shall legibly show the plant permit number issued to the plant by the city health officer. (Prior code § 13-12.)

 

8.16.110 Hides—Required when carcasses are accepted and stored.
        Every refrigeration plant shall accept and store beef, veal and lamb carcasses only when the hide accompanies the carcasses. (Prior code 13-13.)

 

8.16.120 Hides—Record of disposition.
        Every refrigeration plant shall keep a record of the disposition of each hide referred to in Section 8.16.110. Such record shall be available at all times to the city health officer and the state hide and brand inspector. (Prior code § 13-14.)

 

8.16.130 Bonds of refrigeration plants handling meat.
        Every refrigeration plant handling inspected and uninspected beef, lamb, pork or veal shall post with the city health officer a surety or cash bond in the sum of one thousand dollars, conditioned upon compliance by the permittee with all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Such bond shall be subject to forfeiture upon the conviction of the permittee of violation of any provision of this chapter. (Prior code § 13-15.)

 

8.16.140 Days for processing inspected meat—Designating—Notifying health officer of designation and changes.
        Every refrigeration plant handling or processing inspected and uninspected meat shall designate different days of the week upon which inspected meat will be processed and shall notify the city health officer in writing of such designation and of any change thereof, together with the effective date of such change. (Prior code § 13-16.)

 

8.16.150 Processing uninspected meat on same day.
        No refrigeration plant shall process both inspected and uninspected meat on the same day, except with the permission of the city health officer.

        The handling of meat of deer or other game or fowl shall be classified as uninspected meat for the purpose of this section and shall not be handled on days designated for inspected meat. (Prior code § 13-17.)

 

8.16.160 Applicability.
        Except as provided in Section 8.16.150, this chapter shall not apply to carcasses of deer, game or fowl. (Prior code § 13-18.)

Chapter 8.20 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS—FOOD HANDLERS
8.20.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Department” means the county department of public health.

B.     “Director” means the director of the county department of public health or his duly appointed deputy or representative.

C.     “Food handler” means any person engaged or employed in a business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Chapters 8.16 and 8.20 who handles food in such manner that some portion of his clothing or body or body discharges might come in contact with such food or with the utensils used in connection therewith.

(Ord. 2923 § 1, 1976.)

 

8.20.050 Transmissible disease.
        No person who has contracted or is afflicted with a disease or infection determined by the director to be a danger to public health, transmissible either directly or through food or drink to other persons, or who is known or suspected to be a carrier of organisms causing such disease, or who has come in contact with any person afflicted with such communicable disease or infection, shall act or be engaged or employed as a food handler. (Ord. 2923 § 1, 1976.)

 

8.20.060 Transmissible disease—Medical examination—Exclusion.
        Whenever information that the possibility of transmission of disease determined by the director to be a danger to public health exists in a food handler or in any business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Chapters 8.16 and 8.20 presented to the director, he shall investigate conditions and take appropriate action. The director may, after investigation, and for reasonable cause, require any of the following measures to be taken:

A.    The immediate exclusion by the director of any food handler from the affected business or establishment;

B.     The immediate closing of any affected business or establishment until, in the opinion of the director, no further danger of the outbreak of disease exists;

C.     Medical examination of the owner, employee, and his coemployees, with such laboratory examination as may be indicated; or should such examination or examinations be refused, then the immediate exclusion of the refusing owner, employee or coemployee from that or any other food establishment operation, until a medical or laboratory examination shows that the person is not infected with, or a carrier of, any such disease in a communicable form.

(Ord. 2923 § 1, 1976.)

 

8.20.080 Fees.
        No fee shall be charged for any test or examination made pursuant to this chapter by the department. The county shall not be liable for any fee or charge made for any test, X-ray or examination required by this chapter that is not made by the department. (Ord. 2923 § 1, 1976.)

Chapter 8.21 REGULATION OF WHOLESALE FOOD WAREHOUSES
8.21.010 County of San Diego Wholesale Food Warehouse Ordinance—Adoption by reference.
        The Wholesale Food Warehouse Ordinance of the county of San Diego, being Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances (being sections 61.212 through 61.256), as adopted by the county of San Diego, is adopted by reference as the regulatory provisions applicable to wholesale food warehouses that hold or distribute food at wholesale, operating in the city of El Cajon, to prevent conditions of such facilities, and the mishandling of recalled food stored in such facilities, from spreading foodborne illnesses, and each and all such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Wholesale Food Warehouse Ordinance of the county of San Diego are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The Wholesale Food Warehouse Ordinance of the county of San Diego is referred to in this chapter as the “County Wholesale Food Warehouse Ordinance,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4733 § 1, 2003.)

 

8.21.020 Section 61.213 Amended—Penalties.
        Section 61.213 of the County Wholesale Food Warehouse Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

B.     Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter, unless provision is otherwise made in this chapter, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

C.     Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this chapter, unless provision is otherwise made in this chapter, shall be punishable by fine only as follows:

1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the chapter within one year;

3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the chapter within one year.

D.    Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable accordingly.

E.     In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated as such by this city, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

(Ord. 4733 § 1, 2003.)

Chapter 8.22 TRASH BINS AND DROP OFF BOXES
8.22.010 Purpose and scope.
        The city council finds that the unregulated practice of allowing trash bins and drop off boxes in the city would result in a proliferation of such solid waste facilities which could result in potentially dangerous health and safety concerns, including: creating environments for pests, insects, and other vermin; generating offensive odors; creating unsightly accumulations of trash and solid waste; and presenting unsafe conditions for children and others playing or working around such solid waste facilities. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use, location, and size of trash bins and drop off boxes in the city, to regulate the duration of use of permitted trash bins and drop off boxes, and to provide remedies for the violation of such regulations. (Ord. 4684 § 1, 2001.)

 

8.22.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

        “Trash bin” means a container, for the collection of solid waste or items to be recycled, with dimensions of, or exceeding, fifty-four inches by sixty inches by twenty-four inches, but not exceeding the dimensions of six feet by five feet by eighteen feet.

        “Drop off box” means a container, for the collection of solid waste or items to be recycled, with dimensions of, or exceeding, six feet by five feet by eighteen feet. (Ord. 4684 § 2, 2001.)

 

8.22.030 Trash drop off box or trash bin permit required.
        No person, except the city or its authorized representative, shall place or leave standing a trash bin or a drop off box within the city. (Ord. 4684 § 3, 2001.)

 

8.22.040 Authority to remove trash bins or drop off boxes.
        If there is no valid authority for a trash bin or drop off box, or if the terms of the permit or this ordinance are not complied with, the city manager, or his designee, may, by notice, require the removal of any trash bin or drop off box. (Ord. 4684 § 4, 2001.)

 

8.22.050 Service of notice—Contents.
        The notice referred to in Section 8.22.040 shall be posted upon the trash bin or drop off box. The notice shall specify the violation and shall require the removal of such encroachment within twenty-four hours. Such notice shall be required one time only to any one owner of a trash bin or drop off box. Following such posting, it shall be conclusively presumed thereafter that the owner of the trash bin or drop off box has knowledge of the requirements of this chapter. Future placement of a trash bin or drop off box within the city by a person or company that has been previously notified of such violation, shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter and such notice shall not be required to be posted on said trash bin or drop off box. (Ord. 4684 § 5, 2001.)

 

8.22.060 Removal of trash bins or drop off boxes at owner’s expense.
        If the trash bin or drop off box is not removed within twenty-four hours from and after posting of the notice, the city may remove the trash bin or drop off box at the expense of the owner of the trash bin or drop off box or at the expense of any other person causing the trash bin or drop off box to remain. If the owner of the trash bin or drop off box has been previously notified as referred to in Section 8.22.040, the city may remove the trash bin or drop off box immediately at the expense of the owner of the trash bin or drop off box or the person causing the trash bin or drop off box to remain. The city may store the removed trash bin or drop off box in a public or private yard, and the owner of the trash bin or drop off box shall be responsible for all impound and storage fees and other charges incurred in the removal and storage of the trash bin or drop off box. (Ord. 4684 § 6, 2001.)

 

8.22.070 Unauthorized placement of trash in drop off boxes
        It is unlawful for a person to place solid waste or trash in a trash bin or drop off box unless the person is the owner or lessee of the trash bin or drop off box or has the permission of the owner or lessee of the trash bin or drop off box to place solid waste or trash in the trash bin or drop off box. (Ord. 4684 § 7, 2001.)

 

8.22.080 Violation—Misdemeanor, infraction—Administrative citation.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. In the event that the violation is charged as an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, the person shall be subject to: (1) a fine of fifty dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine of one hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; (3) a fine of two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year.

B.     Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable accordingly.

C.     In lieu of criminal prosecution pursuant to Subsection A, herein, violations of this chapter may be prosecuted in accordance with the administrative citation procedure set forth in Chapter 1.14 of this code.

(Ord. 4684 § 8, 2001.)

Chapter 8.24 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
8.24.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, and other discarded matter, goods, and materials is a matter of great public concern, in that improper control of such matters creates a public nuisance, can lead to air pollution, fire hazards, illegal dumping, insect breeding and rat infestation, and other conditions affecting the health, welfare, and safety of the residents and businesses of this and surrounding cities. The periodic collection of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse from all residences and places of business in the city benefits all occupants of residences and businesses within the city and, therefore, the collection of garbage and refuse for single-family residences, multi-family residences, commercial establishments generating garbage or rubbish (each as defined in Section 8.24.020), restaurants, eating houses, boarding houses, or other building or facility where meals are furnished and generating garbage (as defined in Section 8.24.020), in the city shall be a mandatory service, and all property owners are made liable for the payment of such fees for the mandatory service as may be from time to time approved by the city council. The regulations provided in this chapter are designated to eliminate such problems.

B.     The city council shall have the authority to make other reasonable rules and regulations concerning individual collection, disposal, and hauling of solid waste over city streets by private persons, or relating to the operation of a transfer station.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Contractor” means the person or persons with whom the city council has entered into written agreement for the collection, transportation and disposal of refuse within the city.

B.     “Garbage” means all animal and vegetable refuse and all waste derived from materials or matter prepared or intended, in whole or in part, to be used for food, whether generated by households or by places where foodstuffs intended for human consumption are handled commercially.

C.     “Handle commercially” means storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging, transporting, salvaging or otherwise handling food for distribution or sale directly to the consumer.

D.    “Mandatory collection service” means that the collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse by the contractor shall be mandatory for all single-family homes, mobile homes, duplexes, multi-family residential complexes, commercial establishments (generating garbage or rubbish), restaurants, bars, nightclubs, eating houses, boarding houses, or other buildings or facilities where meals are furnished and generating garbage.

E.     “Property” means each address or unit located on a parcel, each of which shall be responsible for providing and maintaining its own garbage receptacle and contract with the contractor for the collection of garbage, rubbish, recyclables, and other refuse, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

F.     “Recyclable material” means “rubbish” which may be collected, sorted, cleaned, treated or reconstituted and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. When mandatory recycling programs are in place, and for the purposes of this chapter, designated recyclable materials shall include the following:

1.     “Glass bottles and jars” means food and beverage glass containers including container glass covered by the deposit law, and excluding household and kitchen containers such as drinking glasses, cups, cooking and serving dishes.

2.     “Metal” means recoverable aluminum, tin and bimetal materials such as used beverage containers, siding and other recyclable manufactured metal items.

3.     “Newspaper” means materials printed on newsprint.

4.     “Office paper” means waste paper grades of white and colored ledgers. Examples include forms, copy paper, stationery and other papers that are generally associated with desk activity.

5.     “Plastic beverage bottles” means plastic containers with narrow necks, or mouth openings smaller than the diameter of the container bottles used for containing milk, juice, soft drinks or water intended for human consumption; to be distinguished from nonfood bottles such as those containing motor oil, detergent or other household products.

G.    “Responsible occupant” means and includes the owner, tenant, person in possession of, the inhabitant of, or a person who has the care and control of real property.

H.    “Rubbish” means all refuse other than garbage; and such term shall include paper, rags, leaves, grass, vines, sawdust, sweepings, plaster, bricks, cement, glass, crockery, shell, metals, metal products, cans, ashes, and tree shrubbery trimmings.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.030 Receptacles—Combining garbage and rubbish—Recovering containers.
A.    Every person owning, managing or controlling any property which is used for residential, business, or commercial purposes and which generates garbage shall maintain at all times, in a place easily accessible to the garbage contractor and where it will not be a public nuisance or in any degree offensive, a receptacle of suitable material or metal-lined box with suitable bail or handles and covers provided by the city’s contractor, and having a capacity of not more than ninety-six gallons, in which shall be placed all garbage accumulating on the premises; provided, however, that persons living in the same apartment house using a single garbage receptacle in common, and persons residing in properties in the R-E-20 and R-E-40 zones, may utilize waste bins provided by the city’s contractor in excess of ninety-six gallons so long as the containers are neither stored nor maintained in the required front yard setback portions of the property (except that the containers may be placed at the curb or in an alley for a scheduled collection in compliance with Section 8.24.160); and provided further, however, that any business or commercial customer may use waste bins provided by the city’s contractor in excess of ninety-six gallons. Notwithstanding anything in this subdivision to the contrary, single-family residential customers may utilize bins provided by the city’s contractor in excess of ninety-six gallons for a period of not to exceed ninety days in the aggregate during any twelve month period.

B.     Garbage shall be drained and wrapped in suitable wrapping prior to placement in the receptacle, or may be combined with rubbish for collection.

C.     Any person owning, managing or controlling any property which is used for business, or commercial purposes and where food is handled commercially shall keep all containers secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons, animals, wind, rain, insects, and rodents. If the containers are accessible at any time to unauthorized persons, the containers shall be kept locked to prevent access by anyone other than authorized persons or the contractor. All containers shall be supplied by the contractor.

D.    The garbage contractor shall replace the lid and, where required, the lock on each garbage container after emptying it.

E.     In lieu of the requirements in Subsection A of this section, businesses and commercial entities may use one and one-half- or three-cubic-yard containers supplied by the contractor. Such containers shall be covered at all times, and after emptying same contractor shall place the container in the same location with the lids closed and, where required, the locks fastened.

F.     All recyclable materials shall be separated from garbage and rubbish and placed in receptacles provided by the contractor.

G.    Any person owning, managing or controlling any property located in the downtown area and within the boundaries of Specific Plan No. 182, which is used for multi-family residential, business, or commercial purposes shall keep all containers secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons, animals, wind, rain, insects, and rodents. If the containers are accessible at any time to unauthorized persons, the containers shall be kept locked to prevent access by anyone other than authorized persons or the contractor. Containers shall be supplied by the contractor. Specific Plan No. 182 is generally bounded by Madison Avenue on the north, Ballantyne Street / Avocado Avenue on the east, Lexington Avenue and W. Main Street on the south, and Chambers Street and W. Douglas on the west. Specific Plan No. 182 is shown on Attachment A, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this section and on file in the office of the City Clerk.

H.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Subsection A of this section, multi-family residential complexes of greater than three units shall utilize containers supplied by the contractor which are sufficient to provide service to the complex in the amount of not less than one-half of one yard per dwelling unit per week. Such containers shall be covered at all times, and after emptying same contractor shall place the container in the same location with the lids closed and, where required, the locks fastened. In the event that the city council determines that a multi-family residential complex receiving container service requires more frequent collection service than is required by the minimum standards as set forth in this Subsection J for sanitation or health reasons, the city council may impose more frequent collection service requirements upon the residents of such complex by resolution adopted following a public hearing.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.040 Power of city council to contract for disposal.
        The city council shall have the power to let contracts for the accumulation and disposal of garbage and rubbish as provided for in this chapter and may, as a condition for granting such contract, require a bond from the contractor in an amount determined by the council for the faithful performance of such agreement. In case the contractor shall fail or refuse to conform to the conditions of such agreement and this chapter, the city council, at its option and after a hearing of which the contractor shall have ten days written notice, may terminate such agreement and let the contract to another contractor deemed more capable of carrying out the terms of such agreement. In letting contracts for garbage and rubbish disposal, the city council shall not be required to let the same to the lowest bidder, but shall be free to let such contract to the contractor deemed best suited to comply with the terms of this chapter and such agreement. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.050 Collection charges—Generally.
        The collection of all garbage and refuse in the city shall be a mandatory service provided by the contractor for all single-family homes, mobile homes, duplexes, multi-family residential complexes, commercial establishments (generating garbage or rubbish), restaurants, eating houses, boarding houses, or other buildings or facilities where meals are furnished and generating garbage, unless otherwise excepted. Accounts shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of each property. Responsible occupants shall be billed periodically by the contractor for services rendered, at such rates as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.060 Collection charges—Exceptions.
        The responsible occupant of any property subject to the mandatory collection requirements of this chapter may apply in writing to the contractor for an exception. Such exception may be granted with sufficient proof of use of a city approved solid waste and recyclables collection alternative. The contractor’s determination to grant or deny a request for exception shall be made within ten days of receipt of the request. All exceptions shall be subject to monthly renewal. Those who have been granted exceptions may from time to time be required to provide sufficient proof of use of such acceptable alternative method. Upon denial or conditional approval by the contractor, any applicant dissatisfied with such decision may appeal same to the city manager. A decision by the city manager can be appealed to the city council. Appeal to both the city manager and the city council must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within fifteen days after notice of such decision. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.070 Liability for charges.
        The obligation to pay the charges provided in this chapter shall be upon the legal owner(s) of the property serviced. Nothing in this section shall prohibit arrangements under which a responsible occupant of the property is billed and makes payments on behalf of the owner(s). However, no such arrangement shall relieve the owner(s) of his/her/their ultimate obligation to pay for services rendered. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.080 Failure to pay contractor for refuse collection.
A.    An account is deemed delinquent if payment for collection services has not been received within fifteen days after the due date of the invoice for which service was rendered. Upon determination of delinquency, the contractor may give written notice to the delinquent account holder that the bill is now overdue and payable in full and shall attempt to collect payment through all available means, within thirty days of the date of such notice.

B.     Provided adequate arrangements for payment have not been made between the contractor and delinquent account holder within five business days of the end of the earliest unpaid billing period, the contractor may assign the total unpaid bill amount to the city for collection. The assignment shall provide all pertinent data including the name and address of the residence owner billed, address and parcel number of the property billed, dates of the period of service unpaid, amount due and certification that the billing procedures pursuant to Subsection A of this section have been fulfilled.

C.     The delinquent bill presented by the contractor to the delinquent account holder pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall include a written notice warning that nonpayment within five business days of the earliest unpaid period may result in assignment of the debt to the city for collection, may include collection charges and may result in the recordation of a lien against the property for which service was rendered.

D.    Upon receipt of assignment of the debt, the city shall advise the debtor in writing of the assignment, that a minimum fee of ten percent of the bill amount is imposed in all collection cases filed with the city, that an additional lien fee will be charged in all cases where the filing of a lien is necessary, and that thirty days notice is given to permit payment of the debt to the city to avoid payment of the lien fee and to avoid a special assessment against said property in the amount of all aforesaid fees and charges.

E.     Originally billed amounts, which are collected by the city, shall be paid to the contractor on a quarterly basis. All fees and lien charges collected shall be retained by the city.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.090 Special assessment collection.
A.    The city may initiate proceedings to make delinquent refuse collection service fees and collection charges a special assessment against properties for which such debts were assigned to the city for collection.

B.     A report of delinquent charges shall be transmitted to the city council, which shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any protests or objections thereto.

C.     The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the owner of real property to which service was rendered not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. At the time fixed for said hearing, the city council shall hear any objections of the owner liable to be assessed for delinquent accounts. The city council may make such revisions to the report as it deems just and, if satisfied with the correctness of the report as submitted or revised, shall confirm or reject it by resolution. The decision of the city council on the report and on all protests or objections thereto are final and conclusive.

D.    Upon confirmation of the report by the city council, the amounts so approved shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll and, thereafter, such assessment shall constitute a special assessment and lien upon the property.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.100 Interest on unpaid assessments.
        All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the city council shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.110 Collection charges—Unusual accumulations—Collections in certain places.
        For unusual accumulations of rubbish or garbage, and for collection in places not otherwise provided for in this chapter, rates may be charged as shall be agreed upon by the garbage contractor and the responsible occupant of the property. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.120 Collection charges—Requirement to pay.
        No person having garbage or rubbish collected and disposed of as provided in this chapter shall willfully neglect or refuse to pay to the contractor the rates agreed upon for such service, subject to the maximum charges fixed in the contract with the city. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.130 Solid waste generated off site—Placement in city waste containers prohibited.
        City waste containers are placed in city parks and other public areas for the use of the public to control trash, litter and garbage, which is generated at their respective location. Such waste containers are not to be used as disposal sites for trash or rubbish which is generated off site. It is unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit or throw away solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever in city waste containers if such was generated at a location other than where the waste container is located. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.140 Solid waste—Disposal on private property prohibited—Exception.
        It is unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit or throw away any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever, upon any private property adjacent to or abutting upon any public highway, or public place, or upon any private property whatsoever, within the city unless such person first obtains the permission of the owner of such property to do so. It is unlawful for such person to deposit or place such materials in any waste container owned or used by the owner of such property unless such person first obtains the permission of the owner to do so. It is further unlawful for such persons to co-mingle their solid waste materials with that of another thereby avoiding payment for solid waste and recycling services under the franchise. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.150 Disputes resolved by city council.
        In all cases where a dispute arises as to the rate charged or to be charged for any service provided for in this chapter, the matter shall be referred to the city council, which, upon due investigation, shall determine and fix such prices as it shall deem just and equitable. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.160 Schedule for collections.
        All garbage and rubbish shall be collected from businesses and residences and all other collection points at least once a week, except for those businesses utilizing one and one-half- or three-cubic-yard containers supplied by the contractor, which collection shall be a minimum of once a week.

        No container or receptacle shall be placed out at the curb or alley prior to four p.m. on the day prior to scheduled collection, and all containers shall be removed prior to noon on the day following the collection day. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.170 Collection from parks and playgrounds.
        The garbage and rubbish contractor shall collect the garbage and rubbish from receptacles at public parks and playgrounds immediately after each holiday and other days when such parks and playgrounds have extraordinary use. Otherwise such collections shall be made twice a week, one of which days shall be Monday. Said collection shall be performed without charge to the city. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.180 Requirements as to construction of collection equipment.
        No person shall remove any garbage or carry it through the streets and highways except in carts, trucks or trailers having metallic or metal-lined beds or metal tanks or metal containers with proper covers so that the garbage shall not be offensive. The garbage shall be protected from the wind and rain, and be loaded in such a manner that none of it shall fall, drop or spill upon the ground. The rubbish contractor shall provide solid lined beds with proper covers for rubbish. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.190 Methods of disposal by garbage contractor.
        All garbage and rubbish gathered and collected by the contractor shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by such contractor in a manner satisfactory to the city council. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.200 Burying or burning garbage and rubbish.
        No person shall bury any garbage or rubbish in any yard or open space within the city. The burning of garbage and rubbish is prohibited, except when done in accordance with Chapter 8.04 of this code, and with all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.210 Unauthorized collectors.
        At such time as there is in force a contract entered into by the city with any contractor for the disposal of garbage and rubbish of the city or its inhabitants, it is unlawful for any person other than the contractor, or its agents and employees, to collect any garbage or rubbish for hire within the city. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.220 Powers and duties of health officer.
        The city health officer is empowered to inspect all wagons, carts, trucks or other vehicles used in the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish, and to see that the same are kept clean and sanitary. The health officer shall also inspect all places where garbage or rubbish is deposited. It shall be the duty of the health officer to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other health ordinances of the city. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.230 Provisions applicable to recyclable material.
        All provisions of this chapter applicable to the collection, accumulation and disposal of garbage and rubbish shall apply to recyclable material, including collection charges.

        A surcharge may be imposed upon any hauler failing to comply with the mandatory recycling provisions of this chapter. To facilitate the county’s enforcement of the mandatory recycling program, the city has adopted, by resolution, the surcharges as set forth by the county. Such surcharges shall be collected by the county of San Diego. The current surcharge structure shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be in such amounts as the county may establish. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.240 Waste generators and designated recyclable materials.
        Waste generators and designated recyclables to be diverted are specified below for the purpose of implementing the city’s mandatory recycling program.

A.    Residential recyclables: aluminum, tins and bi-metal cans, glass bottles and jars, white goods (appliances), newspaper, yard wastes, plastic beverage bottles.

B.     Commercial Recyclables.

1.     Office Buildings. Office buildings of more than twenty thousand square feet used for commercial, governmental, or educational purposes: aluminum, newspaper, corrugated cardboard, office paper.

2.     Hospitality Facilities. All restaurants and taverns, and hotels and motels with eating and drinking establishments: aluminum, plastic beverage bottles, corrugated cardboard, tin and bi-metal cans, glass jars and bottles, white goods (appliances).

C.     Industrial Recyclables: Industrial service loads consisting of ninety percent or more of any one of the following materials: dirt, asphalt, sand, land clearing brush, concrete, rock.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.250 Preparation of designated recyclable materials for collection.
        For designated recyclable materials generated within the city, the responsible occupant shall:

A.    Separate all designated recyclable materials from other solid waste.

B.     Group together all designated recyclable materials and place the group for collection as provided in this code, or as the contractor may designate to expedite collection of designated recyclable material.

C.     Use the collection containers for designated recyclable material provided by the contractor.

D.    A responsible occupant is not prohibited from using alternative collection and disposal methods which are not in conflict with the provisions of this code.

(Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.260 Scavenging of recyclable material prohibited.
        Recyclable material (as defined in Section 8.24.020E) once placed at curbside or any designated pickup location, shall become the property of the city or its duly authorized contractor. It is unlawful for any person other than a representative of the city or its contractor to move, remove, interfere with, disturb, or tamper with said materials or their containers. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.270 Penalty for violation.
        Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

 

8.24.280 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4760 § 2, 2004.)

Chapter 8.26 MEDICAL WASTES
8.26.010 Definitions of terms.
A.    “Biohazardous waste” means any of the following:

1.     Laboratory waste, including, but not limited to, specimen cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biological agents, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures or material which may contain infectious agents and may pose a substantial threat to health;

2.     Recognizable fluid blood elements and regulated body fluids, and containers and articles contaminated with blood elements or regulated body fluids that readily separate from the solid portion of the waste under ambient temperature and pressure. Regulated body fluids are cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluids, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid;

3.     Sharps, which are objects or devices having acute rigid corners, edges, or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not limited to, hypodermic needles, blades and slides;

4.     Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, excrement and bedding of animals including materials resulting from research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals which are suspected of being infected with a disease communicable to humans;

5.     Any specimens sent to a laboratory for microbiologic analysis;

6.     Surgical specimens including human or animal parts or tissues removed surgically or by autopsy;

7.     Such other waste materials that result from the administration of medical care to a patient by health care providers and are found by the administering agency or the local health officer to pose a threat to human health or the environment. If there is a difference in opinion between the administering agency and the local health officer, the local health officer’s view will prevail.

B.     “Biomedical waste” means any waste which is generated or has been used in the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, in the production or testing of biologicals, or which may contain infectious agents and may pose a substantial threat to health. Biomedical waste includes biohazardous waste and medical solid waste. Biomedical waste does not include hazardous waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117 and California Code of Regulations Title 22 Articles 9 or 11) or radioactive waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25805(e)).

C.     “Biomedical Waste Management Plan” is a document which shall be completed by generators of biomedical waste on forms prepared by the environmental health division of the Department of Health Services and shall contain the following information:

1.     Name, address, telephone number, establishment, number of the generator, the responsible person, and an emergency telephone number which will provide twenty-four hour access to the responsible person;

2.     Descriptions of the type and quantity of biomedical wastes generated and the containers used to store and dispose of the wastes;

3.     Methods used to store, treat and dispose of biohazardous wastes;

4.     Methods used to store and dispose of medical solid wastes;

5.     A statement assuring that all personnel handling biomedical wastes have received training in aspects of handling the wastes in accordance with this chapter and the biomedical waste management plan.

        The responsible person shall certify by his or her signature that the biomedical waste management plan is true, and that the generator will comply with the provisions thereof.

D.    “Medical solid waste” shall include, but not be limited to, waste such as empty specimen containers, bandages, dressings containing nonliquid blood, surgical gloves, decontaminated biohazardous waste, and other materials which are not biohazardous.

E.     “Permitted biohazardous waste hauler” is a hauler who has received a permit from the appropriate agency to haul biohazardous waste.

F.     “Putrescible biohazardous waste” means biohazardous waste subject to decomposition by microorganisms which produces a foul odor. Putrescible biohazardous waste includes, but is not limited to, blood and urine specimens and cultures.

G.    “Red bag” means a disposable plastic bag which is impervious to moisture and has a strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing or bursting under normal conditions of usage and handling of the waste-filled bag. Each bag shall be constructed of material to sufficient single thickness strength to pass the 165-gram dropped dart impact resistance test as prescribed by Standard D 1709-75 of the American Society for Testing and Materials and certified by the bag manufacturer. The bags shall be securely tied so as to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling or transport. The bag shall be red in color and conspicuously labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word “Biohazard.” The bag shall be labeled so that the producer’s name, address, and phone number are legible and easily visible on the outside of the bag.

H.    “Sharps containers” are: leakproof, rigid, puncture-resistant containers which when sealed cannot be reopened without great difficulty. These containers must be labeled with either “biohazard” or “infectious waste” on the outside of the container. These containers must also be labeled so that the producer’s name, address and phone number are legible and easily visible on the outside of the container.

I.      “Solid waste hauler” is a hauler licensed by the appropriate agency to haul solid waste.

(Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.020 Medical solid wastes.
        Any person who is a generator, or an employee of a generator of medical solid wastes, shall store such wastes prior to disposal in an area secured as to deny access to unauthorized persons, animals, wind, rain, insects, and rodents. If such wastes are placed in a trash receptacle or compactor which is accessible at any time to unauthorized persons, such receptacle or compactor shall be locked to prevent access to the contents thereof to anyone other than authorized persons or refuse collection personnel. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.030 Biohazardous wastes—Small generators.
A.    It is unlawful for any generator of biohazardous wastes who produces less than two hundred twenty pounds of such waste per month to store or dispose of such wastes without an annual permit therefor from the deputy director of environmental health services.

B.     Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall make application therefor as prescribed in Title 6, Division 5, Section 65.107 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances.

C.     Any person who is a generator, or an employee of a generator, of biohazardous wastes, and produces less than two hundred twenty pounds of such waste per month, shall store and dispose of such waste in the manner provided for in Sections 66840(f), 66840(g), 66840(h), and 66845(a)—(c) of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, and shall maintain on the premises a copy of the current biomedical waste management plan, and documentation verifying the manner of disposal used. Unless approved by the deputy director of environmental health services, putrescible biohazardous waste shall not be maintained by the generator for more than seven days. Nonputrescible biohazardous waste (including sharps) shall not be maintained by the generator for more than six months. The sections of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations specified in this section are incorporated into and made a part of this code. One copy of the specified sections is on file in the office of the city clerk.

(Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.040 Biohazardous wastes—Large generators.
        Any person who is a generator, or an employee of a generator, of biohazardous wastes, and produces two hundred twenty pounds or more of such wastes per month, shall store and dispose of such waste in the manner provided for in Sections 66840(a)—(m), 66845(a)—(c), 66850(a)—(h), 66855(a)—(d), 66860, and 66865 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, and shall maintain on the premises a copy of the current biomedical waste management plan, and documentation verifying the manner of disposal used. The sections of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations specified in this section are incorporated into and made a part of this code. One copy of the specified sections is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.050 Sharps containers and red bags—Additional requirements.
        In addition to the requirements of Sections 8.26.030 and 8.26.040, all generators of biohazardous wastes shall meet the following requirements:

A.    All sharps containers and red bags used in complying with Sections 8.26.030 and 8.26.040 shall be of the type defined in Section 8.26.010G and H.

B.     All sharps containers and red bags shall be labelled in accordance with Section 8.26.010G and H prior to placing any materials in said containers or bags.

C.     When wastes are to be processed in an autoclave prior to disposal by the generator they may be placed in a single red bag which must be placed in a clear autoclave bag which is labelled in the same manner as required for red bags in Section 8.26.010G. More than one red bag may be placed in an autoclave bag.

D.    Wastes which are not processed in an autoclave prior to disposal by the generator shall be stored and disposed of in a red bag which is sealed inside of a second red bag.

E.     Needles and syringes shall not be clipped prior to disposal.

F.     Red bags, as defined above, shall be used only for the storage and disposal of biohazardous wastes.

G.    All materials disposed of in sharps containers shall be managed in the manner prescribed for biohazardous wastes in Section 8.26.030 whether or not the materials are actually biohazardous wastes as defined in Section 8.26.010A.

(Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.060 Management plan—Preparation and filing.
A.    All generators of biomedical wastes shall prepare a Biomedical Waste Management Plan as defined in Section 8.26.010C. The plan shall be filed with the deputy director of the environmental health services, and a copy shall be kept at all times on the premises of the facility in which biomedical wastes are being generated.

B.     Every Biomedical Waste Management Plan shall be updated and re-filed annually, or when any of the information contained therein has changed, whichever occurs first.

(Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.070 Exemption.
        Sections 8.26.010 through 8.26.060 shall not be applicable to biomedical wastes produced by individuals through personal use at their residences and which are disposed of through residential service as defined in Section 68.501(b)(30) of the San Diego County Code. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.080 Criminal penalty.
        Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or both. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.090 Civil penalty.
        Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed fifteen thousand dollars for each such violation. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.100 Additional remedies.
        The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter are remedies in addition to any existing remedy authorized by law and are not to be construed as conflicting with or in dereliction of, any provisions of this chapter or of this code or of law. Said provisions are to be construed as independent and nonexclusive and in no way conditioned upon each other. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

 

8.26.110 Enforcement.
        The city manager or designated representative shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The environmental health services division of the department of health services shall be the administering agency. (Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.26.120 Hazardous and medical wastes.
A.    No person shall transport or collect hazardous wastes without compliance with applicable state law.

B.     No person shall deposit, dump, spill, or otherwise allow to be placed on a county solid waste facility not designated as a hazardous waste disposal facility, any waste classified as hazardous or infectious by state and federal law or county or city ordinance.

(Ord. 4177 § 1, 1989.)

Chapter 8.28 SWIMMING POOLS
8.28.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4952 § 1, 2010; Ord. 4710 §§ 2, 3, 2002.)

 

8.28.015 Requirements for pool safety.
        Every person in possession of land within the City, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain the features of pool safety as prescribed by Section 3109.4.4 and/or Chapter 31B of the California Building Code. (Ord. 4952 § 2, 2010; Ord. 4710 § 4, 2002.)

 

8.28.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4952 § 1, 2010; Ord. 4710 § 5, 2002.)

 

8.28.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4952 § 1, 2010; prior code § 18-28.)

 

8.28.040 Violations of provisions relative to enclosures deemed nuisance.
        The continuance of any violation of Section 8.28.015 shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code.

        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 4952 § 2, 2010; prior code § 18-29.)

 

8.28.045 Review of plans for public swimming pools—Fee.
        Any person desiring the review and approval of plans and specifications for a public swimming pool by the director of public health pursuant to Section 7780 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code shall submit said plans to the director accompanied by a fee as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code to cover the cost of said review. As soon after the plans and specifications are submitted as is practical, the director shall review or cause to be reviewed said plans and specifications and shall determine whether they are in accordance with the requirements of Sections 7780 et seq., of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. In the event that the plans and specifications do not comply with said Administrative Code provisions, amended plans and specifications may be submitted to the director for re-review and approval, and the fee for each such re-review shall be as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, payable to the director in advance. (Ord. 4952 § 2, 2010; Ord. 3714 §§ 7, 8, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 7, 1982.)

 

8.28.050 Public swimming pool—Permit required—Inspection fee.
        No person shall maintain or operate any pool except a private pool unless an annual operating permit is issued therefor by the health officer. A pool shall be considered a “private pool” if it is maintained by an individual for the use of family and friends and for swimming instruction programs of short duration. An annual operating permit issued by the health officer is required for operation of any public pool, including, but not limited to, all commercial pools, real estate and community pools, pools at hotels, motels, resorts, auto and trailer parks, auto courts, apartment houses, clubs, public or private schools and gymnasia, and health establishments. Every person applying for a permit as required by this section shall, at the time of making application for such permit, pay an annual inspection fee for the first pool under one ownership and on the same property as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, and a fee for each additional pool on the same property under the same ownership as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. The annual operating permit shall be effective for a twelve-month period from the date of issuance. The required permit shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in Chapter 8.36 of this code. (Ord. 4952 § 2, 2010; Ord. 3714 § 9, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 8, 1982; Ord. 2948 § 1, 1976: prior code § 18-29.1.)

 

8.28.060 Public swimming pool—Permit renewal—Penalty for delinquency.
        Renewal of public swimming pool permits and penalties for delinquent applications shall be as prescribed in Chapter 8.36 of this code. (Ord. 4952 § 2, 2010; Ord. 3637 § 9, 1982; Ord. 2948 § 1, 1976: prior code § 18-29.2.)

 

8.28.070 Public swimming pool—Permit not transferable.
        A permit is not transferable from one person or one place to another, and shall be deemed voided if removed from the place or location specified in the written application and in the permit. (Ord. 4952 § 2, 2010; Ord. 2948 § 1, 1976: prior code § 18-29.3.)

Chapter 8.30 SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS AND SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
8.30.010 Purpose and Intent.
        The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety within the City of El Cajon from the dangers and ill effects of synthetic stimulants and synthetic cannabinoids by declaring certain activities involving these drugs to be a public nuisance and subject to all available civil remedies. (Ord. 4980 § 1, 2012.)

 

8.30.020 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(a)    Synthetic Stimulants – As used in this Chapter, the terms “synthetic stimulant” or “synthetic stimulants” are defined as follows:

        1.     Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation, except bupropion or compounds listed under a different schedule, which contains any quantity of the following substances having a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, including its salts, isomers, esters, or ethers, and salts of isomers, esters, or ethers whenever the existence of such salts, isomers, esters, or ethers, and salts of isomers, esters, or ethers is possible within any of the following specific chemical designations:

a.     Naphthylpyrovaleron, whether or not further substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the naphthyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents, or whether or not further substituted in the carbon chain at the 3-, 4-, or 5-position with an alkyl substituent.

b.     2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone (cathinone) or variation in any of the following ways:

(1)    By substitution in the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents.

(2)    By substitution at the 3-position with an alkyl substituent.

(3)    By substitution at the 2-amino nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, or benzyl groups, or by inclusion of the 2-amino nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.

        2.     “Synthetic stimulants” are commonly marketed under the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning but may be marketed under other trade names and contain a common disclaimer that these products are “not safe for human consumption.”

        3.     “Synthetic stimulants” do not include normal, standard bath salts that do not contain synthetic chemical compounds listed above that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. Standard bath salts primarily contain magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts), sodium chloride (table salt), sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon, amorphous/glassy sodium metaphosphate), sodium sesquicarbonate and borax.

(b)    Synthetic cannabinoids – As used in this Chapter, the terms “synthetic cannabinoid” or “synthetic cannabinoids” are defined as follows:

        1.     Any synthetic cannabinoid agonist, including but not limited to the substances listed below and any substances identified as a “synthetic cannabinoid compound” by Health & Safety Code section 11357.5:

a.     1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-018).

b.     1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-073).

c.     1-2-[(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-200).

d.     5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (CP-47,497).

e.     5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (cannabicyclohexanol; CP-47, 497 C8 homologue).

f.      Naphthoylindoles: any compound containing a 3-(1-naphthoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

g.     Naphthylmethylindoles: any compound containing a 1H-indol-3-yl-(1-naphthyl) methane structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperi-dinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

h.     Naphthoylpyrroles: any compound containing a 3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-t-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

i.      Naphthylmethylindenes: any compound containing a naphthylideneindene structure with substitution at the 3-position of the indene ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

j.      Phenylacetylindoles: any compound containing a 3-phenylacetylindole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.

k.     Cyclohexylphenols: any compound containing a 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol structure with substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperi-dinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring to any extent.

        l.      Benzoylindoles: any compound containing a 3-(benzoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.

m.    2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinyl-methyl)-pyrrolo-[1,2,3-de]-1,4-benzoxa-zin-6-yl]-1-napthalenylmethanone.

n.     9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahy-drobenzo[c] chromen-1-ol.

o.     Adamantoylindoles: any compound containing a 3-(1-adamantoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morphonyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the adamantyl ring system to any extent.

        2.     Synthetic cannabinoids products are commonly marketed under the following names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, Pot-Pourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Fake Weed, but may be marketed under other trade names and contain a common disclaimer that these products are “not safe for human consumption.”

        3.     “Synthetic cannabinoids” does not include normal, standard incense that is sold as incense sticks, oils or cones that is commonly used for their aromatic qualities that do not contain any synthetic chemical compounds listed above that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects.

(c)    Distribute – As used in this Chapter, the term “distribute” has the same meaning as set forth in Health & Safety Code § 11012.

(d)    Person – As used in this Chapter, the terms “person” or “persons” has the same meaning as set forth in Health & Safety Code § 11022. (Ord. 4980 § 1, 2012.)

 

8.30.030 Public Nuisance.
        (a)    It is a public nuisance for any person to distribute, sell or possess with the intent to distribute or sell synthetic stimulants and/or synthetic cannabinoids.

        (b)    Possession that is not described in subdivision (a) of this section is declared to be a public nuisance when such possession injuriously affects any person or persons, other than the person in possession, in such other person’s or persons’ health, safety, welfare, or comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (Ord. 4980 § 1, 2012.)

 

8.30.040 Authority to Administer and Enforce.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development department, police department, any code conformance officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any provision of the Municipal Code, as noted below. (Ord. 4980 § 1, 2012.)

 

8.30.050 Abatement Authority and Procedures; Other Remedies.
        (a)    Public Nuisance. If a public nuisance exists pursuant to this Chapter, any of the persons identified in section 8.30.040 of this Chapter may proceed under Chapter 1.16 Nuisance of this Code.

        (b)    Civil Remedies. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the City of El Cajon from pursuing any and all other legal remedies that may be available, including but not limited to civil actions filed by the City Attorney seeking any and all appropriate relief such as civil injunctions, penalties and forfeiture.

        (c)    Civil Penalties. Notwithstanding Chapter 1.24 General Penalty, Chapter 1.16 Nuisance, Chapter 1.14 Administrative Citation Procedures, or any other section of this Code to the contrary, any person, entity, or organization that maintains a public nuisance as defined in this Chapter may be subject to civil penalties up to $2,500 for each day said nuisance is in existence. (Ord. 4980 § 1, 2012.)

 

8.30.060 Severability.
        This Chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 4980 § 1, 2012.)

Chapter 8.32 REGULATION OF SMOKING AND SECONDHAND SMOKE IN CERTAIN PUBLIC AREAS AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
8.32.010 Purpose.
        Smoking of any tobacco product or any other weed or plant is a positive danger to health and a cause of material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, and a health hazard to those who are present in confined places. Secondhand smoke is harmful to persons with certain respiratory conditions, and has also been determined to cause cancer to nonsmokers exposed to secondhand smoke on a frequent basis. The United States Surgeon General and the United States Department of Health and Human Services found that a majority of the four hundred thirty-four thousand Americans that die each year from tobacco-related illness, and who smoked, became nicotine addicts before their eighteenth birthday.

        In order to serve public health, safety and welfare, to reduce unwanted and unwelcome exposure to secondhand smoke, to assure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the city, its residents, and visitors, to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers, including children and persons with existing respiratory conditions (while recognizing the threat to public health and the environment which smoking causes), and to decrease the accessibility of tobacco, tobacco-related products, and electronic vapor inhalation substances and devices, the declared purposes of this chapter are (1) to prohibit the smoking of tobacco or any other weed or plant or plant product or electronic vapor device in certain areas which are used by or open to the public, and certain areas in places of employment; (2) prohibit self-service sales and self-service displays, racks and shelves of tobacco products, and electronic vapor devices and electronic vapor inhalation substances; (3) require the posting of warning signs at the point of purchase which state the legal age of sale and that identification is required to purchase tobacco and electronic vapor devices and electronic vapor inhalation substances; (4) prohibit vending machine sales of tobacco products; and (5) require all tobacco products and electronic vapor devices and electronic vapor inhalation substances be sold in original packaging with all legally required health warnings. (Ord. 5011 § 3, 2014.)

 

8.32.020 Definitions.
A.    “Bar” includes that area of a restaurant which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food may be only incidental to the consumption of such beverages provided that the area is completely separated from the remainder of the restaurant by solid partitions or glazing without openings other than doors or doorways, which shall meet the minimum standards applicable to such bar and restaurant as established by the Uniform Building Code or other applicable building or fire regulations, and the patrons of the restaurant are not required to pass through the bar in order to enter the restaurant.

B.     “Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profitmaking purposes, or for nonprofit purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered.

C.     “Common area at a shopping mall” means any indoor or outdoor common area of a shopping mall accessible to and usable by the occupants or customers of more than retail establishment including, but not limited to halls, lobbies, outdoor eating areas, play areas and parking lots.

D.    “Electronic Vapor Device” means any device with a heating element, a battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the user in a manner that simulates smoking tobacco products, shisha, herbs, or any other product that produces smoke.

E.     “Electronic Vapor Inhalation Substance Products” means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers, vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic vapor devices.

F.     “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for monetary compensation or profit.

G.    “Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal corporation, who employs the services of more than four persons.

H.    “Enclosed area” means:

1.     Any covered or partially covered area having more than fifty percent of its perimeter walled or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a covered porch with more than two walls;

2.     Any space open to the sky (hereinafter “uncovered”) having more than seventy-five percent of its perimeter walled or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a courtyard;

3.     Except that an uncovered space of three thousand square feet or more is not an enclosed area, such as, for example, a field in an open-air arena.

I.      “Hookah” means a pipe commonly, but not always, made of glass, used for vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, non-flavored tobacco, shisha, dried fruits, or other substances in which vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin before inhalation.

J.      “Minor” means any individual who is less than eighteen years old.

K.    “Multi-unit residence” means a building or portion thereof that contains more than one dwelling space, each of which consists of independent living facilities for one or more persons, including but not limited to single-room occupancy hotels (SROs), congregate care facilities other than those conducted in single-family residential structures, and dormitories.

L.     “Multi-unit residence common area” means any common area of a multi-unit residence accessible to and usable by the occupants of more than one dwelling, including but not limited to halls, lobbies, laundry rooms, outdoor eating areas, play areas and swimming pools.

M.    “Place of employment” means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity that an employee or the general public may enter in the normal course of operations, but regardless of the hours of operation, including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities, warehouses, and, while employees, children or patients are present, private residences that are used as child-care or health-care facilities subject to licensing requirements.

N.    “Playground” means any public or privately owned park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on city property.

O.    “Public place” means any public or private place open to the general public, regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, for example, streets, sidewalks, plazas, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis and buses. Public place includes any common area at a shopping mall.

P.     “Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

Q.    “Reasonable distance” means a distance of twenty-five feet or, with respect to an existing approved designated smoking area, twenty feet or, with respect to a proposed designated smoking area, such larger area as the city manager reasonably determines in writing to be necessary in a given circumstance to ensure that occupants of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to second-hand smoke created by smokers outside the area.

R.     “Recreational area” means any public or private area open to the public for recreational purposes whether or not any fee for admission is charged, including, for example, parks, gardens, sporting facilities, stadiums, playgrounds and play areas.

S.     “Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products to which the public has access without the intervention of any employee.

T.     “Shopping mall” means any parcel of land zoned and used for retail sales by more than one retailer that is jointly operated or which includes shared parking facilities.

U.    “Smoking” means possessing (and “smoke” means to possess) an electronic vapor device, hookah, a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, including, but not limited to, any tobacco product, or any other weed or plant or plant product.

V.    “Tobacco product” means (1) any product containing tobacco leaf including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, shisha, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth; (3) any electronic vapor device, electronic vapor inhalation substance, and hookahs; (4) any plant, weed, or plant product that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

W.    “Tobacco retailer” means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances, and hookahs are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

X.    “Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether coin or paper bill, or other thing representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product and/or tobacco accessories.

Y.    “Unenclosed area” means any area which is not an enclosed area.

Z.     “Vendor-assisted” means only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased.

(Ord. 5011 § 5, 2014.)

 

8.32.025 Smoking prohibited.
A.    Smoking is prohibited in, and within twenty-five feet of, the following city-owned recreation buildings: Bostonia Center, Fletcher Hills Center, Hillside Center, Kennedy Center, Renette Center, and Wells Center. A recreation building is defined as a structure wherein the following activities are typically conducted: games, meetings, dance, gymnastics, arts and crafts, sports, instructional activities, and recreation offices.

B.     Smoking is prohibited in, and within twenty-five feet of, any tot lot, any playground, and any recreational area. A tot lot is defined as any area located in a city park or city playground, or in a privately owned playground open to the public, where playground equipment, intended for use by children, is located. Playground equipment includes but is not limited to swings, slides, and climbing apparatus.

C.     In addition to the restrictions found in subsections A and B above, and except as otherwise provided by this chapter or state or federal law, the following restrictions on smoking, and using or disposing of tobacco and tobacco-related products in public parks shall apply:

1.     No person shall be in possession of a burning tobacco or tobacco-related product, including but not limited to cigars and cigarettes, in or upon any park, playground or recreation center.

2.     No person shall chew tobacco or tobacco-related products, in or upon any park, playground or recreation center.

3.     No person shall dispose of lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes, or cigar or cigarette butts, or any other tobacco-related waste in or upon any park, playground or recreation center.

4.     No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section.

D.    In addition to the restrictions found in subsections A, B and C above, and except as otherwise provided by this chapter or state or federal law, the following restrictions on smoking, and using or disposing of tobacco and tobacco-related products in public places shall apply:

1.     No person shall be in possession of a burning tobacco or tobacco-related product, including, but not limited to, cigars and cigarettes, in:

a.     Any public places;

b.     Any places of employment;

c.     Any multi-unit residence common areas; or

d.     Any enclosed and unenclosed places of hotels, businesses, restaurants, and bars, and other public accommodation.

2.     Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this subsection D, smoking is permitted in the following locations within the city, unless otherwise provided by Chapter 15.60 of this Code, or state or federal law:

a.     Private residential property, other than those used as a child-care or health-care facility subject to licensing requirements when employees, children or patients are present. Nothing in this chapter shall require a person or entity who or which owns or controls a private residential property, including but not limited to a condominium association or an apartment owner, to permit smoking and such a person may choose to prohibit smoking throughout the property he, she, or it owns or controls.

b.     In up to twenty percent (20%) of guest rooms in any hotel or motel, if the hotel or motel permanently designates at least eighty percent of its guest rooms as nonsmoking rooms, appropriately signs nonsmoking rooms, and permanently removes ashtrays and matches from them. Smoking rooms shall be segregated from nonsmoking rooms on separate floors, wings, or portions of either; smoking and nonsmoking rooms shall not be interspersed. Nothing in this chapter shall require a hotel or motel to provide smoking rooms and the owner or operator of a hotel or motel may choose to prohibit smoking throughout the property.

c.     Designated unenclosed areas in shopping mall common areas (“smokers’ outposts”), provided that: (i) there is not more than one square foot of unenclosed area designated for smoking for every twenty thousand square feet of rentable enclosed or unenclosed space shopping mall (provided that each shopping mall may have at least one smokers’ outpost of forty or fewer square feet in area), (ii) the area is prominently marked with signs, (iii) it is located the greatest distance practicable, and at least twenty feet (or twenty-five feet if Chapter 15.60 of this Code applies), from any doorway or opening into an enclosed area or any accessway from parking facilities to the retail areas of the shopping mall, (iv) smoke is not permitted to enter adjacent areas in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, other law or by the owner, lessee or licensee of the adjacent property, and (v) the location(s) of the smokers’ outpost(s) is or are approved in writing by the community development director of the city based on the standards of this subsection and the goals of this chapter.

d.     Smokers’ outposts on public property in an unenclosed area designated by the city manager, or her designee, if located within the area subject to Specific Plan 182 so long as: (i) the area is prominently marked with signs, (ii) it is located the greatest distance practicable, and at least twenty feet (or twenty-five feet if Chapter 15.60 of this Code applies), from any doorway or opening into an enclosed area, and (iii) smoke is not permitted to enter adjacent area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, other law or by the owner, lessee or licensee of the adjacent property.

e.     Smokers’ outposts designated by a landlord of a multi-unit residential property, if apartments, or designated by the board of directors of a homeowners association, if a residential common interest development, so long as: (i) the area is prominently marked with signs, (ii) it is located the greatest distance practicable, and at least twenty-five feet, from any doorway or opening into an enclosed area of the multi-unit residential property, and at least twenty feet (or twenty-five feet if Chapter 15.60 of this Code applies) from any playgrounds, recreation areas, swimming pools, or any other areas where smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter, and (iii) the area is not more than twenty-five percent of the total outdoor area (excluding parking lots, sidewalks, stairways, non-exclusive balconies, patios and breezeways) of the premises where it is located, to a maximum of forty square feet. If the requirements of this subsection cannot be satisfied for a multi-unit residence property due to the unique physical features of the outdoor common area then no smokers’ outpost will be permitted.

f.      Any outdoor area in which no nonsmoker is present and, due to the time of day or other factors, it is not reasonable to expect another person to arrive.

3.     No person shall dispose of smoking waste or place or maintain a receptacle for smoking waste in an area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law, including within any reasonable distance required by this chapter.

(Ord. 4953 § 3, 2010.)

 

 

8.32.030 Prohibitions.
A.    No person or business shall offer for sale any tobacco product prior to prominently displaying a sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products that states: “SELLING TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS YOUNGER THAN EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS ILLEGAL. PHOTO ID IS REQUIRED TO PURCHASE ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT.” The letters of the sign shall be at least one-quarter inch high.

B.     No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager, or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter shall sell, offer to sell, or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without first examining identification that establishes the purchaser’s age as at least eighteen years unless the seller has some reasonable basis for determining the buyer’s age.

C.     No person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale any tobacco product that is not in the manufacturer’s original packaging that contains all required health warnings.

D.    It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.

(Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

 

8.32.035 Tobacco vending machines.
        No cigarette or other tobacco product, cigarette paper or wrapper, may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a tobacco vending machine or other appliance, or any other device designed or used for vending purposes. (Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

 

8.32.040 Reasonable distance required.
        No person shall smoke in an area in which smoking is otherwise permitted by this chapter or other law within a reasonable distance from any entrance, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, other law or by the owner, lessee or licensee of that enclosed area. (Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

 

8.32.046 Allowing, aiding or abetting illegal smoking.
A.    No person, employer, business, landlord or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking in an area under his, her, or its legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law.

B.     No person, employer, business, landlord or nonprofit entity shall allow the placement or maintenance of a receptacle for smoking waste in an area under his, her, or its legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law.

C.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner, landlord, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or other person who or which has legal or de facto control over any property may declare any area in which smoking would otherwise be permitted to be a nonsmoking area and, provided that signs are posted giving notice of the smoking restriction, smoking in or within a reasonable distance of that area shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

D.    “No Smoking” or “Smoke Free” signs, with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) or any alternative signage approved by the community development director of the city shall be conspicuously posted at each entrance to a public place in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity who or which has legal or de facto control of such place. The city manager shall post signs at each entrance to a public place in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, which is owned or controlled by the city. Signage required by this subsection shall not be subject to Chapter 17.66 of this code. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provision of this chapter, except as to an area in which smoking is prohibited only by subsection C of this section.

E.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a landlord of a multi-unit residence shall not be deemed to have allowed, aided or abetted illegal smoking if he, she, or it can show through written documentation that, upon receipt of a complaint about a tenant or guest of a tenant smoking in a prohibited area, reasonable steps were taken by the landlord in response to the complaint. “Reasonable steps,” shall include, but not be limited to (i) up to three verbal warnings, memorialized in writing, indicating that the offending tenant and his or her guest has been given notice of such violations, (ii) if three verbal warnings are ineffective, one written warning issued to the offending tenant and his or her guest, and/or formal legal notices served on the offending tenant. In the event a landlord elects to commence eviction proceedings based on a violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that a landlord has not allowed, aided or abetted illegal smoking, even in the event a court refuses to order such eviction.

(Ord. 4913 § 3, 2008.)

 

8.32.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4886; Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 4301 § 5, 1991; Ord. 3845 § 1, 1985: Ord 3706 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2890 § 1, 1975: prior code § 18C-5.)

 

8.32.060 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4886; Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 4301 § 6, 1991; Ord. 3845 § 1, 1985.)

 

8.32.070 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4886; Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 3845 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3706 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3647 § 7, 1983; Ord. 2879 § 1, 1975: prior code § 18C-6.)

 

8.32.080 Private enforcement.
A.    The city attorney or city prosecutor may also bring a civil action to enforce this chapter and to obtain the remedies specified below or otherwise available in equity or at law.

B.     Except as otherwise provided herein, any person acting for the interests of him, her, or itself, or of its members, or of the general public (hereinafter “a private enforcer”) may bring a civil action to enforce this chapter against any person who knowingly violates this chapter with the remedies specified below, if both of the following requirements are met:

1.     The action is commenced more than sixty days after the private enforcer has given written notice of an alleged violation of this chapter to the city attorney and to the alleged violator.

2.     No person acting on behalf of the city or the state has commenced or is prosecuting an action regarding the violation(s) which was or were the subject of the notice on the date the private action is filed.

Notwithstanding the right of a private enforcer to bring a civil action to enforce this chapter, only the city attorney or city prosecutor may bring an action for a violation of Section 8.32.046.

C.     A private enforcer shall provide a copy of his, her, or its action to the city attorney within seven days of filing it.

D.    Upon settlement or judgment of an action brought pursuant to subsection G of this section, or upon settlement of any claim or demand presented by a private enforcer prior to commencement of an action, the private enforcer shall give the city attorney a notice of that settlement or judgment and of the final disposition of the case. No private enforcer may settle such an action unless the city attorney or the court determines the settlement to be reasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter, and any settlement in violation of this requirement may be set aside upon motion to a court of competent jurisdiction by the city attorney or city prosecutor.

E.     Upon proof of a violation of this chapter, the court shall award the following:

1.     Damages in the amount of either:

a.     Upon proof, actual damages;

b.     With insufficient or no proof of damages, two hundred fifty dollars for each violation of this chapter (hereinafter “statutory damages”). Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no private enforcer suing on behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages based upon a violation of this chapter if a previous claim brought on behalf of the general public for statutory damages and based upon the same violation has been adjudicated, whether or not the private enforcer was a party to that earlier adjudication.

2.     Restitution to the appropriate party or parties of the gains obtained by way of violation of this chapter.

3.     Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice, or a conscious disregard for the public health and safety.

4.     Attorney’s fees and costs reasonably incurred by a successful party in prosecuting or defending an action.

Any damages awarded in an action brought by the city attorney or city prosecutor shall be paid into the city’s general fund, unless the court determines that they should be paid to a damaged third party.

F.     Upon proof of at least one violation of this chapter, a private enforcer, the city prosecutor, city attorney, any peace officer or code enforcement official may obtain an injunction against further violations of this chapter or, as to small claims court actions, a judgment payable on condition that a further violation of this chapter occur within a time specified by the court.

G.    Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar, a private enforcer may bring an action to enforce this chapter solely on behalf of the general public. When a private enforcer does so, nothing about such an action shall operate to preclude or bar the private enforcer from bringing a subsequent action on his, her, or its own behalf based upon the same facts.

H.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private enforcer from bringing a civil action in small claims court to enforce this chapter, as long as the amount in demand and the relief sought are within the jurisdiction of small claims court.

(Ord. 4913 § 4, 2008.)

 

8.32.090 Enforcement.
A.    Except as allowed by Section 8.32.080, the city manager shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter when facilities, which are owned, operated or leased by the city of El Cajon, are involved. The city shall provide business license applicants with a copy of this chapter.

B.     Owners, operators, or managers of any place of employment regulated herein shall comply with this chapter. Such owner, operator, or manager shall post all signage required herein.

C.     It shall be the responsibility of employers to disseminate information concerning the provisions of this chapter to employees.

(Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

 

8.32.100 Violations and penalties.
        Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. No fines or private damages shall be imposed or allowed for any violations occurring within six months following the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

 

8.32.110 Retaliation prohibited.
        No person shall intimidate, threaten or effect any retaliation against an individual seeking enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

 

8.32.115 Other applicable laws.
        This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable law. (Ord. 4886 § 2, 2007.)

Chapter 8.33 LICENSURE OF TOBACCO RETAILERS
8.33.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly required otherwise:

A.    “Authorized address” means the name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all license-related communications and notices.

B.     “Department” means the community development department.

C.     “Electronic vapor device” means any device with a heating element, a battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the user in a manner that simulates smoking tobacco products, shisha, herbs, or any other product that produces smoke.

D.    “Electronic vapor inhalation substance products” means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers, vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic vapor devices.

E.     “Electronic vapor device retailers” means any establishment that sells electronic cigarettes or any products used in conjunction with electronic cigarettes, including, but not limited to, kits, e-liquids and “juice.”

F.     “Hookah” means a pipe commonly, but not always, made of glass, used for vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, non-flavored tobacco, shisha, dried fruits, or other substances in which vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin before inhalation.

G.    “Person” shall have the definition set forth in Section 1.04.020 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

H.    “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

I.      “Tobacco product” means: (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis or any other preparation of tobacco; (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth; (3) any electronic vapor device, electronic vapor inhalation substance, and hookahs; and (4) any plant, weed, or plant product that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth in smoke or vapor form, using any tobacco paraphernalia, but does not include any product specifically approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence.

J.      “Tobacco paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products, hookahs, electronic vapor devices and electronic vapor inhalation substances.

K.    “Tobacco retailer” means any person or proprietor who – personally or through an agent, employee, contractor, or other intermediary – sells, offers for sale or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, hookahs, electronic vapor devices and electronic vapor inhalation substances. “Tobacco retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged or offered for exchange.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.020 Requirement for tobacco retailer license.
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer’s license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur.

B.     A license may only issue to authorize tobacco retailing at a specified, fixed, address, legally zoned for commercial activities at the location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot and tobacco retailing from vehicles are prohibited.

C.     No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location that is licensed under state law to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises (e.g., an “on-sale” license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) and no license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location offering food for sale for consumption by guests on the premises. For example, tobacco retailing in bars and restaurants is prohibited.

D.    The license fee established pursuant to Section 8.33.060 confers paid status upon a license for a term of one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer’s license no later than thirty days prior to expiration of the payment term.

E.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including, without limitation, any condition or limitation on smoking in enclosed places of employment made applicable to business establishments by California Labor Code Section 6404.5.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.030 Application procedure.
        Application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed of the laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer’s license. A license that is issued in error or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor may be revoked pursuant to Section 8.33.090(C) of this chapter. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following information:

A.    The name, address and telephone number of each proprietor.

B.     The business name, address and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought.

C.     The authorized address for each proprietor. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection B above.

D.    Whether any proprietor has previously been issued a license pursuant to this chapter that is, or was at any time, suspended or revoked and, if so, the dates of the suspension period or the date of revocation.

E.     Such other information as the department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.040 Issuance of license.
        Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer’s license and the license fee, the department shall issue a license unless reasonable evidence in the record demonstrates one of the following basis for denial:

A.    The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or

B.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a proprietor for which or whom a suspension is in effect pursuant to Section 8.33.090 of this chapter; or

C.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a proprietor for which or whom a suspension is in effect pursuant to Section 8.33.090 of this chapter; or at a location which has had a license revoked pursuant to Section 8.33.090(A)(4) of this chapter provided; however, this subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant: (1) was not a proprietor at the time that: (a) a violation of this chapter occurred, or (b) an appeal of a citation for a violation of this chapter was pending; and (2) has acquired or is acquiring the premises or business in an arm’s length transaction. For the purposes of this subsection, an “arm’s length transaction” is defined as a third-party sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, proprietors, or a sale for the primary purpose of avoiding the effect of the violation of this chapter that occurred at the location, is presumed not to be an “arm’s length transaction;” or

D.    The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to Chapter 12.06 and Section 8.33.020 of this chapter (e.g., mobile vending), or that is unlawful pursuant to Title 17 of this code (i.e., the zoning code), or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state or federal law.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.050 Other requirements and prohibitions.
A.    Display of License. Each license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed premises.

B.     Positive Identification Required. No person shall engage in tobacco retailing without first examining the identification of each purchaser and confirming that the proposed sale is to a purchaser who is at least the minimum age in state law for being sold the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia.

C.     Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person shall engage in tobacco retailing if the person is younger than the minimum age in state law for being sold or for possessing any tobacco product.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.060 Fees for license.
A.    The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer’s license shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both license administration and license enforcement, including, for example, issuing the license, administering the license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the total program. All fees shall be used to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law.

B.     A proprietor, in possession of a tobacco retailer’s license, who has not been found to be in violation of this chapter for a period of thirty-six months immediately preceding the issuance or renewal of a tobacco retailer’s license, shall receive a twenty percent (20%) discount on the annual tobacco retailer’s license fee. This discounted fee will be applied to the annual license fee following a proprietor’s compliance after thirty-six consecutive months.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.070 Licenses nontransferable.
        A tobacco retailer’s license is nontransferable except between existing proprietors holding a license at the same location. If the information required in the license application pursuant to Section 8.33.030, subsections (A) (1), (2) or (3) changes, a new tobacco retailer’s license is required before the business may continue to act as a tobacco retailer. For example, if a proprietor to whom a license has been issued changes business location, that proprietor must apply for a new license prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at the new location. Also, if the business is sold, the new owner must apply for a license for that location before acting as a tobacco retailer. (Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.080 License violation and compliance monitoring.
A.    Violation of Tobacco-Related Laws. It shall be a violation of a tobacco retailer’s license for a licensee or his or her agent or employee to violate any local, state or federal tobacco-related law.

B.     License Compliance Monitoring.

1.     Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. Any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter.

2.     The department shall check the compliance of each tobacco retailer at least one time during a twelve-month period and shall conduct additional compliance checks within that period as warranted. The compliance checks shall be conducted to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is complying with tobacco laws regulating underage sales. The department, or the police department, in assisting the department in performing compliance checks, shall use underage decoys and comply with the city’s protocols for the compliance checks developed in consultation with the San Diego County Department of Health and Human Services, the San Diego County District Attorney, and the City Attorney’s Office. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other tobacco-related laws.

3.     The city shall not enforce any tobacco-related minimum-age law against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person’s age (the “underage decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when:

a.     The underage decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official; or

b.     The underage decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part by the San Diego County Department of Health and Human Services, funded in part, either directly or indirectly through sub-contracting, by the California Department of Health Services, or funded in part directly by fees or fines collected from tobacco retailers under this chapter.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.090 Penalties for violation.
A.    Suspension or Revocation of License for Violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, an administrative fine shall be paid, and a tobacco retailer’s license may be suspended or revoked if the department finds, after notice to the licensee and opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, or his or her agents or employees, has or have violated the requirements or prohibitions of this chapter including the conditions of the license imposed pursuant to Section 8.33.080 of this chapter.

1.     Upon a finding by the department of a first license violation within any thirty-six month period, the tobacco retailer shall pay an administrative fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars. The city may also conduct up to two compliance checks within twelve months of the first violation.

2.     Upon a finding by the department of a second license violation within any thirty-six-month period, the tobacco retailer shall pay an administrative fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars and the license shall be suspended for sixty days. The city may also conduct up to two compliance checks within twelve months of the second violation.

3.     Upon a finding by the department of a third license violation within any thirty-six month period, the tobacco retailer shall pay an administrative fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars and the license shall be suspended for one hundred twenty days. The city may also conduct up to two compliance checks within twelve months of the third violation.

4.     Upon a finding by the department of a fourth license violation within any thirty-six month period, the license shall be revoked, and the tobacco retailer shall pay an administrative fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars. Further, the proprietor or proprietors who had been issued the license shall never again be issued a tobacco retailer’s license pursuant to this chapter.

5.     A tobacco retailer with a suspended or revoked license:

a.     Shall remove all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia from public view; and

b.     Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products at the tobacco retailer location or that would lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at the tobacco retailer location, including any use of the terms, “tobacco,” or “smoke shop,” or similar references in the name of the business operated by the tobacco retailer;

c.     Except in the case of a first or second suspension within any thirty-six month period, instead of complying with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the tobacco retailer may elect to post a clear and legible sign at each point of sale and at every public entrance stating in seventy-two point type or larger: “TOBACCO PRODUCTS NOT FOR SALE because this store has violated a public health law regulating tobacco” and such signs must be present and remain free of obstructions for the entire duration of the suspension period.

6.     Any tobacco retailer who has paid a two thousand five hundred dollar administrative fine as required by subsections (A) (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section will be eligible for a refund of five hundred dollars if, within ninety days following the payment of the fine, that person, and each proprietor and employee of that person, shall attend a one hour responsible vendor class, training, or other course of instruction approved by the department. “Responsible vendor” courses must include training related to the laws that restrict the sales of alcohol, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, and electronic vapor devices, and other such products, including restrictions in this chapter. To be eligible for the refund the instructor must produce to the department a list of attendees and certificates for each person that successfully attends the training.

B.     Suspension of License for Failure to Pay Renewal Fee. A tobacco retailer’s license that is not timely renewed pursuant to Section 8.33.020(D) shall automatically be suspended by operation of law. If not renewed, a license shall be automatically revoked two years after the renewal date. To reinstate the paid status of a license that has been suspended due to the failure to timely pay the renewal fee, the proprietor must:

1.     Submit the renewal fee plus a reinstatement fee of ten percent of the renewal fee; and

2.     Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not sold any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia during the period the license was suspended for failure to pay the renewal fee.

C.     Revocation of License Issued in Error. A tobacco retailer’s license shall be revoked if the department finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the basis for denial of a license under Section 8.33.040 of this chapter existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a license.

D.    Appeal of Suspension or Revocation. A decision of the department to revoke or suspend a license may be appealed by a proprietor or a tobacco retailer by means of an administrative hearing before an independent fact finder, including, but not limited to, an administrative law judge from the State Office of Administrative Hearings, other private service providing retired judges for arbitration, or city-appointed administrative hearing officer. The appeal may also include a challenge to any fine accompanying the suspension or revocation. Any appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days of mailing of the department’s decision and be accompanied by the full amount of any applicable fine as provided in Section 1.14.100 (except as provided in Section 1.14.090). An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action. A suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 8.33.090(B) of this chapter is not subject to appeal.

E.     Appeal of Fine. Any appeal of a fine not involving a suspension or revocation must be conducted pursuant to Sections 1.14.080 – 1.14.110, each inclusive.

F.     An administrative hearing to appeal a decision of the department to issue a fine and revoke or suspend a license held pursuant to subdivision (A) paragraphs (2) through (4) of this section, and subdivision (D) of this section is civil in nature and therefore the burden of proof required is a preponderance of the evidence. In such an appeal the administrative hearing officer shall only determine whether the violations of this chapter occurred in the time periods set forth in subdivision (A), paragraphs (2), (3) or (4), or subdivision (D) of this section. The administrative hearing officer shall not consider the appropriateness of the amount of the fine or whether the length of suspension of a license, or revocation of the license, creates a financial hardship on the tobacco retailer; nor shall the administrative hearing officer grant the applicant any stay of execution or delay of enforcement of a suspension or revocation sustained following the hearing.

G.    The rules of evidence in an administrative hearing to appeal a decision of the department to revoke or suspend a license held pursuant to Section 8.33.090(A) or (D) shall be in accordance with California Government Code Sections 11513 and 11514 as those sections are amended from time to time. Except as provided in this subdivision (F), the provisions of administrative adjudication for the State of California (Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the California Government Code) shall not apply to any administrative hearing under this chapter.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.100 Administrative fine.
A.    Grounds for Fine. In addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity, if the department finds, based on substantial evidence, that any unlicensed person, including a person named on a revoked or suspended license, has engaged in tobacco retailing in violation of Section 8.33.020 of this chapter, the department shall impose an administrative fine on that person pursuant to Section 8.33.110(C) of this chapter.

B.     Appeal to Superior Court of Limited Jurisdiction. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1094.5 or 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and in accordance with Section 1.14.150 of this code, within twenty days after mailing or personal service of the hearing officer’s decision and findings, any person subject to a fine may seek review of the hearing officer’s decision and findings by the superior court of limited jurisdiction. A copy of the notice of appeal to the superior court shall be timely served in person or by first-class mail upon the department by the contestant. The appeal shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of the department’s file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the records of the department of the notices of the violation and of the hearing officer’s decision and findings shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein.

C.     Failure to Pay Fine. If no timely notice of appeal to the superior court is filed, or the department is not timely served with a copy of a notice of appeal, the hearing officer’s decision and findings shall be deemed confirmed and the fine shall be collected pursuant to Section 1.14.130 of this code.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

 

8.33.110 Enforcement.
        The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

A.    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation.

B.     Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any provision of this subdivision any violation may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code.

C.     Any person violating this chapter is subject to a civil action brought by the city attorney, punishable by a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. Any continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense for each day of the violation.

D.    Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

E.     Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be unfair business practices and are presumed to at least nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the business operates.

F.     In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings and suits for injunctive relief.

G.    Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public may bring an action for injunctive relief to prevent future such violations or to recover such actual damages as he or she may prove.

(Ord. 5098 § 2, 2020.)

Chapter 8.34 REGULATION OF TATTOO BUSINESSES
8.34.010 County of San Diego tattoo parlor and mobile tattoo vehicles ordinance—Adoption by reference.
        The tattoo parlor and mobile tattoo vehicles ordinance of the county of San Diego, being Chapter 3 of Division 6 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances, as adopted by the county of San Diego, is adopted by reference as the regulatory provisions applicable to tattoo artists, tattoo parlors, and mobile tattoo vehicles of the city, for the regulation of tattoo parlors and mobile tattoo vehicles operating in the city of El Cajon, to prevent communicable disease which may be spread through improper tattooing techniques, and each and all such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the tattoo parlor and mobile tattoo vehicles ordinance of the county of San Diego are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added, deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The tattoo parlor and mobile tattoo vehicles ordinance of the county of San Diego is referred to in this chapter as the “county tattoo parlor ordinance,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4721, § 1, 2003.)

 

8.34.020 Section 66.318 amended—Penalties.
        Section 66.318 of the county tattoo parlor ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

B.     Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter, unless provision is otherwise made in this chapter, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

C.     Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this chapter, unless provision is otherwise made in this chapter, shall be punishable by fine only as follows:

1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the chapter within one year;

3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the chapter within one year.

D.    Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable accordingly.

E.     In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated as such by this city, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

(Ord. 4721, § 1, 2003.)

Chapter 8.36 APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND FEES
8.36.010 Application.
        Every applicant for a permit, license or registration required by this code and issued by the health officer shall file with the department of health services a written application on a form prescribed by said department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the description of the property by street and number wherein or whereon it is proposed to conduct the business or activity for which the permit or license is required, the nature of the permit or license for which application is made, the character of the business or activity proposed to be conducted, and such other information as the department of health services may require. (Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

 

8.36.020 Inspection fee for health regulated activities.
        Every person applying for a permit for any health regulated business for which a permit, license or registration is required under the provisions of this code, and issued by the health officer, shall at the time of making application for the permit pay the designated inspection fees. (Ord. 4189 § 1, 1989; Ord. 3714 § 10, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

 

8.36.030 Investigation by department of health services.
        Upon receipt of such application, accompanied by the required fee, it shall be the duty of the health officer to investigate the matters set forth in such application, and the sanitary conditions in the place where it is proposed to conduct the business or activity mentioned in the application, and if it shall appear to the health officer that the statements contained in the application are true, and that the existing sanitary conditions in the place mentioned in said application comply with the provisions of law, a permit, license or registration shall thereupon be granted. Such permit or license shall be granted only upon the express condition that it shall be subject to revocation or suspension by said health officer upon a showing satisfactory to said health officer of a violation by the holder of such permit or any person acting with his consent or under his authority, of any applicable provision of law regulating places or activities of the character for which the permit or license is granted. (Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

 

8.36.040 Renewal of permit, license or registration.
        A permit or license issued pursuant to this code shall expire on the last day of the month of the one year anniversary month in which the permit was issued and shall be renewed annually, except as provided for food vending and sewage pumping vehicles, food vending machines, and underground hazardous materials storage tanks. At the time application is made, there shall be paid to the department of health services the required annual fee, which fee is due and payable each year on the first day of the month following the expiration of the permit. (Ord. 4189 § 1, 1989; Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

 

8.36.050 Penalty for delinquent payment.
A.    Any fee which is not paid by the first day of the month following the month in which it is due is thirty days delinquent, and on the first day of the next following month, if still unpaid, is sixty days delinquent.

B.     In any case where a fee is thirty days delinquent, a penalty of fifty dollars, or an amount equal to fifty percent of the fee, whichever is less, shall be added to and collected with the required fee.

C.     In any case where a fee is sixty days delinquent, an additional penalty of one hundred dollars, or an amount equal to the fee for a total penalty of one hundred fifty dollars, or one hundred fifty percent of the fee, whichever is less, will be added to and collected with the required fee.

D.    The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code or any ordinance, nor shall it prevent prosecution for violation of this code or any ordinance.

E.     The delinquent penalty fee may be waived by the health officer in case of error or when the applicant has not held a health permit during the past five years, and was unaware that a health permit was required.

(Ord. 4189 § 1, 1989; Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

 

8.36.060 Permit or license not transferable.
        A permit or license is not transferable from one person or one place to another, and shall be deemed voided if removed from the place or location specified in the written application and in the permit. (Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

 

8.36.070 Fees.
A.    The fee for each permit, license, or registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council and retained on file in the office of the city clerk.

B.     If the fee is determined by reference to the number of employees retained by the establishment or concession, such fee shall be based on the average number of employees during the preceding year, or, if in the opinion of the health officer such average number does not reflect the number of employees during the year for which the permit is sought with reasonable accuracy, the estimated average number of employees.

(Ord. 3714 § 11, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 10, 1982.)

Chapter 8.40 RENTAL OF BUILDING USED FOR DRUG ACTIVITY
8.40.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor, as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Health and Safety Code Section 11054, et seq.

B.     “Drug-related nuisance” means the holding, maintenance, or use of a rental unit for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing, or giving away any controlled substance.

C.     “Drug related use” means any use in a rental unit of a controlled substance.

D.    “Illegal drug dealing activity” means any possession for sale, any sale, storage, possession, or manufacturing of a controlled substance from or in a rental unit.

E.     “Landlord” means an owner, lessor, or sublessor (including any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.

F.     “Rental unit” means any residential or commercial building, dwelling, apartment, dwelling unit, and room, as defined in Chapter 17.04 of this code, including any single-family residence, duplex, condominium, and suite, in the city, the land and buildings appurtenant thereto, including but not limited to common areas, garage facilities, attics, basements, alleyways, stairwells, and elevators. This term shall also include mobile and manufactured homes (“home”), whether rent is paid for the home and the land upon which the home is located, or the rent is paid for the land alone. Further, it shall include recreational vehicles, as defined in California Civil Code Section 799.24, if located in a mobile home park, whether rent is paid for the recreational vehicle and the land upon which it is located, or rent is paid for the land alone.

G.    “Tenant” means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, any person entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person who is using or occupying a rental unit.

(Ord. 4600 § 2, 1999; Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.40.020 Prohibition.
        A landlord shall not knowingly cause or permit any rental unit to be used or maintained for any drug-related use, illegal drug dealing activity, or drug-related nuisance. (Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.40.030 Notice of violation.
        If the city attorney determines that a rental unit is being used or maintained in violation of Section 8.40.020, then the city attorney or any law enforcement agency may order the landlord to comply with said section. This order shall be presented to the landlord either by personal service or by a letter sent certified mail with a return receipt requested. The order shall contain as enclosures sufficient documentation to establish that the premises are being used or maintained for any drug-related use, illegal drug dealing activity or drug-related nuisance. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorizing the release of documentation which would violate an individual’s rights to privacy or any other applicable provision of law that precludes the release of public records. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize a search of any rental unit or seizure of any property by a landlord under color of authority of the city or any employee or official thereof. (Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.40.040 Failure to comply with notice of violation.
        A landlord shall in good faith comply with the notice prescribed by Section 8.40.030. If the landlord fails to comply with the notice, then the city attorney or any law enforcement agency may take any lawful action to enforce Section 8.40.020 hereof. Good faith compliance may be shown by the landlord’s obtaining the voluntary surrender of the premises by the tenant; or the landlord’s commencement and prosecution of unlawful detainer proceedings; or the landlord’s demonstration in writing to the satisfaction of the city attorney that commencement of unlawful detainer proceedings is not supported by the evidence received by the city and by the landlord, taken as a whole. (Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

 

8.40.045 Violation—Penalty.
        Failure of landlord to comply with the notice prescribed by Section 8.40.030 may also subject the landlord to the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 or 1.24.020 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city of El Cajon. (Ord. 4600 § 3, 1999.)

 

8.40.050 Declaration of public nuisance.
        In addition to any other enforcement action, the city attorney may declare an alleged violation of Section 8.40.020, or the activities described therein, to constitute a public nuisance and may commence abatement of the conditions giving rise thereto in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 11570 et seq. (Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

8.40.060 Construction.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted in such a way as to create a principal-agent relationship between the city and the landlord. (Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

 

 

8.40.070. Severability.
        If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. It is declared that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, would have been adopted or passed irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 4204 § 1, 1989.)

Chapter 8.44 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED
8.44.010. Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for public safety regarding the use, possession, storage, transport, distribution, delivery, sale, or display of fireworks. No part of this chapter shall be deemed to permit any activity in violation of state or federal regulations relating to fireworks. (Ord. 4998 § 1, 2013.)

 

8.44.020. Definitions.
        The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

        (a)    “Fireworks” has the same meaning as the term “fireworks” in Health and Safety Code section 12511. The term “fireworks” includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks; blank cartridges; toy pistols; toy cannons; toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used; firecrackers; torpedoes; sky-rockets; Roman candles; rockets; daygo bombs; sparklers; snap caps; party poppers; paper caps; chasers; fountains; smoke sparks; aerial bombs; and fireworks kits. “Fireworks” does not include auto flares, paper caps that do not contain in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of these caps.

        (b)    “Fireworks kit” has the same meaning as the term “fireworks kit” in Health and Safety Code section 12512 and means any assembly of materials or explosive substances, which is designed and intended by the seller to be assembled by the person receiving the material or explosive substance and when assembled, comes within the definition of “fireworks,” above.

        (c)    “Sell” means to sell, offer to sell, solicit the sale of, take orders for, give away, offer to give away, distribute or deliver. (Ord. 4998 § 1, 2013.)

 

8.44.030. Fireworks prohibited.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to use, posses, store, transport, distribute, deliver, sale, or display fireworks except for supervised public displays of fireworks by or for a municipal agency, or permitted theatrical performances by a state licensed pyrotechnic operator. (Ord. 4998 § 1, 2013.)

 

8.44.040. Seizure of illegal fireworks.
        City of El Cajon Police, City of El Cajon Fire Department and the San Diego Sheriff’s members shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all fireworks being manufactured, offered for sale, possessed or being discharged in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 4998 § 1, 2013.)

 

8.44.050. Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provisions of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4998 § 1, 2013.)

 

 

8.44.060. Violation—Penalty.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 4998 § 1, 2013.)

TITLE 8 ENDNOTES
 

        Prior code history: §§ 13-19, 13-19.1, 13-20, 13-21, 13-22, 13-23, 13-24, 13-25 and 13-26.

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Division I OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT (RESERVED)
Division II OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON (RESERVED)
Division III OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Division IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Division V OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Division VI CONSUMER PROTECTION
Division VII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Division VIII WEAPONS

Division I OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT (RESERVED)

Division II OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON (RESERVED)

Division III OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Chapter 9.20 DRUNKENNESS
9.20.010 Arrest.
        The arresting officer need not, in his discretion, swear to a complaint against persons taken into custody for drunkenness. If no formal complaint is on file by any policeman or civilian, the intoxicated person may be lawfully released upon his recovery from drunkenness. (Prior code § 18-10.)

 

Chapter 9.22 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION
9.22.005 Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 25620, Penal Code Section 647e, and other applicable laws, in order to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. (Ord. 3723 § 3, 1983.)

 

9.22.010 Alcoholic beverage—Definition.
        For the purposes of this chapter “alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances, as defined in Section 23004 of the California Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 3723 § 3, 1983.)

 

9.22.020 Alcoholic beverage possession or consumption—Superblock, Civic Center, Expanded Civic Center, Prescott Promenade, parking lots, city property.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage within any public facility or upon any public grounds located in the Super-block, Civic Center, Expanded Civic Center and Prescott Promenade areas, and to possess any alcoholic beverage in the Prescott Promenade; said areas described in Section 6.12.150.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on any public street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, public parking lot, or private parking lot held open to the public, within the city of El Cajon.

C.     Notwithstanding subsections A and B above, consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted at planned events held at specific times in the areas stated above, including the El Cajon Performing Arts Center and the areas immediately adjacent to the East County Performing Arts Center building; provided that express permission for such is granted by the city council or city manager.

D.    Notwithstanding subsections A and B above, this section shall not apply to the East County Regional Center building.

(Ord. 5033 §§ 4, 5, 2015; Ord. 4738 § 2, 2003.)

 

9.22.030 Alcoholic beverage possession or consumption—Parks.
        It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage within any city, county, or city and county owned park, or other adjacent city, county, or city and county owned public place, or any recreation and park district, or any regional park or open space district. (Ord. 4738 § 3, 2003.)

 

9.22.040 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4528, 1997.)

 

9.22.050 Alcoholic beverages—Possession of open containers—Liquor stores and adjacent areas.
A.    It is unlawful for any person possessing any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot, parking lots adjacent to the posted parking lot, or public sidewalks immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, pursuant to Division 9 of the California Business and Professions Code.

B.     Those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license shall be posted with clear, visible notice indicating to the patrons of the licensee and the immediately adjacent parking lot, and to persons on the immediately adjacent sidewalk, that the provisions of California Penal Code Section 647e (a), as adopted by subsection A above, are applicable. Any licensee who fails to post the licensed premises shall be subject to penalties as provided in subsection E below.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private residence parking lot which is immediately adjacent to those premises to which this section applies.

D.    Parking lot immediately adjacent to any alcoholic beverage licensee means any parking lot, except those described in subsection C of this section, which is contiguous to the licensed premises and any parking lot under the control of, operated in conjunction with, or having shared access to, the licensed premises.

E.     Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction. Violations of this section are subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010(C) of this code.

(Ord. 5013 § 2, 2014.)

 

9.22.055 Posting requirements.
        Signs posted in accordance with Section 9.22.050(B) shall conform in all respects to the sign provisions of this code. They shall be limited to no more than two faces per sign with no more than four square feet per sign face and shall be in substantially the following form:

 

POSSESSION OF OPENED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS UPON THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED.

 

(ECMC § 9.22.050)

 

(Ord. 4178 § 3, 1989.)

9.22.060 Exemption—State licensed premises.
        This chapter shall not apply where the alcoholic beverage consumption or possession is within premises located in a park or other public place for which a license has been issued pursuant to Division 9 of the California Business and Professions Code, except as expressly provided in Section 9.22.050 of this code. (Ord. 3723 § 3, 1983.)

 

Chapter 9.24 REPEALED
Chapter 9.25 HOTEL, MOTEL AND LODGING HOUSE REGISTRATION REGULATIONS
9.25.010 Purpose and scope.
        The purpose of this chapter is to deter the facilitation of prostitution, illicit drug activity and other illegal activities within the city by regulating registration practices in hotels, motels and other lodging houses. (Ord. 4598 § 2, 1999.)

 

9.25.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of Sections 9.25.010 through 9.25.060, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

A.    “Hotel” means any structure or portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home, motor home, travel trailer or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

B.     “Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

C.     “Room” means any area within a hotel intended for use as dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. “Room” does not mean any area within a hotel not intended for use as sleeping or lodging quarters such as meeting or conference rooms.

D.    “Transient” means any person possessing any room or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, sleeping or any other purpose, or possessing the right to do the same for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days.

(Ord. 4598 § 3, 1999.)

 

9.25.030 Registration identification required.
A.    Every operator of every hotel in the city shall at all times keep and maintain therein a register, in which the operator shall inscribe with ink, the name, address and date of birth of the adult transient who registers for a room or rooms. Concurrent with the registration process, the adult transient who registers for a room or rooms must provide to the operator valid picture identification. Valid picture identification includes a valid drivers license, federal or state government, or military identification card, passport or any form of identification that contains the transient’s picture, current address and date of birth. The type of picture identification provided to the operator shall be noted in the register and include the document’s identification number and the state or country of issuance. Additionally, the adult transient who registers for a room or rooms must identify by name each and every transient and all authorized or proposed occupants of such room or rooms.

B.     The operator shall also include in the register information regarding the transient’s vehicle including vehicle make and model, license plate number and the state of issuance. Such vehicle information shall be provided to the operator prior to the termination of the period for which the room (or rooms) was let.

C.     Such register shall be signed by the transient and such operator shall thereupon write opposite such name and address so registered the number of each room assigned thereto together with the time of such inscription. Until all of the aforementioned entries, except vehicle information, have been made in such register, no transient shall be permitted to occupy any room in any hotel in the city. Erasures or alterations on the register shall be prohibited excepting correction of an error and no person shall erase or obliterate any name or address or permit the same. When the transient quits or surrenders any room in any hotel, the operator of the hotel shall enter the time thereof in the register opposite the name of such transient.

D.    Registration records shall be maintained and kept on file not less than ninety days from inscription and shall be available for reasonable inspection by city officials or any peace officer.

(Ord. 4623 § 1, 1999; Ord. 4598 § 4, 1999.)

 

9.25.040 Multiple renting or letting prohibition.
        No operator shall rent or let any room in any hotel more than once within an eight-hour time period. (Ord. 4598 § 5, 1999.)

 

9.25.050 Signing of true name.
        No person shall write or cause to be written, nor shall any operator or person in charge of any hotel knowingly permit to be written in any register of any hotel any name other than the true name of the person so registering. (Ord. 4598 § 6, 1999.)

 

9.25.060 Violation—Penalty.
        Any violation of any provision contained in this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable by up to a one thousand dollar fine and/or twelve months in the county jail. (Ord. 4623 § 2, 1999; Ord. 4598 § 7, 1999.)

 

Chapter 9.28 GAMBLING[2]
9.28.010 Purpose and scope.
        The purpose of Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150 is to preserve the public peace, health and safety. It is the finding of this legislative body that games predominantly of chance, as described in Section 9.28.100, present a significant threat to the public peace, health and safety. For this reason it is the intent of this legislative body that the prohibitions of Section 9.28.100 apply to games predominantly of chance, as described in said section.

        The provisions of Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150 specifically make the mere possession of any machine, contrivance or device defined in Section 9.28.100 illegal, and render such machine or contrivance subject to confiscation as provided in Section 9.28.140. (Ord. 2897 § 1, 1975: prior code § 4-57.)

 

9.28.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of Sections 9.28.020 through 9.28.090, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

A.    “Betting” means an agreement, expressed or implied, between two or more persons that money or some valuable thing contributed by those so agreeing shall become the property of one or some of them upon the happening or not happening in the future of an event which at the time is an uncertainty, or upon the ascertainment of the facts in dispute.

B.     “Consideration” means any benefit, right, interest, gain, advantage, profit or payment conferred or agreed to be conferred upon one person by another person, as an inducement for some detriment, prejudice, forbearance, inconvenience, disadvantage, loss, or for some act, payment, responsibility, or service given, suffered or undertaken, conferred, or agreed to be conferred by a person.

C.     “Gamble” or “gambling” means the playing of a game, device or contrivance in which the element of chance is the controlling factor for stakes or the betting on the results of any game or contest, device or contrivance, whether it be one of skill or chance.

D.    “Prize” means any form of consideration except a trophy or trophies.

E.     “Trophy” means a placard, plaque, medal, statue, vase or similar object given to a person or group as a memento of his or their victory, status or standing at the conclusion of a tournament. It includes the above-mentioned articles which are competed for as mementos of victory, status or standing obtained in a designated tournament, and not as items of monetary value or for the value that can be derived by exchanging such items for another thing, payment or money.

(Prior code § 18A-1.)

 

9.28.030 Prohibited generally.
        It is unlawful for any person to gamble within the city. (Prior code § 18A-6.)

 

9.28.040 Prohibition of games—When.
        No person shall play, bet at, or, as owner or employee, open, set up, manage, conduct or maintain any game, machine or enterprise wherein:

A.    A consideration is given by the player; and

B.     Prizes are awarded as determined by chance, or by any combination of skill and chance wherein chance is the predominant factor.

(Prior code § 18A-2.)

 

9.28.050 Prohibition of games—Additional restrictions.
        No person shall play, bet at, or, as owner or employee, open, set up, manage, conduct or maintain any game, machine or enterprise wherein:

A.    A consideration is given by the player; and

B.     Prizes are awarded to the player; and

C.     Such game, machine or enterprise is played concurrently with or alternately or in connection with any of the following:

1.     Any lottery,

2.     Any game of chance, or any game which is a combination of skill and chance wherein chance is the predominant factor, whether or not a consideration is paid for playing such game of chance or combination thereof.

(Prior code § 18A-3.)

 

9.28.060 Prohibition of games—Free games as enticement.
        No person shall set up, manage, conduct or maintain any combination of games of chance and games of skill which are alternated or played in any sequence with each other so that free games are used to entice or lure players into the playing for a consideration of paid games of skill or paid games combining the element of chance with the element of skill wherein chance is the predominant factor. (Prior code § 18A-4.)

 

9.28.070 Prohibition of games—Awarding prizes by chance.
        No person shall set up, manage, conduct or maintain in any public place or public building any game, machine or enterprise wherein or whereby prizes are awarded by operation of chance, and for playing such game, machine or enterprise, no consideration is furnished by the player. (Prior code § 18A-5.)

 

9.28.080 Visiting gambling place.
        It is unlawful for any person knowingly to visit or be in any room, place or space where anything declared unlawful by Sections 9.28.020 through 9.28.090 is carried on, conducted or operated. (Ord. 2893 § 6, 1975: prior code § 18A-7.)

 

9.28.090 Permitting gambling on premises.
        It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or under his charge or control to be used in full or in part for anything declared unlawful by Sections 9.28.020 through 9.28.090. (Prior code § 18A-8.)

 

9.28.100 Possession prohibited.
        No person shall have in his possession or under his control, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagor or otherwise, or permit to be placed, maintained or kept in any room, space, enclosure or building owned, leased or occupied by him or under his management or control, whether for use or operation or for storage, bailment, safekeeping or deposit only, any pinball machine or marble machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device, upon the result of action on which money or other valuable thing is or may be staked or hazarded, and which is operated or played by placing or depositing therein any coins, checks, slugs, balls or other articles or devices, or in any other manner, and by means whereof, or as a result of the operation of which, any merchandise, money, representative or article of value, checks or tokens redeemable in, or exchangeable for, money or any other thing of value, or any additional free game or free play upon such machine, is or are or may be won or lost or taken from or obtained from such machine, or paid or to be paid or pretended to be paid or given or to be given or pretended to be given by any merchant, owner of such machine or any other person, when the result of action or operation of such machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device is dependent upon hazard or chance, or any combination of skill and chance wherein chance is the predominant factor.

        The mere possession or control, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagor or otherwise, of any pinball machine or marble machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device as defined in this section, is prohibited and penalized by the provisions of this chapter, whether or not the mere possession or control, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagor or otherwise, of any pinball machine or marble machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device as defined in this section might be an infraction of the laws of the state against lotteries, gaming or gambling. (Ord. 2897 § 1, 1975: prior code § 4-51.)

 

9.28.110 Any possession or control deemed violation.
        Every person who has in his possession or under his control, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagor or otherwise, or who permits to be placed, maintained or kept in any room space, enclosure or building owned, leased or occupied by him or under his management or control, whether for use or operation or for storage, bailment, safekeeping or deposit only, any pinball machine or marble machine, appliance or electrical or mechanical device as prohibited in Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150. (Prior code § 4-52.)

 

9.28.120 Relation of provisions to state law.
        The provisions of Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150 are not intended to conflict with, but shall supplement all laws of the state prohibiting lotteries, gaming or gambling. These provisions shall be invoked by all law enforcement officers of the city whose duty it is to enforce the state laws against lotteries, gaming or gambling, when by operation of Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150 the use, ownership or possession, as defined in Section 9.28.100, of any such game or mechanical device or contrivance is prohibited by Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150, but might not be prohibited by the laws of the state. (Prior code § 4-53.)

 

9.28.130 Description of devices.
        The pinball machine or marble machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device the use or operation or possession of which machine is prohibited by Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150, is usually, but not exclusively, described as consisting of a table on legs, the table being in the shape of a box with the upper side covered by glass. Inside the box is a surface studded with pins, plugs, buffers, springs and holes. When a ball is released by a plunger upon the surface, the ball wends its way from the top to the bottom, and during the journey may fall into one of the numerous holes, or in its course along the surface of the table may hit many of the springs, pins or plugs, thereby and by means of electrical or other recordings, giving to the player a score or other result from the operation of such machine which indicates the probable or possible return to the player of any consideration mentioned in Section 9.28.100.

        The description of the pinball machine or marble machine or other contrivance, appliance or mechanical device given in this section does not in any way limit the penal provisions of Section 9.28.100, and this section is not to be construed as making legal any pinball machine or marble machine or other contrivance, appliance or mechanical device which is prohibited by the general terms of Section 9.28.100, but which is not specifically described in this section. (Prior code § 4-54.)

 

9.28.140 Seizure of prohibited devices.
        In addition to any other remedy provided for violation of Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150, any machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device prohibited under Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150 may be seized by any of the officers designated by Section 335a of the Penal Code of the state, being officers whose duty it is to inform against and diligently prosecute offenses against gaming. (Prior code § 4-55.)

 

9.28.150 Destruction of prohibited devices—Disposition of money.
        A notice of intention summarily to destroy machines or devices seized under the provisions of Section 9.28.140 shall, upon such seizure, be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises in or upon which such machine or device was seized.

        Such machines or devices shall be held by the seizing officer for thirty days after such posting, and if no action is commenced to recover possession of such machines or devices within such time, the same shall be summarily destroyed by such officer or, if such machines or devices are held by the court in any civil or criminal action to be in violation of Sections 9.28.010 and 9.28.100 through 9.28.150, the same shall be summarily destroyed by such officer after the decision of the court has become final.

        Any money seized in connection with such machines or devices is to be paid into the treasury of the city for credit of the general fund immediately after such machines or devices have been so destroyed. (Prior code § 4-56.)

 

9.28.160 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

2

Chapter 9.30 SOCIAL HOST OF PARTIES
9.30.010 Purpose and intent.
        The city council finds and determines that youth often obtain alcoholic beverages or possess and use marijuana or controlled substances at parties or other gatherings held at private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises which are under the control of a person or persons who knows or should know of the illegal conduct and fails to stop it. The city council further finds and determines that persons who will be held responsible for abetting or tolerating such conduct will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such parties or gatherings on property under their control. It is the purpose of this chapter to impose criminal liability on persons who are aware of, or should be aware of, the illegal conduct yet fail to prevent it. It is the further purpose of this chapter to impose civil liability for the recovery of the costs of enforcement services and to provide for the recovery of reasonable attorney fees in the event of litigation. (Ord. 5099 § 2, 2020.)

 

9.30.020 Definitions.
        Terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning given to them by state law except as expressly provided herein.

A.    “Adult” shall mean a person who is twenty-one years of age or older.

B.     “Alcoholic beverage” shall mean any liquid or solid material intended to be ingested by a person, which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, drinking alcohol, or alcohol, including but not limited to alcoholic beverages as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code, and which contains one percent (1%) or more of alcohol by volume; any intoxicating liquor; any malt beverage, beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka, cordials, gin, and brandy; and any mixture containing one or more alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverage includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic beverages whether found or ingested separately or as a mixture.

C.     “Control” shall mean any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy, or other possessory right.

D.    “Controlled substance” shall mean a drug or substance whose possession and use is regulated under the schedules set out in California Health & Safety Code Section 11007 and includes, without limitation, “synthetic stimulants” and “synthetic cannabinoids” as those terms are defined in Sections 8.30.020(a) and (b) of this code. Such term does not include any drug or substance for which the individual found to have possessed or consumed such substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue such prescription.

E.     “Enforcement services” shall mean the salaries and benefits of police officers or other code enforcement personnel for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the gathering; the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured police officers or other code enforcement personnel; the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property; and the cost arising from the use of any damaged city equipment in responding to or remaining at the gathering.

F.     “Gathering” shall mean a party, gathering, or event, where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity at a residence or premises.

G.    “Marijuana” shall mean cannabis and cannabis products as described in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11018 and 11018.1, and includes, without limitation, in leaf form, including flowers from the female plant; in edible or drinkable forms, including as an additive to consumable products; the oils and resins of marijuana; or in pills or other ingestible products.

H.    “Minor” shall mean a person under the age of twenty-one years.

I.      “Residence or premises” shall mean a hotel or motel room, home, yard, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

J.      “Social host” shall mean a person who permits a gathering where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages on property owned or controlled by the persons.

(Ord. 5099 § 3, 2020.)

 

9.30.030 Prohibition.
A.    It shall be the duty of any person having control of any residence or premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering to take place at said residence or premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances by any minor at the gathering. Whenever the person having control of the residence or premises either knows or should know a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance at the residence or premises in violation of this chapter it is presumed that the person had the ability to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substances by a minor as set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section; it is further presumed that the person has the ability to terminate the illegal conduct once it is, or should reasonably have been, discovered.

B.     No person who owns or has control of any residence or premises shall knowingly allow a gathering to take place or continue at the residence or premises if:

1.     At the gathering any minor possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance; and

2.     The person knows or reasonably should know by taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance consumption by any minor, that a minor possesses or is consuming any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance at the gathering. Reasonable steps are: (a) controlling access to alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances at the gathering; (b) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances present at the gathering; (c) verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that persons under the age of twenty-one years do not consume alcoholic beverages or marijuana while at the gathering; and (d) supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.

C.     This section does not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

D.    This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, Section 4, of the California Constitution.

(Ord. 5099 § 4, 2020.)

 

9.30.040 Prima facie evidence.
        Whenever a person having control of a residence or premises is present at that residence or premises at the time that a minor possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge specified in Section 9.30.030(A) or (B)(2) above. (Ord. 5099 § 5, 2020.)

 

9.30.050 Protected activities.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to legally protected religious activities or gatherings of family members with not more than two non-family members. (Ord. 4741 § 2, 2003.)

 

9.30.060 Criminal penalties.
        Violations of this chapter may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 4741 § 2, 2003.)

 

9.30.070 Civil liability for enforcement services.
        When a gathering prohibited by Section 9.30.030 occurs and a police officer or code enforcement officer is called to the scene, the person or persons having control of the residence or premises shall be liable for the cost of providing enforcement services during the second or a follow up response by the police, after a first warning to the person or persons having such control. (Ord. 5099 § 6, 2020.)

 

9.30.080 Reimbursement for cost of enforcement services.
        The actual cost of enforcement services described in Section 9.30.070 shall be deemed a debt owed to the city recoverable in a civil action, and shall be recoverable in a civil action, including reasonable attorney fees and costs. (Ord. 4741 § 2, 2003.)

 

9.30.090 Reservation of legal options.
        The city of El Cajon does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 4741 § 2, 2003.)

 

Chapter 9.32 TOPLESS AND BOTTOMLESS ACTIVITY
9.32.010 REPEALED.
        (Prior code § 18B-1.)

 

9.32.020 REPEALED.
        (Prior code § 18B-2.)

 

9.32.030 Exposure of female breast.
        Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any establishment serving alcoholic beverages:

A.    Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts are below such straight line; or

B.     Employs any device or covering, which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or

C.     Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed.

(Ord. 4476, 1995; Ord. 3647 § 8, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 4, 1975; prior code § 18B-3.)

 

9.32.040 Exposure of pubic area or buttocks.
        Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

A.    Exposes his or her private parts or buttocks or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any establishment serving alcoholic beverages; or

B.     Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose himself or herself, or to employ any such device.

(Ord. 4476, 1995; Ord. 3647 § 8, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 4, 1975; prior code § 18B-4.)

 

9.32.050 Exceptions.
        This chapter does not apply to any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Ord. 4476, 1995; prior code § 18B-5.)

 

9.32.060 Accessories.
        Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels, or assists any person to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3647 § 9, 1983; Ord. 2893 § 4, 1975; prior code § 18B-6.)

 

Chapter 9.33 NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES
9.33.010 Nudity prohibited in any public place.
        It shall be either a misdemeanor or an infraction, in the discretion of the prosecutor, for any person from intentionally or recklessly appearing nude in any place open to the public or any place visible from a place open to the public. “Nude” within the meaning of this section means the absence of an opaque covering which covers the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region of any person or any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof of any female person. (Ord. 5043 § 1, 2016)

 

9.33.020 Exceptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Any person five years old or younger.

B.     Any female exposing her breast to the extent such exposure is necessary to breast-feed a child.

C.     Performers who are engaged in live theatrical performances performed in a theater, concert hall or other such establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 5043 § 1, 2016)

 

Chapter 9.34 REPEALED
9.34.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.015 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.060 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.070 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.080 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.090 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.100 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

9.34.110 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4890; Ord. 4796 § 2, 2004.)

 

Chapter 9.36 SLEEPING
9.36.005 Definition.
        “Camp” shall have the same meaning as in Section 2.56.010 of this code. (Ord. 4449, 1994.)

 

9.36.010 Sleeping prohibited—Superblock, Expanded Civic Center, Judson Park and Prescott Promenade.
        It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge or sleep within any public facility or upon any public grounds in:

A.    The Superblock and Expanded Civic Center area, more particularly described as:

 

        Lots 1 through 5, inclusive, of Superblock Phase II in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 9548, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 6, 1980, together with Lot 1 of El Cajon Civic Center in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego,

        State of California, according to Map thereof Number 8071, filed in the office of the Recorder of said county February 14, 1975; and

        Blocks 4 and 5 of Map thereof Number 597, filed in the office of the Recorder of San Diego County, State of California, on April 28, 1886. Together with that portion of Highland Avenue between Douglas Avenue and Lexington Avenue closed by the El Cajon City Council on February 3, 1987, Resolution Number 46-87.

 

B.     That certain parcel of land commonly known as Judson Park and shown as “Park” on the Map of Palm Acres in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 1716, filed in the office of the County Recorder of San Diego County on March 25, 1921.

C.     All publicly owned property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue including that area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade.

(Ord. 4749 § 2, 2003; Ord. 4586 § 3, 1998; Ord. 4537, 1997.)

 

9.36.020 Camping prohibited—City property.
        It is unlawful for any person to camp or lodge in or on any property maintained or operated by the city of El Cajon. (Ord. 4473, 1995; Ord. 3723 § 4, 1983.)

 

9.36.025 Sleeping prohibited—City property.
        It is unlawful for any person to sleep in or on any property maintained or operated by the city of El Cajon, other than parks as defined in Section 2.56.010(B). Sleeping in parks is limited by Section 2.56.030(W) and (X).

 

9.36.030 Exceptions.
        Notwithstanding the above, this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    The East County Regional Center building;

B.     El Cajon fire department personnel, while on duty;

C.     Persons in the custody of law enforcement officers.

(Ord. 37-23 § 4, 1983.)

 

Chapter 9.38 DISPOSAL OF HUMAN WASTE
9.38.010 Disposal of human waste.
        It is unlawful for any person to eliminate human waste in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, public building, or publicly maintained facility or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation which is done in any restroom or other facility designated for the sanitary disposal of human waste. The provisions in this Chapter shall be applicable in the Superblock, Expanded Civic Center and Prescott Promenade more particularly described as follows:

 

 

Lots 1 through 5, inclusive, of Superblock Phase II in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 9548, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 6, 1980, together with Lot 1 of El Cajon Civic Center in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 8071, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 14, 1975; and

 

Blocks 4 and 5 of Map thereof Number 597, filed in the office of the Recorder of San Diego County, State of California, on April 28, 1886. Together with that portion of Highland Avenue between Douglas Avenue and Lexington Avenue closed by the El Cajon City Council on February 3, 1987, Resolution Number 46-87.

 

        All publicly owned property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue including that area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade. (Ord. 4586 § 4, 1998; Ord. 3797 § 1, 1984.)

Division IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Chapter 9.40 DISTURBING THE PEACE
9.40.010 Disturbing the peace.
        No person shall maliciously and willfully disturb another person by loud and unreasonable noise, or use offensive words which are inherently likely to produce a violent reaction, or unlawfully fight or challenge another person to fight on any street, alley, sidewalk, square, park, or in any store or other public place in the city. (Ord. 2905 § 5, 1975; prior code § 18-6.)

 

Chapter 9.42 BICYCLING, DOCKLESS VEHICLES AND SKATEBOARDING—PROHIBITIONS
9.42.010 Purpose and scope.
        The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public health, safety and welfare within the city. It is the finding of this legislative body that pervasive bicycle, scooter, and skateboarding within the city presents a significant threat to the peace, health and safety of the community. For this reason it is the intent of this legislative body to limit such activity. It is not the intent of this legislative body to limit the private enjoyment of such activity where it is safe to do so.

        The provisions of this chapter do not prohibit the possession of bicycles, scooters, or skateboards if not ridden.

        Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of wheeled devices by physically disabled persons. (Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

 

9.42.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        “Bicycle” means any device upon which a person may ride which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears, and which has one or more wheels.

        “Dockless vehicle” means:

A.    Any wheeled device, other than an automobile or motorcycle, that is powered by a person or motor;

B.     Accessed via an on-demand portal, whether a smartphone application, membership card, or similar method;

C.     Owned by a private entity that owns, manages, and maintains devices for shared use by members of the public without a physical dispatching location within the City; and

D.    Available at unstaffed, self-service locations, to members of the public for their personal operation.

        “Expanded Civic Center” means the areas of El Cajon City known as City Hall, East County Regional Center, East County Performing Arts Center, Library, Community Center and Fire Facility Headquarters Complex, more particularly described as follows:

        Lots 1 through 5, inclusive of Superblock Phase II in the city of El Cajon, county of San Diego, state of California, according to Map thereof No. 9458, filed in the office of the recorder of said county February 6, 1980. Together with Lot I of El Cajon Civic Center in the city of El Cajon, county of San Diego, state of California, according to Map thereof No. 8071 filed in the office of the recorder of said county February 14, 1975; and Blocks 4 and 5 of Map of El Cajon City, Map No. 597, filed in the office of the recorder of San Diego County, California, on April 28, 1886. Together with that portion of Highland Avenue between Douglas Avenue and Lexington Avenue closed by the El Cajon city council on February 3, 1987, Resolution No. 46-87.

        “Public parking lot” means any publicly owned, operated or maintained parking lot, parking facility, sidewalk, walkway, path, ramp, bridge, plaza, mall, trolley station, quadrangle or patio. This does not prohibit the responsible operation of skateboards and roller skates within areas of city parks as designated and posted for such use by the department of recreation.

        “Ride” means move, not move, or travel at any speed while supported by a device.

        “Scooter” means a foot-operated vehicle consisting of a narrow board of wood, metal, plastic, fiberglass, or other material, and having two or more wheels tandem with an upright steering handle attached to the board or the front wheels.

        “Skateboard” means any toy or device upon which a person may ride standing or sitting, which coasts, glides, or is propelled by human power, which is a board or other surface mounted on one or more wheels.

        “Skatepark” means a facility owned, operated or managed by the city of El Cajon, designed specifically to accommodate skateboarding and in-line skating, where skating rules and hours are posted, and are specifically located at Kennedy Skatepark and Renette Plaza. (Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

 

9.42.030 Bicycle, scooter, dockless vehicles, or skateboarding prohibited within the Expanded Civic Center area.
        It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, scooter or dockless vehicle within any public facility or upon any public grounds in the Expanded Civic Center area or the public property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue, including that area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade. It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle in the Expanded Civic Center area of the public property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue, including the area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade, unless upon a bike path, alley, street or highway. (Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

 

9.42.040 Skateboarding—Prohibition—Locations.
A.    The riding of any skateboard is prohibited upon or across any publicly owned, operated or maintained sidewalk, curb, bike path, alley, street or highway along:

1.     Main Street from Chambers to Ballantyne Street; or

2.     Magnolia Avenue from Lexington Avenue to Madison Avenue.

B.     The riding of any skateboard is also prohibited upon or across any privately owned, operated or maintained parking lot, parking facility, sidewalk, walkway, path, ramp, bridge, plaza, mall, quadrangle or patio which is held open to the public and which has been posted to prohibit skateboarding.

(Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

 

9.42.045 Skateboard and in-line skate riding—Use of public skatepark facility.
A.    No person shall use, remain in or enter any city operated skatepark facility during all closed hours specified in park regulations. A notice indicating time or period when the skatepark facility is closed shall be posted at the skatepark facility. Hours of operation for skatepark facilities are set forth in subsection H, herein.

B.     No person shall ride a skateboard, bicycle, scooter or use in-line skates in the skatepark facilities except while wearing commercially manufactured helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.

C.     No person shall use any city operated skatepark facility for any purpose other than skateboarding or in-line skating, provided, however, that bicycles and scooters may be used in a city operated skatepark facility during such times, and subject to such limitations, designated by the department of recreation and clearly identified in appropriate notices posted at the city operated skatepark. Use of motorized vehicles or similar devices is specifically prohibited in any city operated skatepark facility.

D.    No person shall skate or ride a bicycle or scooter in the parking lot, sidewalks, curbs, or entrance areas near the skatepark facility.

E.     For purposes of this section, the term “skatepark facility at Kennedy Skatepark” shall mean the fence and the entire fenced area surrounding and including the skateboard bowls and street plaza area and the land adjacent to the skateboard bowls and street plaza area. The term “skatepark facility at Renette Plaza” shall mean the concrete features between the Renette Park outdoor basketball court and the recreation center building, and between the sidewalk and the Renette Park fence line, not to include the side-walk and the play court (i.e. hopscotch, tetherball, ball wall area).

F.     This section does not apply to any duly authorized city employee while performing duties of their job.

G.    Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 9.42.070 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be separately punished.

H.    Hours of operation for the skatepark facility at Kennedy Park Skatepark, and for the skatepark facility at Renette Plaza, are as follows:

1.     Kennedy Skatepark. Hours shall be as posted and shall vary seasonally. Skating is prohibited in the skatepark facility when the facility is locked, when posted “closed,” or when the facility is otherwise scheduled for recreation service sponsored/approved activities.

2.     Renette Multi-Purpose Court. Skating is prohibited between dusk/sundown and sunrise, or when the facility is otherwise scheduled for recreation service sponsored/approved activities.

(Ord. 4967 § 2, 2011.)

 

9.42.050 Right-of-way.
A.    It is unlawful for any person who is riding a skateboard, to fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians within or approaching the area.

B.     It is unlawful for any person who is riding a skateboard, while upon a public street, including the sidewalk or alley, to interfere with the movement of vehicles thereon.

(Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

9.42.060 Ramps prohibited.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to use, construct or place upon any public property a ramp, jump, platform, or similar device intended for use by a person riding a bicycle, skateboard, or similar wheeled device.

B.     The costs incurred by the city in removing a ramp, jump, platform, or similar device placed contrary to this section shall be a charge imposed upon and payable by the individual violating this section. If the individual violating this section is a minor, then the charge shall be imposed against the individual’s custodial parent, parents or guardians.

(Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

 

9.42.070 Fines for violation.
        A violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by:

A.    A fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars, for a first offense;

B.     A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; or

C.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a third and each additional violation of this chapter within one year.

(Ord. 5076 § 5, 2019.)

Chapter 9.44 NOISE REGULATIONS
9.44.010 Noises—Prohibited when loud, disturbing.
        No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the city, any loud, disturbing, or unusual noise which injures or endangers the health, peace or safety of persons of reasonable sensibilities: provided, that this section shall not in any way affect, restrict or prohibit any activities incidental to scientific or industrial research or manufacturing, construction or repairing conducted in areas zoned for such purposes.

        The following acts, among others, are determined to be loud, disturbing and unusual noises, although such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:

A.    The use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or any other machine or device producing or reproducing sound which is cast upon the streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure;

B.     The keeping of any animal in violation of Section 6.04.125 of this code;

C.     The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;

D.    The using, operating or permitting to be used or operated, any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, or any other machine or device for the reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or business establishments by any restaurant, drive-in or other commercial establishment.

(Ord. 4528, 1997; Ord. 3790 § 4, 1984.)

 

9.44.020 Enumeration of disturbing noises.
        No person shall use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any device, horn or musical instrument, bell, or mechanical production or reproduction of sound by vehicles or aircraft so as to emit or transmit any loud and raucous noise within the city.

        As defined by this section, “loud and raucous noise” means any of the following:

A.    Any noise made by the motor of any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle, or aircraft of any kind not reasonably required in the operation thereof under the circumstances, and shall include but not be limited to backfiring, motor racing, and the buzzing by airplanes;

B.     The sound of the discharge of any gun or other explosive, except by or with the permission of the governing body having control of the highway or thoroughfare;

C.     The human voice or any record or recording thereof when amplified by any device, whether electrical or mechanical or otherwise; or any sound not included in the foregoing which is of such volume, intensity, or carrying power as to tend to interfere with the peace and quiet of persons upon public or private property or other users of the public highways and thoroughfares.

(Ord. 4220 § 1, 1990; Ord. 3790 § 4, 1984.)

 

9.44.030 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

 

Chapter 9.46 SPECTATORS AT ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTEST
9.46.010 Purpose and scope.
        The purpose of this chapter is to discourage illegal motor vehicle speed contests and illegal street racing in our community. (Ord. 4727 § 1, 2003.)

 

9.46.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of Sections 9.46.010 through 9.46.050, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

A.    “Illegal motor vehicle speed contest” or “illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed” means any motor vehicle speed contest or motor vehicle exhibition of speed described in California Vehicle Code section 23109(a) and (c).

B.     “Preparations” for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed include, but are not limited to, situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (4) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed; (6) one or more drivers is revving his engine or spinning his tires in preparation for the event; or (7) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.

C.     “Spectator” means any individual who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. Spectator includes any individual at the location of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means.

(Ord. 4727 § 1, 2003.)

 

9.46.030 Spectator at illegal speed contest or exhibitions of speed—Violation.
A.    Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of one thousand dollars, except that notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code.

B.     Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of one thousand dollars, except that notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code.

C.     An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed if that individual is within two hundred feet of the location of the event, or within two hundred feet of the location where preparations are being made for the event.

D.    Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators at illegal motor vehicle speed contests or illegal motor vehicle exhibitions of speed in the course of their official duties.

(Ord. 4727 § 1, 2003.)

 

9.46.040 Relevant circumstances to prove a violation.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of Section 9.46.030, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

A.    The time of day;

B.     The nature and description of the scene;

C.     The number of people at the scene;

D.    The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene;

E.     The number and description of motor vehicles at the scene;

F.     That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene;

G.    That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed;

H.    That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed;

I.      That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed;

J.      That the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed or where an illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed or illegal motor vehicle speed contest was in progress.

(Ord. 4727 § 1, 2003.)

 

9.46.050 Admissibility of prior acts.
        The list of circumstances set forth in Section 9.46.040 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal motor vehicle exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Prior acts are not limited to those that occurred within the city of El Cajon. (Ord. 4727 § 1, 2003.)

Chapter 9.47 MOBILE MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
9.47.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:

        “Marijuana” means cannabis sativa in any form, whether living or dead, including but not limited to: in leaf form, including flowers from the female plant; in edible or drinkable forms, including as an additive to consumable products; the oils and resins of marijuana; or in pills or other ingestible products.

        “Mobile marijuana dispensary” means any clinic, cooperative, club, business or group which transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of medical marijuana to a person.

        “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. The term person shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson.

        “Operation” means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply, allow to be operated, or aid, abet or assist in the operation of a mobile marijuana dispensary. (Ord. 5037 § 2, 2016.)

 

9.47.020 Mobile marijuana dispensaries prohibited.
        Mobile marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in the city of El Cajon. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the city. (Ord. 5037 § 2, 2016.)

 

9.47.030 Marijuana delivery prohibited.
        (a)    No person shall deliver marijuana to any location within the City from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for such purposes.

        (b)    No person shall deliver any marijuana-infused product such as tinctures, baked goods or other consumable products, to any location within the city from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for such purposes. (Ord. 5037 § 2, 2016.)

 

9.47.040 Chapter supplementary to zoning code.
        This chapter is intended to control conduct and the use of land and properties within the city of El Cajon and is declared to be supplementary and complementary to Title 17 (Zoning Code) of this code. (Ord. 5037 § 2, 2016.)

 

9.47.050 Public nuisance declared.
        Operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 5037 § 2, 2016.)

 

9.47.060 Violations.
        Violations of this chapter may be enforced by any applicable law. Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, a violation of this chapter is not subject to criminal penalties. (Ord. 5037 § 2, 2016.)

Division V OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Chapter 9.56 URBAN FORESTRY
9.56.010 Purpose.
        This ordinance establishes policies, regulations, and standards necessary to ensure that the city will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. The provisions of this ordinance are enacted to:

A.    Establish and maintain a reasonable amount of tree cover on public and private lands in the city;

B.     Maintain city trees in a healthy and non-hazardous condition through good arboricultural practices;

C.     Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species and age classes to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest;

D.    To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city;

E.     To recognize, designate and protect landmark trees; and

F.     To avoid improper tree selection, planting and maintenance.

(Ord. 3997 § 1, 1986; prior code § 18-5.)

 

9.56.020 Jurisdiction and authority.
        The city shall have jurisdiction over the planning, planting, maintenance, alteration, and removal of all trees, shrubs, and landscape materials in public areas in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or designee is to administer the provisions of the ordinance and related policies. Administrative responsibilities shall include the following:

A.    Preparing an annual program budget for tree planting, maintenance, and removal in public areas of the city;

B.     Inventorying all existing trees in public areas;

C.     Directing municipal tree care operations;

D.    Evaluating and approving permits for activities that may affect trees;

E.     Conducting an ongoing program of public outreach and education in order to promote public understanding of the city’s urban forest and public adherence to the standards and procedures established under this chapter;

F.     Enforcing ordinance provisions;

G.    Inspecting the planting, maintenance and removal of all trees in public areas;

H.    Making determinations of tree removals in public areas;

I.      Reviewing all landscaping plans as they affect trees in public areas;

J.      Preparing and maintaining all necessary maps, plans and records relating to the various functions carried on under this chapter; and

K.    The city manager or designee shall report to the city council annually on the work and activities carried on under the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 4556, 1997; Ord. 3997 § 1, 1986.)

 

9.56.030 Definitions.
        For purposes of carrying out the intent of this chapter, words, phrases and terms used in this chapter shall have their ordinary meaning unless defined otherwise as follows:

A.    “Alter” means to change such as prune, graft, remove limbs, or perform root or tree surgery.

B.     “City manager” means the city manager or designee.

C.     “Injure” means any act damaging a tree, shrub or landscape materials such as cutting, carving, transplanting, poisoning, breaking or uprooting.

D.    “Landmark tree” means any tree designated as such pursuant to this chapter because of unique, special or historic characteristics.

 

 

 

E.     “Landscape materials” means any organic or inorganic substance used for landscaping, including ground cover such as grass turf, or similar plant materials.

F.     “Parkway” means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto.

G.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity.

H.    “Public area” means city parks, playgrounds, parkways, public places serving city public buildings, and similar areas owned by the city.

I.      “Remove” means to intentionally cut down a tree, shrub or landscape materials, or negligently act to cause the same to decline or die within a period of three years, including but not limited to, damage inflicted upon root systems by applying toxic substances, operating heavy machinery, changing the natural grade above or below the root system, excessive pruning, or severing all of or part of a trunk or root system.

J.      “Shrub” means wood vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground level up.

K.    “Sidewalk means any city owned or controlled area provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians and includes, but is knot limited to, pathways, trails and alleys.

L.     “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes, including roadways, bicycle paths and alleys.

M.    “Topping” means severely cutting back limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within a tree’s crown to such a degree that the canopy of the tree is removed or disfigured.

(Ord. 4556, 1997; Ord. 4110 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3997 § 1, 1986.)

 

9.56.040 Tree planting, maintenance and removal.
        The purpose of this section is to provide information in the form of requirements that will result in safe and healthy trees that contribute to a quality environment rather than to create problems. All standards and specifications shall be reviewed at least every five years. Standards and specifications for planting, maintenance and removal of trees required by this chapter shall be fixed by resolution of the city council, including:

A.    Permissible parkway tree list;

B.     Specifications for acceptance of nursery trees;

C.     Tree planting standards;

D.    Tree planting and staking detail;

E.     Pruning standards;

F.     Tree and stump removal specifications.

(Ord. 4556, 1997; Ord. 4110 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3997 § 1, 1986.)

 

9.56.050 Topping prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to top any tree located in public areas. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from this section at the discretion and written permission of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 4556, 1997; Ord. 3997 § 1, 1986.)

 

9.56.060 Prohibited actions.
        No person shall cut or otherwise injure trees, shrubs or landscaping in any public area within the city without the express written consent of the city manager or designee. It is also unlawful for any person, without the express written consent of the city manager or designee, to:

A.    Intentionally damage, break, cut, carve, mutilate, kill, injure or destroy any city tree;

B.     Transplant or remove any city tree;

C.     Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, sign or other contrivance to any city tree;

D.    Allow to come in contact with the roots, leaves, bark or any part of any city tree any gaseous liquid or solid substance harmful to such tree; or

E.     Cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any city tree;

 

F.     Place or maintain any type of ground cover or plant materials within three feet of the base of any tree planted in a parkway; or

G.    Place or maintain any concrete, asphalt, tar paper or plastic membranes or other types of impervious materials in the parkway in such close proximity to a city tree as to impede the movement of soil, air and water which are necessary to sustain tree growth and development;

H.    Plant or set out any tree within the public right-of-way without first procuring a permit from the city manager or designee, and completing a tree maintenance agreement which may be requested from the public works department. No tree shall be planted in the public right-of-way or overhang any city street unless the tree is on the permissible parkway tree list, or as is specified in writing by the city manager or designee. Any planting to be conducted shall be in accordance with instructions on the parkway tree planting standards, and tree planting and staking detail;

I.      Make any excavation, place any fill, compact the soil, or construct any structure, walkway, driveway, pavement or public utility within fifteen feet of any city tree without first obtaining a permit for such work from the city manager or designee and conducting such work in accordance with such permit. As a condition of issuing such permit, the city manager or designee shall require that the work be done in accordance with such generally accepted arboricultural specifications and standards of practice necessary to protect the vitality of the tree.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.070 Obtaining city manager’s or designee’s consent.
A.    Any application for a permit required by Sections 9.56.050 or 9.56.060 shall be on a form as provided by the city manager or designee and filed with the same and shall contain the following:

1.     The name and address of the applicant;

2.     The address or location where the work is to be performed;

3.     A detailed description of the work to be performed;

4.     The date of commencement and completion of any such work;

5.     The name and address of any person or persons employed by or contracting with the applicant for the performance of the work, if applicable;

6.     A statement that the applicant will hold the city harmless from any damage to any property or bodily injury or death caused in any way by the performance of any work for which such a permit is issued.

B.     The city manager or designee may require that the applicant submit a certificate of public liability insurance covering proposed activities in amounts as required by city. The policy or policies of insurance, or certificates thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the issuance of the permit and such applicant shall keep said insurance in full force and effect during the term of the permit.

C.     The city manager or designee may issue a permit only if the following conditions are met:

1.     The applicant has demonstrated that the proposed alteration or removal is justified to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee;

2.     In the case of the proposed alteration or removal of a tree, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee that the person actually performing the work is familiar with tree care standards promulgated by the International Society of Arboriculture Western Chapter Pruning Standards.

3.     In the case of the proposed alteration or removal of a tree, the city manager or designee may consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a permit:

a.     The extent of possible damage to the tree;

b.     The health of the tree;

c.     Desirability of a particular species in a particular location;

d.     Whether the size and condition of the tree will result in significant damage to property;

e.     The condition and quantity of other trees in the vicinity.

D.    All work performed pursuant to a permit issued by this section shall be completed no later than thirty days from the issuance of said permit, or within a longer period as the city manager or designee may specify.

E.     The city manager or designee may condition the issuance of any permit granted pursuant to this section as he/she determines to be reasonable, necessary and legally justified.

F.     The city manager or designee is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section if work performed thereto does not comply with any provision contained in this code or any condition imposed pursuant to this chapter.

G.    Contractors shall submit a copy of a city business license and a California State Contractors’ license (C61/D-49) as required by state law to the city manager or designee.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.080 Responsibilities of property owners.
A.    Property owners shall water trees in public areas whenever their landscaping deprives such trees of adequate moisture levels.

B.     Property owners shall refrain from any activity on private or public property resulting in injury to any trees, shrubs or landscape materials in public areas, including damage which may be caused by soil compaction or contamination. Any person engaging in an activity on private or public property which may potentially injure any trees, shrubs or landscape materials in public areas shall consult with the city manager or designee prior to such activity and first comply with guidelines as established by the same. Such guidelines shall be kept on file with the city manager or designee.

C.     Property owners shall remove overgrown trees, shrubs, landscape materials and weeds on their property encroaching in public areas.

D.    An owner or occupant of any corner lot shall keep shrubs and landscape materials at the corners of intersecting streets to trimmed that the height of same shall not exceed forty-two inches above the curb level for a distance of fifteen feet measured horizontally in any direction from the point of intersection of the property lines at street corners.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.090 Duty to maintain sidewalk and parkway.
A.    The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a public street or area shall maintain any sidewalk in such condition that the sidewalk will not endanger persons or property and maintain it in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of those areas.

B.     The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a public street or area shall maintain any parkway in such condition that the parkway will not endanger persons or property, nor will it interfere with the convenience of the public in the use of the parkway.

C.     Place or maintain within any parkway, or portion thereof, any solid landscaping, decorative materials or plants, including but not limited to, large rocks, driftwood or planters made of tile or concrete pipe sections, which protrude more than twenty-four inches above the level of curb and sidewalk and which are continuous with the length of the parkway, or otherwise tend to block the free movement of pedestrians across the width of the parkway strip.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.100 Prohibiting maintenance of hazardous trees, shrubs or obstacles.
        Not withstanding Section 9.56.020, no owner of any lot, place, premises or area within the city, or any agent of such owner, shall install, permit or maintain any tree, shrub, landscaping or hazardous obstacle as follows:

A.    In the corner setback area subject to yard requirements as described in this code, any tree, shrub, or other obstruction exceeding forty-two inches above the curb grade;

B.     On any property within the city, any tree shrub, landscaping or hazardous obstacle which blocks pedestrian or vehicular city streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way. For purposes of this section, visibility or passage will be presumed blocked where vertical clearance is less than thirteen and one-half feet for streets and alleys, and less than seven feet for sidewalks; or

C.     On any property within the city, any tree, shrub or landscaping which causes damage to public areas or encroaches into drainage and sewer easements.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.110 Public nuisance.
        The following are hereby declared public nuisances:

A.    Any diseased, infested, dead or dying tree, shrub or other plant on private property so near to any city tree as to constitute a danger to such tree, or to any street or portion thereof;

B.     Any tree, shrub or ground cover on any private property or within the parkway of a type of species apt to destroy, impair or otherwise interfere with any approved city tree, street improvement, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer or other public improvement, including any main or service;

C.     Any vines, climbing plants, trees or shrubs growing into or over any city trees or any public hydrant, pole or electrolier;

D.    The existence of any tree on private property within the city limits that is infested, infected or in danger of becoming infested or infected with objectionable insects, scales, fungus or growth injurious to trees;

E.     The existence of any branches or foliage on private property which interferes with the visibility on, or free use of, or access to, any portion of any street improved for vehicular or pedestrian travel;

F.     Any shrubs or plants more than twenty-four inches in height in the parkway, or portion thereof, measured above top of curb grade;

G.    The construction or maintenance of any type of wall or fence around or within any parkway or portion thereof.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.120 Abatement of public nuisance.
        When any public nuisance as defined herein exists, it shall be subject to abatement as provided for in this code. Appeals may be made to the city council in accordance with this code. (Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.130 Noncompliance.
        Upon the violation of Section 9.56.120, the city may, after notice of abatement is given in accordance with this code and the condition is not abated, cause the work to be done. Costs of such work may be charged to the owner of the property and may result in a lien upon the property in accordance with this code. (Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.140 Summary abatement.
        Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the summary abatement of a public nuisance by removal or destruction of the act or thing constituting such nuisance for the preservation of the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.150 Landmark trees.
A.    The city council may designate as a “landmark tree” any tree on city property for the purpose of protecting trees of historic value or unusual qualities from damage or destruction.

B.     A tree may qualify for the designation of landmark tree if it meets one or more of the following criteria; species rarity, old age, association with a historical event or person, abnormality or scenic enhancement.

C.     Landmark trees shall be removed only after approval of the council based upon, but not limited to, the following considerations:

1.     The condition of the landmark tree with respect to its general health, status as a public

        nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures, interference with utility services, and potential for endangering the health of human and plant life;

2.     The necessity of removal to allow construction of improvements or otherwise allow economic or other reasonable enjoyment of property;

3.     The topography of the land and the effect of the proposed action on soil retention, water retention, and diversion or increased surface water;

4.     The number, species, size and location of existing trees in the area and the effect of the proposed action on shade areas, air pollution, historic values, scenic beauty, and the general welfare of the city;

5.     Good forestry practices such as the number of healthy trees a given parcel may support.

D.    The council may impose reasonable conditions on the removal of landmark trees such as:

1.     On-site or off-site replacement to offset any negative impacts;

2      A maintenance and care program for the purpose of preserving the health or other landmark trees on the property;

3.     A donation of planting stock or the payment of an in lieu fee for possible on-site or off-site tree replacement.

(Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.160 Enforcement.
        The city manager or designee shall have the power to enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, and landscape materials upon the public right-of-way, or other public areas in the city. (Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.170 Violations.
        Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in this code. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this ordinance, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant located in a public area is caused, the cost of repair or replacement, or the appraised dollar value of such tree, shrub, or other plant, shall be borne by the party in violation. The value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and Evergreens, as published by the International Society or Arboriculture. (Ord. 4556, 1997.)

 

9.56.180 Exemption from Solar Shade Control Act.
        The city is exempt from the provisions of the California Public Resources Code Section 25980 et seq., known as the Solar Shade Control Act.

 

Chapter 9.60 DRAINAGE DITCH—TRESPASS PROHIBITED
9.60.010 Drainage ditch—Trespass prohibited.
        No person shall trespass upon the drainage ditch and channel located in the city upon the easement owned by the city and of record in the office of the county surveyor as miscellaneous survey number one. (Prior code § 18-7.)

 

9.60.020 Exceptions.
        Section 9.60.010 shall not apply to any entry in the course of duty of any peace officer, nor to any person traversing an existing public sidewalk, street or highway. (Prior code § 18-8.)

 

Chapter 9.62 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
9.62.010 Prohibition of parking on private property.
        No person shall park a vehicle on private property without the consent or permission of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property. (Ord. 3746 § 1, 1984.)

 

9.62.020 Removal of vehicle parked on private property.
        The owner or person in lawful possession of any private property may cause the removal of a vehicle parked on such property by complying with the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22658. (Ord. 3924 § 2, 1986; Ord. 3746 § 1, 1984.)

 

Chapter 9.64 MOTOR VEHICLES TRESPASSING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
9.64.010 Motor vehicles trespassing on private property.
        No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any property owned or occupied by another without having, and upon request of a peace officer displaying, written permission from the owner of such property, or his agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof; provided, however, this section shall not be applicable to persons having visible or lawful business with said owner, agent or person in lawful possession. (Prior code § 18-9.1.)

 

9.64.020 Motor vehicle defined.
        For the purposes of Chapters 9.20, 9.24, 9.40, 9.44, 9.56 through 9.68, 9.76 through 9.84, 9.92 and 9.96, a “motor vehicle” is defined as a vehicle which is self-propelled. (Prior code § 18-9.2.)

 

Chapter 9.66 ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS
9.66.005 Findings and declaration.
        The city council makes the following findings and declarations:

        The accumulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, is found to create a condition tending to reduce property values, to promote blight and deterioration, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to be aesthetically detrimental to the community and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Responsibility for minimizing or eliminating this impact rests with individuals who use shopping carts and the businesses, which provide shopping carts for their patrons. Therefore, effective containment or control of the shopping carts shall be mandated, and the presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, within the city, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.010 Short title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “Abandoned Shopping Carts” ordinance. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.020 Definitions.
        The following word and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless otherwise noted:

        “Abandoned shopping cart” means a shopping cart located outside the premises or parking lot or facility of the business establishment, which furnishes the shopping cart for use by its patrons.

        “Director” means the director of community development or his or her designee.

        “Shopping cart” means any basket of any size, mounted on wheels or a similar device, including parts thereof, provided by a store operator for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind within a business establishment and/or designated parking or loading area of that business establishment.

        “Shopping cart owner” means the owner of the shopping cart, the agent of the owner of the shopping cart, including individuals or business entities, or the business establishment, which furnishes the shopping cart for use.

        “Store premises” mean the lot area, maintained and managed by the business, that may include the building, parking lot and adjacent walkways, and where the business’ shopping carts are permitted. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.030 Administration and enforcement.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development department, public works department and police department of the city as noted below. In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, employees of the aforementioned departments may enter onto both public and private property to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a shopping cart owner, and to remove, or cause the removal of a shopping cart, or parts thereof, in conformance with state law, when found to be abandoned pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.040 General regulations.
A.    All shopping cart owners shall effectively manage the control of their shopping carts so that they do not become a public nuisance.

B.     Upon request by the director, shopping cart owners shall submit a plan to the director for review outlining how the owner is and/or proposes to manage shopping carts so that they are not a public nuisance. Information requested may include a description of the management control system, a monthly shopping cart inventory, monthly loss and recovery data specific to that business location, and such other information deemed reasonable by the director to determine the adequacy of the shopping cart containment system or control method.

C.     In the event the director determines that the shopping cart management system being used by a shopping cart owner is creating a public nuisance, and therefore not effective for that store premise, the director may require a shopping cart owner to utilize an alternate, more effective shopping cart management system. Options that may be considered include, but are not limited to: (1) a shopping cart wheel lock system; (2) posting a guard in the parking lot to stop the removal of shopping carts during business hours; (3) requiring an employee to accompany and immediately retrieve every shopping cart that is removed from a store upon placement of purchases into a customer’s vehicle; (4) establishment of an effective off-site shopping cart retrieval system; (5) requiring shopping carts to be secured during nonbusiness hours, and any combination thereof. Approval of an alternate system does not relieve the shopping cart owner of the responsibility to effectively manage the control of their shopping carts so that they are not a public nuisance. Any decision of the director may be appealed to the city council.

D.    All shopping cart owners shall post a multilingual sign not less than eighteen (18) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in height with block lettering not less than one-half (1/2) inch in width and two (2) inches in height in a conspicuous place on the building within two (2) feet of all customer entrances and exits stating, at a minimum, the following:

 

REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS

FROM THE PREMISES

IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.

B & P Code Section 22435.2

(Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.050 Unauthorized removal or possession.
        Procedures related to the unauthorized removal and possession of any shopping cart pursuant to Business and Professions Code, Sections 22435.2—22435.5 shall be administered by the police department, if deemed warranted by the city manager. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.060 Abandoned shopping carts—Abatement, removal and storage.
        A.    Procedures related to the abatement, removal, and storage of abandoned shopping carts pursuant to Business and Professions Code, Section 22435.7 shall be administered by the public works department, if deemed warranted by the city manager.

        B.     The administrative fees for the removal and storage of shopping carts shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping cart, or parts thereof, plus the proportionate share of administrative costs in connection therewith. The schedule for such fees shall remain on file and be available in the finance department of the city. The public works director shall review the fees charged for such service at least once annually, and may, with the approval of the city manager, recommend changes to the council when the costs for such services make it appropriate. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.070 Shopping cart violations—Misdemeanor.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 1.24 of this code, whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared unlawful or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, it shall be a misdemeanor for each incident and/or each day of failure to comply. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

9.66.080 Chapter not exclusive.
        This chapter is not to be construed as the exclusive regulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 4971 § 1, 2011.)

 

 

Chapter 9.68 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE
9.68.010 Radio and television interference—Prohibited in certain instances.
        No person shall operate in the city any device, appliance, equipment or apparatus generating or causing high frequency oscillations or radiations which interfere with radio broadcast receiving apparatus, wireless receiving apparatus or television receiving apparatus; provided, that X-ray pictures, examinations or treatments may be made at any time if the machines or apparatus used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception and are not negligently operated, and complete screening of the room in which offending X-ray apparatus is operated may be required when such screening is necessary in order to avoid interference. Neon signs shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this section when such signs are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception, wireless reception or television reception and are not negligently operated.

        It is expressly understood and provided that this section shall not apply to radio stations, either broadcast, commercial or amateur, licensed by the federal government or which are engaged in interstate communication. (Prior code § 18-24.)

 

9.68.020 Enforcement of prohibition against interference.
        The city manager is charged with the enforcement of Section 9.68.010. He may appoint or deputize such other persons as he deems necessary to assist him in enforcing the provisions of such section.

        When an inspection and test shall have been made by the enforcement officer or his duly authorized deputy, and it is found that equipment or apparatus coming within the terms of Section 9.68.010 is being operated in violation of such section, the person responsible for the operation of such equipment shall be notified in writing to discontinue its use, or to make additions, repairs or modifications thereof, in order that the same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions of Section 9.68.010. The mailing of a registered letter addressed to the owner at the premises where the equipment or apparatus is located shall constitute a sufficient notice. In the event that the owner or operator of such equipment or apparatus does not, within ten days after receipt of notice to repair or discontinue the use of such equipment or apparatus, either entirely discontinue the use of such equipment or apparatus, or repair the same so that it complies with the provisions of Section 9.68.010, such owner shall be deemed to be operating such machine or equipment or apparatus in violation of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2896 § 3, 1975: prior code § 18-25.)

 

9.68.030 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

 

Chapter 9.70 GRAFFITI
9.70.010 Terms defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

A     “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property.

B.     “Felt tip marker” means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth inch, containing an ink that is not water-soluble.

C.     “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface.

D.    “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker or a paint stick.

E.     “Minor” means a person under eighteen years of age.

F.     “Paint stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty feet, and not water-soluble.

G.    “Responsible person” means any person who owns, controls, or possesses property or who has responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property.

(Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992; Ord. 4168 § 1, 1989.)

 

9.70.020 Possession by minors—Prohibited.
A.    It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement:

1.     While upon public property; or

2.     While upon private property without the consent of the owner of such private property. Such consent must be given in advance and must authorize the minor’s presence while in the possession of a graffiti implement.

        This subsection shall not apply while the minor is attending, or travelling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at said school which has, as a written requirement of said class, the need to use felt tip markers.

B.     No minor shall possess any graffiti implement while in: any public park (within twenty-five feet of any structure); playground; swimming pool; recreational facility; the civic center area; (other than a highway, street, alley or way), except as may be authorized by the city.

C.     This section is not intended to conflict with California Penal Code section 594.1.

(Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992; Ord. 4168 § 1, 1989.)

 

9.70.030 Furnishing to minors prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any felt tip marker or graffiti stick to any minor without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated custodian of the person, which custodial consent shall be given in advance in writing. (Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992; Ord. 4168 § 1, 1989.)

 

9.70.040 Wrongful display for sale.
        No person, firm or entity engaged in a commercial enterprise (“seller”) shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any graffiti implement except in an area under the control of seller’s employee(s). Three such acceptable methods for displaying a graffiti implement for sale shall be:

A.    In completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or building structure, and which shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely locked;

B.     In an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry; or

C.     In an area under the direct visual supervision of employees at all times during business hours.

(Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.050 Graffiti removal.
A.    The city manager is authorized to use city funds for the removal of graffiti from public and privately owned property within the city. Before such removal may be performed, the city manager shall:

1.     Find that graffiti material is so located as to be visible to a person in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view; and

2.     Find that the graffiti is obnoxious; and

3.     Obtain written consent from the property owner for removal.

B.     If the city manager determines that the above conditions do in fact exist, a written request shall be sent to the property owner to remove the graffiti or other inscribed material. Should the owner fail or refuse to act upon the written request, the city manager shall attempt to obtain the written consent of the owner to allow volunteer or city forces to remove the graffiti.

C.     Removal of graffiti is authorized only of the graffiti itself, and not the painting or repair of a more extensive area.

(Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.060 Removal by responsible person.
        It is unlawful for a responsible person to permit property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of seven days after notice of same, unless (1) said person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that they do not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or (2) unless it can be demonstrated that the responsible person has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it is unlawful to permit such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of fifteen days after notice of same. (Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.070 Right of entry—Private property.
A.    Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city, or the purpose of removal of graffiti, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner and a release of the city from liability for private or public property or liability damage.

B.     If a responsible person fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the responsible person shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code.

(Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.080 Declaration of nuisance.
        The existence of graffiti in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view, within the city limits of the city of El Cajon, is deemed a public and private nuisance, and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.090 Punishment provisions.
A.    Police Diversion Program: Community Service with Minimum Hours and Parental Involvement. In lieu of, or as a part of, requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 (including but not limited to, offenses which, in the opinion of the police chief, constitute a violation of this chapter), or in lieu of prosecuting a violation of this chapter as a crime against an adult, the police chief with the approval of (or according to rules and procedures approved by) the city manager, shall be authorized to offer said minor or adult an option to perform such community service as the police chief deems appropriate, but which community service shall, if offered at all, contain the following minimum elements:

1.     The minor or adult shall perform at least thirty hours of community service.

2.     At least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, shall be in attendance at least fifty percent of the period of assigned community service.

3.     The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police.

4.     Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of this chapter, reasonable effort shall be made by the chief of police to assign the minor to community service which constitutes in significant part the removal of graffiti.

B.     Mandatory Juvenile Delinquent Community Service. Any minor determined to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 as a result of committing an offense in the city shall be required, at the city’s option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than thirty hours nor more than eighty hours.

C.     Penalties for Violation. Any and all violations of this chapter shall be punishable either as an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the city attorney.

(Ord. 4401, 1993; Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.100 Enforcement.
A.    The city manager may delegate authority for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section is intended to limit or preclude abatement of an “authorized” inscription, word, figure, or design pursuant to any applicable procedure contained in this code, state or federal law.

B.     Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the removal of graffiti pursuant to any other provision of this code.

(Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

 

9.70.110 Severability.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 4335 § 2, 1992.)

Division VI CONSUMER PROTECTION
Chapter 9.71 REGULATION OF SALE AND DISPLAY OF GLASS ETCHING CREAM
9.71.010 General requirements.
        Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling glass etching cream, or any commercially available glass etching product, whether sold separately or in a kit, shall store or cause to be stored such glass etching cream or glass etching product under lock and key in an area viewable by, but not accessible to, the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such glass etching cream or glass etching product. (Ord. 4690 § 1, 2002.)

 

9.71.020 Owner of premises.
        No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling glass etching cream or any commercially available glass etching product, whether sold separately or in a kit, shall sell or cause to be sold any such glass etching cream or glass etching product to any person who has not yet attained the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 4690 § 1, 2002.)

 

9.71.030 Penalties for violation.
        Any and all violations of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the city, and, by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti clean-up to the maximum extent permitted by California Penal Code Section 594.6 and/or other provision of law. (Ord. 4690 § 1, 2002.)

 

Chapter 9.72 LITTERING, WEEDS, RUBBISH[1]
9.72.010 Short title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “littering ordinance” of the city. (Prior code § 14A-1.)

 

9.72.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Garbage” means all animal and vegetable refuse and household waste of materials or matter prepared or intended in whole or in part to be used for food. Also, all animal and vegetable refuse from places where foodstuffs intended for human consumption are handled commercially.

B.     “Hazardous containers” means residential and/or commercial furniture, appliances or equipment designed for indoor use which are of sufficient size to conceal a child. This term includes, but is not limited to, such items as refrigerators, freezers, stoves, sofas and display counters. Storage of such containers is prohibited unless doors and/or hinges have been removed in accordance with Section 402b of the California Penal Code.

C.     “Litter” means garbage, hazardous containers, rubbish and weeds as defined herein, which is not within a receptacle provided therefor, and all other material which, if thrown, deposited or allowed to accumulate as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.

D.    “Private premises” means any private property, together with any structure thereon, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, including the yard, grounds, walks, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or entryway thereof and any off-street parking area.

E.     “Rubbish” means all refuse other than garbage and hazardous containers, and such term shall include paper, rags, leaves, weeds, grass, vines, sawdust, sweepings, plaster, bricks, cement, glass, crockery, shells, metals, metal products, cans, ashes, and tree and shrubbery trimmings.

F.     “Weeds” means dry grass, stubble, brush or other growth which creates a fire menace, or which is otherwise noxious or dangerous.

(Ord. 4225 § 1, 1990; Ord. 4021 §§ 1, 2, 1987; Ord. 4016 § 1, 1987; prior code § 14A-2.)

 

9.72.030 General prohibition.
        No person shall throw, deposit or accumulate litter in or upon any public place or private premises as hereinbefore defined within the city, except while such person is temporarily engaged in clearing said public place or private premises of litter or improving said public place or private premises. (Prior code § 14A-3.)

 

9.72.040 Use of receptacles.
        Persons placing litter in authorized public or private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises. (Prior code § 14A-4.)

 

9.72.050 Owners of premises—Maintaining adjacent public place free of litter.
        Persons owning or occupying private premises within the city shall keep the public place abutting or adjacent to said premises free of litter, except while such person is temporarily engaged in clearing the public place and adjacent private premises of litter or improving said public place or private premises. No person owning, occupying, or controlling private premises shall sweep into or deposit in any public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any private premises or public place. (Prior code § 14A-5.)

 

9.72.060 Owner of premises—Maintaining free of litter.
        The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. (Prior code § 14A-6.)

 

9.72.070 Prohibited—In parks, Superblock, Expanded Civic Center and Prescott Promenade.
        No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. The provisions in this chapter shall be applicable in the Superblock, Expanded Civic Center and Prescott Promenade more particularly described as follows:

 

        Lots I through 5, inclusive, of Superblock Phase II in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 9548, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 6, 1980, together with Lot I of El Cajon Civic Center in the City of El Cajon, County of San Diego, State of California, according to Map thereof Number 8071, filed in the office of the Recorder of said County February 14, 1975; and

        Blocks 4 and 5 of Map thereof Number 597, filed in the office of the Recorder of San Diego County, State of California, on April 28, 1886. Together with that portion of Highland Avenue between Douglas Avenue and Lexington Avenue closed by the El Cajon City Council on February 3, 1987, Resolution Number 46-87.

 

        All publicly owned property between Main Street and Douglas Avenue including that area commonly referred to as the Prescott Promenade. (Ord. 4586 § 5, 1998: prior code § 14A-7.)

 

9.72.080 Prohibited—On occupied private property.
        No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. (Prior code § 14A-8.)

 

9.72.090 Prohibited—On vacant lots.
        No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. (Prior code § 14A-9.)

 

9.72.100 Notice to remove litter.
        The fire chief and the building inspector or their authorized representatives are authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private property within the city, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner’s property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be as hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 14A-10.)

 

9.72.110 Weeds, grass, noxious matter prohibited.
        No owner of any lot, place or area within the city, or the agent of such owner, shall permit on such lot, place or area, or upon any sidewalk, parkway, easement and/or right-of-way abutting the same:

A.    Any weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter that may be growing, lying or located thereon;

B.     Any trees, shrubs, vines, landscaping or hazardous obstruction in violation of Chapter 9.56 of this code.

(Ord. 4110 § 2, 1988; Ord. 4021 § 3, 1987; Ord. 3997 § 2, 1986: prior code § 14A-11.)

 

9.72.120 Permitting fire hazard prohibited.
        No owner of any lot, place or area within the city, or the agent of such owner, shall permit on such lot, place or area, or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, dry grasses, dead shrubs, dead trees or other growths or noxious matter which constitute a fire hazard to any building, improvements, crops or other property. (Prior code § 14A-12.)

 

9.72.130 Fire hazard—Notice to destroy.
        The fire chief and the building inspector, or their authorized representatives, are authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any such lot, place or area within the city, or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy and/or remove any such weeds, grass, trees, dead shrubs, or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter found growing, lying or located on such owner’s property, or upon the sidewalk abutting the same. Such notice shall be as hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 14A-13.)

 

9.72.140 Notice form—Service.
        The notices referred to in Sections 9.72.100 and 9.72.130 shall be in writing and shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of said property, shall direct compliance with removal or destruction of the litter or obnoxious growth which is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, and shall refer to this chapter and be served in one of the following manners:

A.    By personal service on the owner, agent, occupant or person in charge or control of the property;

B.     By certified or registered mail, addressed to the owner, his agent, or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known. Service shall be deemed to have been completed upon the deposit of the said notice, postage prepaid, in the United States mail.

(Prior code § 14A-14.)

 

9.72.150 Appeal from requirements of removal notice.
        Within ten days from the date of personal service, mailing or posting of the required notice provided for in Section 9.72.140, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot or premises affected by such notice may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall set a hearing date upon all appeals at a regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council not less than fifteen days nor more than thirty days after the service of the notice as provided in Section 9.72.140. The clerk shall notify the owner or person appealing of such hearing date by mail or by personal service, as provided in Section 9.72.140. The city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal at such time, unless continued, and the decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 14A-15.)

 

9.72.160 Time limit for compliance with notice.
        It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the city, within thirty days from the date of personal service, mailing or posting of the notice provided for herein, or in the case of an appeal to the city council, within thirty days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to comply with the requirements of such notice. (Prior code § 14A-16.)

 

9.72.170 Noncompliance with notice—City effecting removal, destruction.
        Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent, after notice as hereinabove set forth, to properly comply with the order to remove or destroy the litter or obnoxious growth from the lot or premises within the time specified in this chapter, the fire chief or building inspector, or their authorized representatives, shall cause such work to be done. When the city has completed such work, or has paid for such work to be done, a report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost on each separate property shall be filed with the city clerk. (Prior code § 14A-17.)

 

9.72.180 Removal—Cost charged to owner of property.
        When the city has completed the work ordered to be done, or has paid for such work, the actual cost thereof, together with an administrative cost, shall be charged to the owner of the property, and the owner, or his agent, shall be billed therefor by mail, if not paid prior thereto. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill will result in a lien upon the property. (Prior code § 14A-18.)

 

9.72.190 Time of hearing upon failure of owner to pay costs.
        Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty days after the date of billing, the city clerk shall set the report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after such thirty-day period has expired. The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and account and a notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the council chambers in the city hall. (Prior code § 14A-19.)

 

9.72.200 Confirmation of special assessment and lien on property.
        The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by interested parties. Any owner of land or person affected by the proposed charge may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision of the city council on the report and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive. The amounts so approved shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill, and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall confirm such assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. (Prior code § 14A-20.)

 

9.72.210 Interest on unpaid assessments.
        All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the city council shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date. (Prior code § 14A-21.)

 

9.72.220 Authority for assessments.
        Said assessments shall be levied in accordance with the provisions of Title 4, Division 3, Chapter 13 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 14A-22.)

 

9.72.230 Violation—Penalty.
        The owner, occupant or agent of any lot or premises within the city who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3647 § 10, 1983; Ord. 3521 § 1, 1981: prior code § 14A-23.)

 

9.72.240 Handbills—In public places.
        No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill circulars, pamphlets, tracts, or advertisements in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it is not unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. No person shall post or affix to any pole, tree, car, fence or structure situated therein any kind of handbill, circular, pamphlet, tract, dodger or advertisement. (Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 14A-24.)

 

9.72.250 On vehicles.
        Because the disposal of unwanted handbills, left on unoccupied vehicles, leads to the proliferation of litter, and the person removing an unwanted handbill is unlikely to keep possession of the handbill until a suitable location for disposal may be found, the City Council finds that it is necessary and appropriate to prevent littering through the regulation of unwanted handbills. Therefore, no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle if the occupant or owner thereof has affirmatively indicated, through an appropriate sign or statement, that such handbills are unwanted and will not be accepted. An “appropriate sign” shall be clearly visible to the public, either on the vehicle or on its dash, stating, in general, that handbills are not wanted by the owner or occupant of the vehicle, and that no handbills are to be deposited in or upon the vehicle. Provided, however, that it is not unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any owner or occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. 4736 § 2, 2003.)

 

9.72.260 On vacant premises.
        No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Prior code § 14A-26.)

 

9.72.270 Distribution on posted premises.
        No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement,” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Prior code § 14A-27.)

 

9.72.280 On inhabited private premises.
        No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.

        The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Prior code § 14A-28.)

 

9.72.290 Permission of owner necessary before posting.
        No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint, place or otherwise affix or cause the same to be done by another, any notice, placard, billposter or advertisement to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curbing, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, enclosure or building, telegraph, telephone or electric lighting pole, motor vehicle, trash receptacle, or public bench, without first obtaining the permission of the owner, agent or occupant thereof, and except as in conformance with the zoning ordinance of the city. (Prior code § 13A-29.)

 

9.72.300 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

 

Chapter 9.75 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
9.75.010 Purpose and scope.
        The purpose of this chapter is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying the solicitation for immediate payment of money or other thing of value in an aggressive manner, or at specified locations. (Ord. 4638 § 2, 2000.)

 

9.75.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

A.    “Solicit, ask or beg” shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, or soliciting the sale of goods or services.

B.     “Public place” shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of individuals have access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, school, park, playground, and any door way, entrance, hallway, lobby, or other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence.

C.     “Bank” means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

D.    “Savings and loan association” means any federal savings and loan association and any “insured institution” as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act.

E.     “Credit union” means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration.

F.     “Check cashing business” means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorator pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000.

G.    “Automated teller machine” shall mean any electronic information-processing device, which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account.

H.    “Automated teller machine facility” shall mean the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space, which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.

I.      “Public transportation vehicle” shall mean any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used, or maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire.

(Ord. 4638 § 3, 2000.)

 

9.75.030 Aggressive solicitation prohibited.
A.    No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner, in a public place.

B.     “Aggressive manner” shall mean any of the following:

1.     Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during, or after soliciting that person, if such conduct would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her own safety, or to otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;

2.     Intentionally causing unwanted physical contact with another person in the course of soliciting that person;

3.     Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or motorist to take evasive action to avoid physical contact;

4.     Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting a person;

5.     Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and has informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or other thing of value to the solicitor; or

6.     Using profane, offensive or abusive language, which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during or after solicitation.

(Ord. 4638 § 4, 2000.)

 

9.75.040 All solicitation prohibited at specified locations.
        All solicitation is prohibited at the following specified locations:

A.    Banks and Automated Teller Machines.

1.     Banks. No person shall solicit, ask or beg within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours.

2.     Automated Teller Machines. No person shall solicit, ask or beg within fifteen feet of an automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers’ use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas.

3.     Exemptions. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets and airports, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located.

B.     Motor Vehicles and Parking Lots.

1.     Motor Vehicles. No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting while such vehicle is located in any public place.

2.     Parking Lots. No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any public parking lot or structure any time after dark. “After dark” means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.

3.     Exemptions. This subdivision shall not apply to any of the following:

a.     To solicitations related to business which is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants;

b.     To solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or

c.     To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a vehicle.

C.     Public Transportation Vehicles and Stops. Any person who solicits, asks or begs in any public transportation vehicle, or within ten feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop, is guilty of a violation of this section if:

1.     He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, driver, or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the agent of the owner, driver or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; the agent of the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; a member of a security force employed by the public transportation facility; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Penal Code § 830); or

2.     Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

3.     Subsection (C)(2) of this section is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits with the express authorization of a person specified in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

D.    Restaurants. Any person who solicits, asks or begs in any outdoor or indoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption is guilty of a violation of this section if:

1.     He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, manager, or supervisor of the restaurant or other food establishment; the agent of the owner, manager, or supervisor of the restaurant; a member of a security force employed by the restaurant; or by a peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Penal Code § 830), acting at the request of any of the persons specified in this subdivision; or

2.     Within the immediate preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section.

3.     Subsection (D)(2) of this section is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits with the express authorization of a person specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section.

(Ord. 4638 § 5, 2000.)

 

9.75.050 Penalty.
        A violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor, or chargeable at the city attorney’s discretion. (Ord. 4638 § 6, 2000.)

 

9.75.060 Severability.
        The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 4638 § 7, 2000.)

 

9.75.070 Non-exclusivity.
        Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. (Ord. 4638 § 8, 2000.)

 

Chapter 9.76 FORTUNETELLING AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
9.76.010 Engaging in or advertising—Bonding and licensing.
A.    No person shall engage in, conduct, advertise, or carry on the occupation, business, science, or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, necromancy, or other occult art or science, for entertainment or otherwise, without posting a bond in the amount of one thousand dollars, and complying with the business license regulations set forth in Chapters 5.08 and 5.16 of this code.

B.     If any provision or clause of Chapter 9.76, or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable.

(Ord. 3830 § 2, 1985: prior code § 18-13.)

 

9.76.020 Practices by religious groups.
        The provisions of Section 9.76.010 shall not be construed to include, prohibit or interfere with the exercise of any religious or spiritual function of any priest, minister, rector or accredited representative of any bona fide church or religion where such priest, minister, rector or accredited representative holds a certificate of credit, commission or ordination under the ecclesiastical laws of a religious corporation incorporated under the laws of any state or territory of the United States, or any voluntary religious association, and who fully conforms to the rites and practices prescribed by the supreme conference, convocation, convention, assembly, association or synod of the system of faith with which they are affiliated.

        Any church or religious organization, however, which is organized for the primary purpose of conferring certificates of commission, credit or ordination for a price and not primarily for the purpose of teaching and practicing a religious doctrine or belief, shall not be deemed to be a bona fide church or religious organization. (Prior code § 18-14.)

 

Chapter 9.77 RETAIL SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF NOVELTY LIGHTERS
9.77.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit sales and distribution of novelty lighters in order to reduce their availability to the general public, and particularly to children. It is presumed that banning sales and distribution of such devices will address safety concerns regarding the high incidence of juvenile firesetting. (Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.020 Findings.
        The city council of the city of El Cajon finds and determines that:

A.    Novelty lighters have features that are attractive to children, including visual effects, flashing lights, musical sounds, or toy-like designs; and

B.     The Consumer Product Safety Commission has recalled thousands of novelty lighters since 1996 due their danger to public safety; and

C.     Juvenile firesetting has been identified as the fastest growing fire threat in the United States, with more than three hundred people killed, thirty percent being children, and almost one billion dollars in property destroyed; and

D.    Many public safety agencies support the prohibition of the sale and distribution of novelty lighters, including the Burn Institute and the San Diego County Fire Chiefs Association; and

 

E.     Functions of novelty lighters can be achieved without posing a danger to public health and safety.

(Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.030 Title.
        This chapter may be known and cited as “Retail Sale or Distribution of Novelty Lighters.” (Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.040 Prohibition.
        Beginning on September 1, 2007, the retail sale, offer of retail sale, gift or distribution of any novelty lighter within the territorial jurisdiction of the city of El Cajon is prohibited. This prohibition is inapplicable to: (1) novelty lighters which are only being actively transported through the city; or (2) novelty lighters located in a warehouse closed to the public for purposes of retail sales. (Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.050 Definition.
        “Novelty lighter” means a lighter that is especially attractive to children ten years or younger due to a toy-like design or other features, such as buttons or devices that initiate visual effects, flashing lights, or musical sounds that might encourage a child to use the lighter. This includes, but is not limited to, lighters of the shape that resembles cartoon characters, toys, guns, watches, telephones, musical instruments, sporting equipment, vehicles, human body or parts of the human body, animals, food or beverages, moving objects, or other entertaining features. (Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.060 Exceptions.
        The term novelty lighter excludes: (1) any lighter manufactured prior to 1980; and (2) any lighter that lacks fuel or a device necessary to produce combustion or a flame. (Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.070 Enforcement.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal, any police officer, any code conformance officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any provision of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

 

9.77.080 Violation.
A.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as prescribed in Chapter 1.24 of the El Cajon Municipal Code (Sections 1.24.010 through 1.24.080).

B.     As an alternative to enforcement of this chapter in accordance with subsection A of this section, any person violating any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation for each and every violation, as prescribed in Chapter 1.14 of the El Cajon Municipal Code (Sections 1.14.010 through 1.14.050).

(Ord. 4885 § 1, 2007.)

Division VII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Chapter 9.80 CURFEW
9.80.010 Purpose and intent.
        By enacting a curfew regulation that applies to minors and their parents, the city council intends to preserve and promote the safety and welfare of the community and minors during late night hours. In adopting this ordinance, the city council considered and relied upon testimony that proves the effectiveness of a juvenile curfew in promoting these purposes. This regulation is intended to reasonably balance the public interest and the protected rights of minors and their parents. This balance is achieved by applying the principle that parental responsibility for a minor’s conduct is paramount to the City’s regulatory authority. Enforcement of this curfew only becomes necessary in the absence of parental authority. (Ord. 4539, 1997.)

 

9.80.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:

A.    “Curfew hours” means the hours between ten (10:00) p.m. and six (6:00) a.m. of the following day.

B.     “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, without limitation, fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

C.     “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor.

D.    “Minor” means any person under the age of 18.

E.     “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor.

F.     “Public place” means any place to which any member of the public has access, including, without limitation public right-of-ways, public grounds, dedicated open or trail space, or any privately owned unsupervised land that is open and generally available to the public including, without limitation, vacant lots, school parking lots and common areas, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, housing complexes, shopping centers, and malls.

G.    “Responsible adult” means the parent, guardian, or adult person at least 21 years old having the responsibility for the care, custody, and control of a minor.

(Ord. 4539, 1997.)

 

9.80.030 Prohibition; Minor.
        No minor shall be present in any public place during curfew hours. (Ord. 4539, 1997.)

 

9.80.040 Prohibition; Adult.
        No responsible adult shall knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, a minor to be present in any public place during curfew hours. (Ord. 4539, 1997.)

 

9.80.050 Exceptions.
        The prohibitions described in Sections 9.80.030 and 9.80.040 above shall not apply to any minor who demonstrates as an affirmative defense that he or she is:

A.    Accompanied by his or her responsible adult;

B.     Engaged in or directly en route to or from an employment activity;

C.     Engaged in any emergency;

D.    Present at a public place abutting the minor’s residence;

E.     Present in any privately owned building or structure generally committed to a business or trade which is open to and serves the public, or going to or returning from said privately owned building or structure without detour or stop;

F.     Attending or directly en route to or from a school sponsored, religious, or recreational activity supervised by at least one responsible adult and sponsored and conducted by the City of El Cajon, a civic organization, public agency, charitable organization, religious entity, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

G.    On an errand at the direction of the minor’s responsible adult without any detour or stop;

H.    In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

I.      Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution;

J.      Legally emancipated; or

K.    Traveling without detour or delay between any activity listed in subsections A through J, or traveling without detour or delay between the minor’s home and one of these activities.

(Ord. 4945 § 2, 2010.)

 

9.80.060 Enforcement; Penalty.
A.    Each violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate offense;

B.     A charge under this Chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. Minors shall be prosecuted in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure.

C.     Any person convicted of an infraction for violating this Chapter may be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by a requirement to perform county or city approved work projects or community service or both.

D.    Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violating this Chapter may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000), or both.

(Ord. 4539, 1997.)

 

Chapter 9.82 DAYTIME LOITERING BY MINORS
9.82.010 Purpose.
        Unexcused absences of minor students from school result in students sacrificing their educational opportunities, decreasing state and federal funding, and, apparently, vandalism, petty theft, burglary, and/or other crimes. This chapter is intended to encourage minors’ school attendance, to prevent loss of educational funds, and to reduce the incidence of crimes committed by minors. (Ord. 4517, 1996.)

 

9.82.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions apply to this chapter:

A.    “Adult” is any person eighteen (18) years old or older.

B.     “Emergency” includes but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or immediate medical care for another person.

C.     “Minor” is any person under eighteen (18) years old.

D.    “Parent” is a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. “Parent” includes court appointed guardians or other adult authorized by the minor’s parent(s), by court order, or by a court appointed guardian to have care and custody of the minor.

E.     “Public place” is any place with public access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, office buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, and malls.

(Ord. 4517, 1996.)

 

 

9.82.030 Daytime Loitering by Minors.
A.    It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education, or to compulsory continuation education, to loiter on or in any public place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, at times when school is regularly in session for that minor.

B.     This chapter does not apply:

1.     When the minor’s parent(s) accompany the minor;

2.     When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent(s);

3.     When the minor is going to, or coming directly from, his or her place of gainful employment;

4.     When the minor is going to or coming directly from a medical appointment;

5.     To minors having permission to leave school campus for lunch or school-related activities;

6.     To minors currently enrolled in an independent study program or home schooling; or

7.     To minors awarded with a high school diploma or a high school equivalency certificate.

(Ord. No. 4517, Enacted, 08/13/96)

 

9.82.040 Parental Responsibility.
        It is unlawful for a minor’s parent(s) to knowingly or negligently permit their minor to violate Section 9.82.030A.

(Ord. No. 4517, Enacted, 08/13/96)

 

9.82.050 Enforcement.
A.    Upon violation of Section 9.82.030A, public safety personnel may issue a citation to the minor. In addition, public safety personnel may detain the minor until the minor’s parent(s) retrieve the minor from custody; public safety personnel may transport the minor to his or her home or school.

B.     A charge under this chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction, unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. The amount of the fine imposed, if any, shall be set by the court.

C.     Upon first violation of this chapter, the minor’s parent(s) shall accompany the minor to court. If found guilty of violating this chapter, the court shall inform the minor’s parent(s) of the citation; the court shall advise the parent(s) that the minor was found violating the ordinance; and the court shall remind the minor’s parent(s) of their responsibility and liability.

D.    Upon a second violation of this chapter, when a minor’s parent(s) were previously warned as set forth in Section 9.82.050(c), public safety personnel may issue a citation for an infraction to the parent(s) to appear in court. The amount of the fine imposed, if any, shall be set by the court.

E.     Upon subsequent violations of this chapter, when the parent(s) were previously issued an infraction, public safety personnel may issue a citation for a misdemeanor to the parent(s) to appear in court. Penalties, if any, will be assessed by the court at that time.

(Ord. No. 4517, Enacted, 08/13/96)

 

9.82.060 Penalties.
A.    Any person convicted of an infraction for violating Sections 9.82.030A or 9.82.040 may be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by a requirement to perform county, city, or school-approved work projects or community service or both. If required to perform a project, the total time for performance shall not exceed twenty (20) hours over a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, during times other than a minor’s hours of school attendance or a minor’s or parent(s)’ hours of employment.

B.     Any parent convicted of a misdemeanor violation of Section 9.82.040 may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both.

(Ord. No. 4517, Enacted, 08/13/96)

 

9.82.070 Cost Recovery.
        This section shall apply only if a court enters a civil finding or criminal conviction in violation of this chapter against a minor. If a minor is detained for a period in excess of one (1) hour under the supervision of El Cajon Police Department employees, the minor’s parent(s) shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such supervision and other costs normally associated with such detention. This assessment shall be payable to the City of El Cajon.

(Ord. No. 4517, Enacted, 08/13/96)

 

9.82.080 Severability.
        If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

(Ord. No. 4517, Enacted, 08/13/96)

 

Chapter 9.84 DISTRIBUTION OF HARMFUL MATTER TO MINORS
Note
*       For the statutory offense of distributing harmful material to minors, see Pen. Code § 313.1.

 

9.84.010 Distribution of harmful matter to minors.
        For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Harmful to minors” means that quality of any description or representation in whatever form when, taken as a whole, it:

1.     Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors,

2.     Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors,

3.     Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors;

B.     “Knowingly” means having general knowledge of or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:

1.     The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant,

2.     The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.

C.     “Matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.

D.    “Minor” means any natural person under the age of eighteen years.

E.     “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.

        Every person who knowingly sells, circulates or exhibits to a minor matter which is harmful to minors is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 18-15.)

Division VIII WEAPONS
Chapter 9.92 FIREARMS
9.92.010 Firearms—Discharging.
        No person shall shoot, fire or discharge any pistol, revolver, gun, rifle or other firearm or device fired or discharged by explosives within the city, unless otherwise permitted by this code. (Ord. 4365 § 1, 1992: prior code § 18-11.)

 

9.92.020 Firearms—Sale to minors.
        No person shall sell within the city to any minor child any dart, arrow or sharp-pointed missile, pistol, revolver, gun, rifle or any other firearm or device fired or discharged by explosives. (Prior code § 18-12.)

 

9.92.030 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

 

Chapter 9.96 MISSILES—SHOOTING OR THROWING
9.96.010 Missile—Shooting or throwing.
        No person shall discharge any air gun, slingshot or beanshooter, or throw, hurl, heave or propel any sharp-pointed missile, dart or arrow upon any public street or sidewalk or public gathering place within the city. (Prior code § 18-21.)

 

9.96.020 Exception—Darting in commercial establishments.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9.96.010 of this code, it shall not be unlawful to throw, hurl, heave, or propel darts in areas of commercial business establishments specifically designated for such purposes by the owner or manager thereof, provided that reasonable safety precautions are taken. (Ord. 3722 § 1, 1983.)

 

9.96.030 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.16 SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
Chapter 10.20 OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Chapter 10.24 OPERATION OF TRUCKS
Chapter 10.25 OPERATION OF INTERSTATE TRUCKS AND DESIGNATION OF INTERSTATE TRUCK ROUTES
Chapter 10.26 OPERATION OF DOCKLESS VEHICLES
Chapter 10.28 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.30 HANDICAPPED PARKING
Chapter 10.32 LOADING ZONES
Chapter 10.36 REPEALED
TITLE 10 ENDNOTES

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.020 Coach defined.
        “Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.030 Curb defined.
        “Curb” defined means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction or not. The word “curb” as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.040 Divisional island defined.
        “Divisional island” means a raised or painted island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Prior code § 17-3.)

10.04.050 Holidays defined.
        Within the meaning of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32, the holidays of the city are those set out in Section 2.36.010 of this code. (Ord. 4129 § 2, 1988; prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.060 Loading zone defined.
        “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.070 Official time standard defined.
        “Official time standard.” Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.080 Parkway defined.
        “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.090 Passenger loading zone defined.
        “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.100 Pedestrian defined.
        “Pedestrian” means any person who is afoot. (Ord. 5076 § 7, 2019.)

 

10.04.110 Police officer defined.
        “Police officer” means every officer of the police department of the city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.120 Stop defined.
        “Stop” means, when required, complete cessation of movement. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.130 Vehicle Code defined.
        “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state. (Prior code § 17-3.)

 

10.04.140 Generally.
        Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Prior code § 17-3.)

Chapter 10.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.08.010 Applicability to persons riding bicycles and animals.
        Every person riding a bicycle, dockless vehicle, or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by Chapters 10.04 through 10.32, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 5076 § 9, 2019.)

 

10.08.020 Applicability—Public employees.
        The provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 except as otherwise permitted in Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 or by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 17-5.)

 

10.08.030 Applicability—Authorized emergency vehicles.
A.    The provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

B.     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others.

(Prior code § 17-6.)

 

10.08.040 Accident reports required.
A.    The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department.

B.     Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

C.     The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection A within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report.

(Prior code § 17-7.)

 

10.08.050 Obedience to school crossing guards—Minors directing traffic at schools.
        It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any person appointed by the chief of police to control traffic at school crossings; provided, that such person giving any order, signal or direction at such school crossings shall at the time be wearing some insignia, indicating such appointment. It is unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the chief of police. (Prior code § 17-8.)

 

10.08.060 Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited.
        No person shall attach him or herself with his or her hands, or catch on, or hold on with his or her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Prior code § 17-9.)

 

10.08.070 Riding or driving on sidewalks.
        No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways, and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick. Such protection shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Prior code § 17-10.)

 

10.08.080 Driving over new pavement or markings.
        No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone-marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Prior code § 17-11.)

 

10.08.090 Erection of barriers—Obedience to same.
        No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of the city.

        No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected:

A.    Pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the city;

B.     By any public utility;

C.     By any department of the city;

D.    By any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city;

        Nor shall any authorized person move or alter the position of any such barrier or sign. (Prior code § 17-12.)

 

10.08.100 Blocking of intersections prohibited.
        No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Prior code § 17-13.)

 

10.08.110 Obstructions of view at intersections prohibited.
        Whenever the city traffic engineer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the streets approaching the intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in size. (Prior code § 17-14.)

 

10.08.120 Blocking of streets by trains—Obedience to railroad crossing barriers.
A.    No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway car or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes; except, that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident.

B.     No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.

(Prior code § 17-15.)

 

10.08.130 Crosswalks.
A.    The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

1.     Crosswalks shall be established and maintained by the city traffic engineer where it is necessary to indicate to the pedestrian a preferred route of travel to cross either a street or a complex intersection, subject to the limitation contained in subsection 2 of this section.

2.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.

3.     The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated.

B.     No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district.

(Prior code § 17-16.)

Chapter 10.12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.12.010 Traffic division—Established.
        There is established in the police department a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. (Prior code § 17-17.)

 

10.12.020 Traffic division—Powers and duties generally.
        It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. (Prior code § 17-18.)

 

10.12.030 Traffic division—Accident studies and reports.
        Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.

        The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. A copy of such reports shall be provided the city traffic engineer. (Prior code § 17-19.)

 

10.12.040 Annual traffic safety report.
        The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows:

A.    The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data;

B.     The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police;

C.     The plans and recommendations of the traffic division for future traffic safety activities.

(Prior code § 17-20.)

 

10.12.050 Traffic engineer—Office established—Appointment.
        The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the city manager, and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 and in the traffic ordinances of the city. Whenever the city traffic engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic-control devices or signals, he shall cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. (Prior code § 17-21.)

 

10.12.060 Traffic engineer—Powers and duties.
        It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other ordinances of the city. Whenever, by the provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Prior code § 17-22.)

 

10.12.090 Direction of traffic—Police officers and fire department officials.
        Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 or the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 17-25.)

 

10.12.100 Direction of traffic—Unauthorized persons.
        No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal; except, that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Prior code § 17-26.)

 

10.12.110 Control of traffic under emergency conditions.
        At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and the police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the police officer’s order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32. (Prior code § 17-27.)

 

10.12.120 Obedience to provisions.
        It is an infraction for any person driving any vehicle or other conveyance upon any street, or for any pedestrian, to do any act prohibited, or fail to perform any act required as applicable to any such person under Chapters 10.04 through 10.32. (Ord. 2893 § 4, 1975; prior code § 17-28.)

 

10.12.130 Obedience to traffic signals required.
        No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. (Prior code § 17-29.)

 

10.12.140 Interference with, obstruction of enforcement officers.
        No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the city in their enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Prior code § 17-30.)

 

10.12.150 Removal of vehicles by police officers.
        Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove or cause to be removed:

A.    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours;

B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between designated hours when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution and signs are posted giving notice of such removal;

C.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal.

(Prior code § 17-31.)

 

10.12.160 Removal and disposal of abandoned, etc., vehicles from private or public property.
A.    The purpose and intent of this section is to establish procedures pursuant to Sections 22660 to 22663 of the Vehicle Code for the abatement, removal and disposal, as public nuisances, of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or vehicle parts from private or public property, not including highways.

B.     Any vehicle or vehicle part located on property other than a highway may be removed as a public nuisance and disposed of in accordance with the following procedures:

1.     Not less than ten days prior to any removal or disposal of a vehicle, a notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle as a public nuisance shall be issued, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle. The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the vehicle and of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

2.     Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, a hearing shall be held before the city manager. This request shall be made to the city manager within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If such a request is not received within such period, then an order may be issued by the city manager, authorizing removal of the vehicle.

3.     The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing. Instead of making an appearance, a sworn written statement may be presented in time for consideration at the hearing, denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial. This statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting the request. This statement shall not be construed as determinative, but rather shall be regarded by the city manager as one factor for consideration at the hearing. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle shall not be assessed against the property upon which the vehicle is located or collected from the landowner.

4.     No person shall reconstruct or make operable any vehicle removed under the provisions of this section, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license, pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.

5.     This section shall not apply to (a) a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or (b) a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. This exception shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this section.

6.     After the public hearing is held pursuant to this section, the city manager may issue an order authorizing removal of the vehicle. After the city manager issues an order authorizing removal of the vehicle pursuant to this subparagraph or subparagraph 2 of this section, the vehicle may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, automobile dismantler’s yard, or any suitable site for processing as scrap, or other final disposition consistent with subparagraph 4 of this section.

7.     Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five days after the date of removal, identifying the vehicle and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates.

8.     The cost of removal and disposal of any vehicle and the administrative cost thereof may be charged against the person who is determined to be responsible for the maintenance of the vehicle as a public nuisance.

9.     Provisions of this section shall be administered by regularly salaried full time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. Any such authorized person may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this section to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, and remove or cause to be removed the vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this section.

(Ord. 4028 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3744 § 1, 1984; Ord. 3668 § 1, 1983.)

 

10.12.170 Removal—Cost charged to owner of the land.
        If it is determined in accordance with Section 10.12.160 that the person responsible for maintenance of a vehicle as a public nuisance is the owner of the land, the city shall remove the vehicle or pay for its removal and prepare a report of the proceedings and an account of the cost on each separate property to be filed with the city clerk. The city shall then bill the owner of the land by mail for the cost of removal and disposal of the vehicle and for any administrative costs. The bill shall apprise the property owner that failure to pay the bill will result in a lien upon the property. (Ord. 4028 § 2, 1987.)

 

10.12.180 Time of hearing upon failure of owner of land to pay costs.
        Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty days after the date of billing, the city clerk shall set the report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after such thirty-day period has expired. The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and account and a notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the council chambers. (Ord. 4028 § 2, 1987.)

 

10.12.190 Confirmation of special assessment and lien on property.
        The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by interested parties. Any owner of land or person affected by the proposed charge may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision of the city council on the report and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive. The amounts so approved shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill, and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall confirm such assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. (Ord. 4028 § 2, 1987.)

 

10.12.200 Interest on unpaid assessments.
        All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the city council shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date. (Ord. 4028 § 2, 1987.)

 

10.12.210 Authority for assessments.
        Said assessments shall be levied in accordance with the provisions of Title 4, Division 3, Chapter 10, Section 38773.5 of the Government Code, and Division 11, Chapter 10, Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 4028 § 2, 1987.)

Chapter 10.16 SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
10.16.010 Traffic-control devices—Installation.
A.    The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32.

B.     Whenever the state Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

C.     The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council.

(Prior code § 17-32.)

 

10.16.020 Obedience required.
        The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Prior code § 17-33.)

 

10.16.030 Removal or relocation.
        The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the state Vehicle Code or Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or remain. (Prior code § 17-34.)

 

10.16.040 Hours of operation.
        The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in Chapters 10.04 through 10.32. (Prior code § 17-35.)

 

10.16.050 Installation of traffic signals and street name signs.
A.    The city traffic engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

B.     The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the division of highways of the state department of public works.

C.     Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection.

D.    Whenever the city traffic engineer shall have determined upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations that the same is necessary, he shall regulate traffic by means of portable traffic signaling devices, subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto with reference to streets which are also state highways.

(Prior code § 17-36.)

 

10.16.060 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Prior code § 17-37.)

 

10.16.070 Signs necessary for enforcement where required.
        No provisions of the state Vehicle Code or of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of the provisions of the traffic laws. (Prior code § 17-38.)

 

10.16.080 Obedience to pedestrian traffic signals.
        Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed for pedestrians only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular traffic signal at any location where special pedestrian traffic signals are in place. (Prior code § 17-39.)

 

10.16.090 Lane markings.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Prior code § 17-40.)

 

10.16.100 Distinctive roadway markings.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the state Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state department of public works pursuant to provisions of the state Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 17-41.)

 

10.16.110 Curb markings.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

1.     Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the state Vehicle Code, except, that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

2.     Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes.

3.     White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:

a.     When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times;

b.     When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed;

c.     When such zones are designated for the exclusive use of taxicabs.

4.     Blue indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons.

5.     Green indicates time-limited parking.

B.     When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section.

C.     No person, unless authorized by the city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the city pertaining thereto.

(Ord. 3353 § 1, 1979; prior code § 17-42.)

Chapter 10.20 OPERATION OF VEHICLES
10.20.010 Turning movements—Installation and use of turning lanes.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Prior code § 17-43.)

 

10.20.020 Turning movements—Restricted turn intersections.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.

        Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Prior code § 17-44.)

 

10.20.030 Turning movements—Right turns at signal-controlled intersections.
        No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as provided in this section.

        The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Prior code § 17-45.)

 

10.20.040 One-way streets and alleys.
        Whenever any provision of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32, ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Prior code § 17-46.)

 

10.20.050 Stop intersections.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

 

A.    A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the State Vehicle Code.

B.     Stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal.

(Prior code § 17-47.)

 

10.20.060 Yield right-of-way intersections.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any yield right-of-way intersection or yield right-of-way signs, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain yield right-of-way signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall become effective unless such signs are in place.

        The driver of any vehicle upon approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from an intersecting street or which are approaching so closely on the intersecting street as to constitute an immediate hazard, and shall continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles until such time as he or she can proceed with reasonable safety. A driver, having so yielded, may then proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the intersecting roadway shall yield the right-of-way to him or her.

        Any yield right-of-way signs erected by direction of the city traffic engineer shall be erected as prescribed by the applicable provisions of the State Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 17-48.)

 

10.20.070 Through streets designated.
A.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the city council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section.

B.     The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the city council.

C.     The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the city council.

(Prior code § 17-49.)

 

10.20.080 Vehicles to be stopped on emerging from alley, driveway.
        The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Prior code § 17-50.)

 

10.20.090 Stops at school crossings.
        The driver of a vehicle shall stop within fifty feet of the nearest side of a school pedestrian lane where any signal device or flagger or other person is stationed, giving warning that children are about to cross or are crossing the street, and shall not proceed until such signal is stopped, raised or removed, or the flagger or person stationed at such pedestrian lane has given a signal to go or has left the locality. (Prior code § 17-51.)

 

10.20.100 Driving through funeral procession prohibited.
        No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Prior code § 17.52.)

 

10.20.110 Entrance to and exit from limited access highways.
        No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Prior code § 17-53.)

 

10.20.120 Restrictions on use of freeways.
        No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle, upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described, except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians; provided, official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Prior code § 17-54.)

 

10.20.130 Designation of speed limits.
        It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed limits otherwise authorized by state law upon the following streets differ from that which is necessary for the safe operation of vehicles. The speed limits set forth in this section are determined to be the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic in a reasonable and safe manner, and shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street.

 

Twenty-five Miles Per Hour

        Chatham Street, between Fletcher Parkway and Westwind Drive.

        East Main Street, from Magnolia Avenue to Avocado Avenue.

        West Main Street from El Cajon Boulevard to Magnolia Avenue.

 

Thirty Miles Per Hour

        Aldwych Road, between the north intersection of Westwind Drive to the south intersection of Westwind Drive.

        Brockton Street, from Fletcher Parkway to Hacienda Drive.

        Chambers Street, from Main Street to Madison Avenue.

        Dewane Drive, from Main Street to Petree Street.

        Garfield Avenue, from the south city limits to Fletcher Parkway.

        Hacienda Drive, from Fletcher Parkway to Windmill View Road.

        Johnson Avenue, from El Cajon Boulevard to West Main Street.

        Lexington Avenue, from El Cajon Boulevard to Avocado.

        Magnolia Avenue, from Lexington Avenue to Madison Avenue.

        Marshall Avenue, between El Cajon Boulevard and West Main Street.

        Murray Avenue, from Murray Drive to West main Street.

        Murray Drive, from Travelodge Drive to Murray Avenue.

        Murray Drive, from El Cajon Boulevard to Water Street (La Mesa city limits).

        Oakdale Avenue, from Second Street to East Main Street.

        Third Street, between Broadway and Greenfield Drive.

        Windmill View Road from Hacienda Drive to Valley Lake Drive.

 

Thirty-five Miles Per Hour

        Ballantyne Street, from Main Street to Interstate 8.

        Chase Avenue, from El Cajon Boulevard to the easterly city limits.

        Cypress Lane between Pioneer Way and the City Limits (approximately four hundred feet west of Magnolia Avenue).

        East Main Street, from Avocado Avenue to Mollison Avenue.

        East Main Street, from First Street to Second Street/Jamacha Road.

        East Main Street, from Mollison Avenue to First Street.

        El Cajon Boulevard, from Johnson Avenue to Douglas.

        First Street, from Washington Avenue to Broadway.

        Granite Hills Drive, from Jamacha Road to Washington Avenue.

        Greenfield Drive between East Main Street and the city limit east of Bermuda Lane.

        Greenfield Drive, from the most westerly city limits to East Main Street (portion within the city limits).

 

        Hacienda Drive, from Fletcher Parkway to Swallow Drive.

        Hacienda Drive, from Windmill View Road to Swallow Drive.

        Lexington Avenue, from Avocado to the easterly city limits.

        Madison Avenue, from Johnson Avenue to Fourth Street.

        Marshall Avenue, from Fletcher Parkway to Vernon Way.

        Marshall Avenue, from Vernon Way to Bradley.

        Melody Lane, from Third Street to Granite Hills Drive.

        Mollison Avenue, from East Main Street to Broadway.

        Murray Drive, from El Cajon Boulevard to Travelodge Drive.

        Navajo Road, from Fanita Drive to Fletcher Parkway.

        North Magnolia Avenue from Fletcher Parkway to Vernon Way.

        Petree Street, from Buena Terrace to Marshall Avenue.

        Second Street, from Broadway to Interstate 8.

        Third Street, from Madison Avenue to Washington Avenue.

        Third Street, from Main to Broadway.

        Travelodge Drive, from Murray Drive to West Main Street.

        Vernon Way, between Cuyamaca Street and Pioneer Way.

        West Main Street, from Johnson Avenue to El Cajon Boulevard.

        West Main Street, from Travelodge Drive to Johnson Avenue.

        Westwind Drive, between West Main Street and Fletcher Parkway.

 

Forty Miles Per Hour

        Avocado, from Main Street to Chase Avenue.

        Ballantyne Street, from Interstate 8 to Broadway.

        Bradley Avenue, between a point six hundred feet west of Mollison Avenue, continuing east to a point six hundred feet east of Mollison Avenue.

        Broadway, from Magnolia Avenue to East Main Street.

        Chase Avenue between El Cajon Boulevard and Anza Street.

        Cuyamaca, from Fletcher Parkway to Bradley Avenue.

        East Main Street, from Broadway to Pepper Drive.

        East Main Street, from Second Street/Jamacha Road to Third Street.

        East Main Street, from Third Street to Broadway.

        El Cajon Boulevard, from Johnson Avenue to Murray Drive.

        Fletcher Parkway, from Marshall Avenue to Magnolia Avenue.

        Fletcher Parkway, from Navajo Road to Westwind Drive.

        Granite Hills Drive, from Melody Lane to Madison Avenue.

        Granite Hills Drive, from Washington Avenue to the northerly city limits.

        Greenfield Drive.

        Jamacha Road between Gustavo Street and Lexington Avenue.

        Jamacha Road between Lexington Avenue and East Main Street.

        Johnson Avenue, from West Main Street to Bradley Avenue.

        Madison Avenue, from Fourth Street to Cuyamaca, from Fletcher Parkway to Bradley Avenue.

        Magnolia Avenue, from Chase Avenue to Washington Avenue.

        Magnolia Avenue, from Madison Avenue North to Interstate 8.

        Magnolia Avenue, from Washington Avenue to Lexington Avenue.

        Marshall Avenue, between Bradley Avenue and Cuyamaca Street.

        Marshall Avenue, from West Main Street to Fletcher Parkway.

 

        Mollison Avenue, from Broadway to the northerly city limits.

        Mollison Avenue, from Chase Avenue to East Main Street.

        Pepper Drive from Main Street westerly to the city limits.

        Pioneer Way, from Fletcher Parkway to Bradley.

        Second Street, from Broadway to the northerly city limits.

        Vernon Way, from Pioneer Way to the city limit east of Pioneer Way.

        Washington Avenue, from El Cajon Boulevard to First Street.

        Weld Boulevard, between Fanita Drive and Cuyamaca Street.

        West Main Street, from Westwind Drive to Travelodge Drive.

 

Forty-five Miles Per Hour

        Avocado, from Chase Avenue to the southerly city limits.

        Bradley Avenue, from Cuyamaca Street to Wing Avenue.

        Chase Avenue, from Anza Street to the easterly city limits.

        Chase Avenue, from the easterly city limits to Avocado.

        Cuyamaca, from Bradley Avenue to northerly city limits.

        East Main Street, from Pepper Drive to Lavala Lane

        Fanita Drive, from Valley Lake Drive to the northerly city limits.

        Fletcher Parkway, from the southerly city limits to Navajo Road.

        Greenfield Drive, between Madison Avenue and Orchard Avenue.

        Jamacha Road between south city limit and Gustavo Street.

        Magnolia Avenue between Airport Drive and northerly city limits.

        North Magnolia Avenue from Airport Drive North to the Santee city limits.

        Washington Avenue, from First Street to Granite Hills Drive.

 

Fifty Miles Per Hour

        Fanita Drive, from Grossmont College Drive to Valley Lake Drive.

        Fanita Drive, from Navajo Road to Grossmont College Drive.

        Fanita Drive, from Navajo Road to the northerly city limits.

        Fletcher Parkway, from Cuyamaca Street to Marshall Avenue.

(Ord. 5042 §§ 1, 2, 2016; Ord. 4978 § 2, 2012; Ord. 4974 § 1, 2012; Ord. 4915 § 1, 2008; Ord. 4866 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4851 § 1, 2006; Ord. 4817 § 1, 2005; Ord. 4804 § 1, 2005; Ord. 4785 § 1, 2004; Ord. 4779 § 1, 2004; Ord. 4778 § 1, 2004; Ord. 4766 § 1, 2004; Ord. 4730 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4724 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4685 § 1, 2001; Ord. 4681 § 1, 2001; Ord. 4670 § 1, 2001; Ord. 4651 § 1, 2000; Ord. 4604 § 1, 1999; Ord. 4597 § 1, 1999; Ord. 4570 § 1, 1998; Ord. 4542, 1997; Ord. 4502, 1996; Ord. 4488, 1995; Ord. 4485, 1995; Ord. 4475, 1995; Ord. 4465, 1995; Ord. 4456, 1994; Ord. 4453, 1994; Ord. 4451, 1994; Ord. 4447, 1994; Ord. 4369, 1992; Ord. 4354 § 1, 1992; Ord. 4319 § 1, 1991; Ord. 4256 § 1, 1990; Ord. 4218 § 1990; Ord. 4187 §§ 1, 2, 1989; Ord. 4185 § 1, 1989; Ord. 4169 § 1, 1989; Ord. 4164 § 1, 1989; Ord. 4154 § 1, 1989; Ord. 4150 § 1, 1989; Ord. 4136 § 1, 1988; Ord. 4127 § 1, 1988; Ord. 4123 § 1, 1988; Ord. 4074 § 1, 1988; Ord. 4057 § 1, 1987; Ord. 3908 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3862 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3836 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3779 § 1, 1984; Ord. 3742 § 1, 1984; Ord. 3656 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3642 § 1, 1982; Ord. 3631 § 1, 1982; Ord. 3586 § 1, 1982; Ord. 3564 § 1, 1981; Ord. 3544 § 1, 1981; Ord. 3540 § 1, 1981; Ord. 3519 § 1, 1981; Ord. 3507 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3439 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3427 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3398 § 1, 1979; Ord. 3379 § 1, 1979; Ord. 3357 § 1, 1979; Ord. 3353 § 2, 1979; Ord. 3323 § 1, 1979; Ord. 3300 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3287 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3273 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3260 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3204 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3179 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3155 § 1, 1977; Ord. 3135 §

1, 1977; Ord. 3075 § 1, 1977; Ord. 3061 § 1, 1977; Ord. 3023 § 1, 1976; Ord. 3014 § 1, 1976; Ord. 2995 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2910 § 2, 1975; Ord. 2900 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2875 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2844 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2837 § 1, 1975.)

Chapter 10.24 OPERATION OF TRUCKS
10.24.005 Definitions.
        Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used they shall mean:

A.    “Overload” means any vehicle or load in excess of the size and weight of vehicles and/or loads allowed to be moved or operated on highways under the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

(Ord. 4087 § 1, 1988.)

 

10.24.010 Designation and use of truck routes.
A.    Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons.

B.     When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or reconstruction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission of the state, or to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

D.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the city council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons.

(Prior code § 17-57.)

 

10.24.015 Designation and use of restricted commercial vehicle routes.
A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.24.010, whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle exceeding a gross weight limit of seven tons, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “commercial vehicles prohibited” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross vehicle weight limit of seven tons.

B.     When any such restricted commercial vehicle route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a gross weight limit of seven tons shall not drive on such route or routes; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of a commercial vehicle exceeding a gross weight of seven tons from having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted commercial vehicle routes when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or reconstruction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission of the state, or to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

D.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the city council are declared to be restricted commercial vehicle routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross weight of seven tons.

(Ord. 4669 § 1, 2001.)

 

10.24.020 Use of certain streets by commercial vehicles restricted.
A.    Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commerce vehicle, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution.

B.     Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the city council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, with the following exceptions:

        Those passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission, any vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual or bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained, or any vehicle owned by a public utility in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Prior code § 17-58.)

 

10.24.030 Light load streets.
        Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited to vehicles with loads in excess of a prescribed tonnage, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution. (Prior code § 17-59.)

 

10.24.040 Overload vehicles; permit required.
A.    Transportation Permit Required. No person shall move or cause to be moved over or across any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city any vehicle, load, trailer, or combination thereof, which exceeds the height, width, length, size or weight of vehicle or load limitations provided in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California without first obtaining a transportation permit therefor from the city traffic engineer or designated representative (hereinafter engineer).

        The transportation permit shall designate the specific route or routes, the specific date or dates, and the hours in which the move will occur. The engineer shall place route restrictions upon the move if any of the following conditions exist:

1.     The load exceeds the weight limits prescribed by Division 15 of the California

        Vehicle Code by more than twenty-five percent; or

2.     The load exceeds thirteen feet in width; or

3.     The load exceeds sixteen feet in height; or

4.     The load exceeds one hundred feet in length.

B.     Application for Transportation Permit—Insurance Required. In order to operate or move vehicles or loads, upon the streets of El Cajon, in excess of size or size and weight restrictions contained in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code, the mover or operator shall first obtain a transportation permit. The application shall specifically describe the vehicle or load to be operated or moved, and any other information the engineer may require.

        The engineer shall have the right to inspect all rollers, trucks, wheels, dollies, tractors or other apparatus proposed to be used in the moving operations. The engineer shall be the sole judge as to the adequacy of such equipment, and may require the use of such apparatus as in his or her judgment will not cause injury to streets or pavements. Any permit issued under this chapter shall stipulate that all equipment used in moving operations shall be subject to the approval of the engineer.

        The engineer may issue a transportation permit to the applicant when:

        1.     Applicant has provided the city with a certificate of liability insurance naming the city of El Cajon as additionally insured, executed by a responsible insurance company authorized to conduct business in the state of California. Under its terms, said insurance company shall assume full responsibility for injuries to persons and property as a result of moving the vehicle or load by applicant, in the following amounts, to wit:

a.     Bodily Injury:

$250,000 each person

0500,000 each occurrence

0500,000 aggregate limit

b.     Property Damage:

$100,000 each occurrence

0250,000 aggregate limit

Note:        A combined single policy limit in the amount of one million dollars will be considered equivalent to the minimum limits set out above.

        Governmental agencies, including the state of California and its political subdivisions, shall not be required to provide the insurance required by this chapter, but may be required to hold the city harmless as hereinafter provided:

 

 

 

        2.     Applicant has signed and submitted to the city an indemnification agreement holding the city harmless if the engineer has determined, in his/her sole discretion, that such an agreement shall be required due to the nature of the move or the governmental agencies involved;

3.     The engineer is satisfied as to the qualifications of the applicant and that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section;

4.     Fees as provided in subsection E of this section have been paid or exempted;

5.     Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bonds as the engineer in his/her discretion may require.

        The transportation permit shall be carried on the vehicle whose movement is authorized by such permit, and shall be available for inspection by any police officer or any authorized agent of the city. Said permit shall be carried in the overload vehicle. Pilot vehicles, front and/or rear, may be required, and when required shall be furnished by the operator or mover at all times during transit. Transportation permits shall be nontransferable.

C.     A transportation permit shall not be issued when any one of the following conditions exists:

1.     The overweight per axle exceeds the limits provided in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code by fifty percent.

2.     The engineer determines the move is prohibitive from the standpoint of public safety or is contrary to the public interest.

3.     The applicant is known to have repeatedly violated conditions of previously-issued permits, or has unsettled claims for damages resulting from past moves.

D.    Overload Moving; Regulations.

1.     The applicant shall comply with all conditions and restrictions contained in the transportation permit.

2.     It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ascertain the most suitable route for the move. When an oversize load is authorized (over thirteen feet six inches high), the applicant shall check all underpasses, bridges, overhead wires, and other limiting structures or facilities for adequate clearance.

3.     The applicant shall notify the owners of all overhead lines or structures subject to disturbance or damage by the move, and shall make arrangements for the temporary removal or relocation of the conflicting facility, if necessary. Where the facility is located in accordance with state or local regulations, the applicant shall bear all costs for such relocation.

4.     For any move involving a load or vehicle whose vertical height is twenty feet or over, the applicant shall submit to the agency(ies) whose facility(ies) will be affected by such move the proposed route for approval at least seventy-two hours in advance of the move. No permit shall be issued until clearances have been received from the fire department, police department, and any private or public utility company affected by the move. Applicant shall provide proof of clearance from each agency so affected.

5.     “No Parking” signs shall be posted, if necessary, in accordance with Section 10.28.190 of this code.

E.     Overload Moving; Permit Fees. Transportation permit fees shall be collected by the city as established by the city council. The current fee structure shall be provided by the city clerk’s office upon request.

        Government agencies, including the state of California and any of its political subdivisions, shall be required to make application for permits as provided under the provisions of this chapter, and if approved, shall be issued a no-fee permit in accordance with the provisions herein. A contractor working for a government agency shall not be considered acting on behalf of that governmental agency, and therefore shall not be exempt from payment of required fees.

        An extension of the effective date or an amendment to the transportation permit may be made without payment of additional fees, if approved by the engineer, and if requested prior to the expiration date of the original permit.

F.     Overload Moves in Emergencies. For moves which, because of their emergency nature, require approval during periods other than the regularly scheduled working hours of the city, the engineer, chief of police, building official, or authorized representatives thereof, may grant interim approval for such moves on the condition that a permit will be acquired during the next regularly-scheduled working day.

G.    Overload Moving; Moves Excluded. The requirements of this chapter shall not affect the requirements of any other chapter of the municipal code requiring permits, fees and bonds, including the requirements for relocating structures as provided in Chapter 15 of the municipal code.

H.    In case of damage to any city owned and maintained facility by reason of the movement of any vehicle or load pursuant to this section, the street department shall do such work as may be necessary to restore the street to as good a condition as existed prior to such damage, and shall charge the cost thereof to the transportation permittee. Such damages as occur may be recovered from the insurance required by this chapter.

(Ord. 4087 § 2, 1988: prior code § 17-60.)

 

10.24.050 Vehicles with lugs or cleats prohibited.
        No person shall operate over the city streets any vehicle, piece of equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges, or other projections on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. (Prior code § 17-61.)

 

10.24.060 Operation of commercial vehicles on driveway and over sidewalks.
        No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

        For the purpose of this section, a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Prior code § 17-62.)

 

10.24.070 Warning devices to be displayed by disabled trucks.
        Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the department of the California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle abovementioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within the city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet in advance of, and one hundred feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A—Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. (Prior code § 17-63.)

 
Chapter 10.25 OPERATION OF INTERSTATE TRUCKS AND DESIGNATION OF INTERSTATE TRUCK ROUTES
10.25.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate truck operation on a federally designated highway system to limit the use of certain streets by commercial vehicles, to regulate the operation of trucks within the city, and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 3896 § 1, 1985.)

 

10.25.020 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

A.    “CalTrans” means the state of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency.

B.     “Interstate truck” means a truck tractor and semi-trailer or truck tractor, semi-trailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code.

C.     “Terminal” means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped, or where full-load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded, or at which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured.

(Ord. 3896 § 1, 1985.)

 

10.25.030 Terminal access application.
A.    Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the city traffic engineer, and appropriate fees to the city.

B.     Upon receipt of the application, the city traffic engineer will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon the city traffic engineer’s approval of that designation, the city traffic engineer will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate structural section, adequate turning radius, and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways, and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed, and traffic volumes. No access off a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of CalTrans.

C.     Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction’s application process. Coordination of the approval of the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity, which controls the terminal’s land use. Costs for trailblazer signs shall be as provided in Section 10.25.040.

(Ord. 4889 § 3, 2007.)

 

10.25.040 Fees and costs.
A.    The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route.

B.     Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city and by CalTrans, the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the city traffic engineer to pay for the purchase and installation of the terminal access signs and trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city en route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place.

(Ord. 3896 § 1, 1985.)

 

10.25.050 Retrofitting terminal routes.
A.    If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the city traffic engineer, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of CalTrans, the actual construction will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to it.

B.     When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work, and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, as the case may be. When the work is done by the applicant, the applicant may file with the city traffic engineer, on a form satisfactory to the city traffic engineer, a statement detailing the actual costs of the retrofitting.

C.     If at any time within five years from the date of completion of retrofitting by the applicant, should any new applicant seek approval of a terminal which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, the new applicant may be required to pay a fee to the city equal to the proportionate share of the cost of the previously complete retrofitting, as determined by the city traffic engineer, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing herein shall require the payment of a proportionate fee if the applicant doing the work failed to file the report with the city traffic engineer required by subsection B of this section.

(Ord. 4889 § 4, 2007.)

 

10.25.060 Revocation of route.
        The city traffic engineer may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal or route becomes a safety hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route, or said vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. (Ord. 4889 § 5, 2007.)

 

10.25.070 Appeal process.
A.    If the city traffic engineer denies terminal designation, route feasibility, or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant/terminal owner, within ten days following the date of receipt of the decision of the city traffic engineer, may appeal the decision to the city council in writing. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the department of public works, and shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the city traffic engineer, or wherein his or her decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five days of the filing of an appeal, the city traffic engineer shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route, and all other data filed therewith, the report of the city traffic engineer, the findings of the city traffic engineer, and his or her decision on the application.

B.     The city clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the city traffic engineer available to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) for inspection, and may give notice to any other interested party who requests notice of the time when the appeal will be considered by the city council.

C.     If CalTrans, and not the city traffic engineer, denies or revokes terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the city council, but must be made to CalTrans as may be permitted by CalTrans.

(Ord. 4889 § 6, 2007.)

Chapter 10.26 OPERATION OF DOCKLESS VEHICLES
10.26.010 Definition.
        “Dockless vehicle” means:

A.    Any wheeled device, other than an automobile or motorcycle, that is powered by a motor;

B.     Accessed via an on-demand portal, whether a smartphone application, membership card, or similar method;

C.     Owned by a private entity that owns, manages, and maintains devices for shared use by members of the public without a physical dispatching location within the City; and

D.    Available at unstaffed, self-service locations, to members of the public for their personal operation.

(Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

 

10.26.020 Regulation of dockless vehicles.
        It is unlawful for any person to provide any dockless vehicle for rent or lease in the city, unless that person complies with all of the following:

A.    Enters into an agreement with the City regarding the operation, maintenance, and storage of dockless vehicles; including a requirement for a security deposit to ensure timely retrieval of dockless vehicles and a process for reimbursement of the cost of staff time expended for removal of dockless vehicles blocking the right of way or pedestrian paths;

B.     Obtains a business license;

C.     Provides proof of insurance to the satisfaction of the risk manager; and

D.    Ensures that all dockless vehicles:

1.     Are labeled with the company logo;

2.     Have a unique serial number; and

3.     Are labeled with a 24-hour customer service number.

(Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

 

10.26.030 Abandoned dockless vehicle.
        Any dockless vehicle that is left on City property for a period of 72 consecutive hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned property and may be impounded by the City. This does not apply to dockless vehicles parked legally in City-owned dockless vehicle lockers or to dockless vehicles parked legally in any other areas designated by the City for long-term dockless vehicle parking. (Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

 

10.26.040 Parking on street rights-of-way.
        No person shall lay a dockless vehicle down on any street, alley or park a dockless vehicle upon any public street, alley or sidewalk in this City in such a position as to interfere with the safety or movement of traffic, including vehicles and pedestrians, or to interfere with the use of the public right-of-way by vehicles or pedestrians. (Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

 

10.26.050 Dockless vehicles prohibited on sidewalk.
        It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a dockless vehicle upon a sidewalk. This section does not prohibit a person from walking beside and guiding a dockless vehicle on a sidewalk. (Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

 

10.26.060 Use of dockless vehicles by minors.
        It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor, or any person having custody or control of a minor, to knowingly permit such minor to use or operate a dockless vehicle in the city in violation of the terms and provisions of this code. (Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

 

10.26.070 Schedule of fines.
        A violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 5076 § 10, 2019.)

Chapter 10.28 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.28.010 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

B.     The provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the State Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.

        The provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.

(Prior code § 17-64.)

 

10.28.020 No-parking areas generally.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:

A.    Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

B.     On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

C.     In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

D.    In any area established by resolution of the city council as a no-parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

E.     Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;

F.     In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

G.    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no-parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;

H.    At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

I.      At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

J.      Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device;

K.    In any space set aside for the exclusive use of any emergency vehicle of the police department, sheriff’s office, or fire department;

L.     So that vehicle faces the opposite direction of traffic flow on one-way streets.

(Prior code § 17-65.)

 

10.28.030 Stopping, standing or parking in parkways prohibited.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Prior code § 17-66.)

 

10.28.040 Stopping, standing or parking in alleys.
        It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park any vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

        The loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, or the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. (Ord. 4219 § 1, 1990; Ord. 2910 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2897 § 2, 1975: prior code § 17-67.)

 

10.28.050 Parking on one-way streets and roadways.
A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

C.     The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

D.    The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb in other than a business district or on a secondary roadway, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic.

(Prior code § 17-68.)

 

10.28.060 Storage for more than seventy-two hours prohibited—Inoperable vehicles prohibited from standing more than four hours.
A.    No person shall store or cause to be stored any vehicle upon any street. A vehicle shall be considered stored when it has been left standing on a street without having been moved more than one-tenth of a mile within a seventy-two consecutive hour period.

B.     No person shall leave standing or cause or allow to be left standing any inoperable vehicle on any street for more than four consecutive hours. A vehicle is considered to be inoperable when it is wrecked, burned, dismantled, or lacks a motor, transmission or wheel or wheels, or is on blocks, or is otherwise incapable of being driven upon the highways in conformity with the requirements of the California Vehicle Code.

(Ord. 4134 § 1, 1988: prior code § 17-69.)

 

10.28.065 Use of streets for habitation prohibited.
        No person shall use a vehicle while it is parked or standing upon any street or alley as either temporary or permanent living quarters, abode or place of habitation, either overnight or day by day. (Ord. 3721 § 1, 1983.)

 

10.28.070 Parking commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers upon city streets.
A.    No person shall park any commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of more than ten thousand pounds, or any commercial trailer or semitrailer (whether or not attached to a motorized vehicle), upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place in the city of El Cajon except where in compliance with Section 10.28.080, and:

1.     If registered to an El Cajon address (not including post office box) and the owner is in possession of a valid city permit;

2.     While in the process of loading or unloading property;

3.     When such vehicle or trailer is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on the property in the block in which such vehicle is parked; or

4.     When such vehicle or trailer is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily parking such vehicle or trailer.

B.     No person shall park any motorized recreational vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer (whether or not attached to a motorized vehicle), boat or boat trailer (whether or not attached to a motorized vehicle) upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place in the city of El Cajon except:

1.     If registered to an El Cajon address (not including post office box) and the owner is in possession of a valid city permit;

2.     While in the process of loading or unloading property; or

3.     When such vehicle or trailer is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily parking such vehicle or trailer.

C.     For the purpose of this section, vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers falling within the definitions of “motorized vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer,” include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     Camp trailers (California Vehicle Code Section 242);

2.     Fifth-wheel travel trailers (California Vehicle Code Section 324);

3.     House cars (California Vehicle Code Section 362);

4.     Trailer coaches (California Vehicle Code Section 635);

5.     Mobilehomes (California Vehicle Code Section 396);

6.     Boats and/or trailers;

7.     Trailers used for the transport of equipment, vehicles, or animals;

8.     Recreation vehicles (California Health & Safety Code Section 18010);

9.     Folding camper trailers; and

10.   Semi-trailers (California Vehicle Code Section 550).

D.    Permits for the temporary parking of motorized vehicles, trailers or semitrailers shall be issued under the following conditions:

1.     Permits will be issued free of charge and will be available at such city facilities designated by the city manager, or may be available through the city’s website, if determined feasible by the city manager;

2.     Permits will be issued only to residents of the city of El Cajon, where the vehicle is registered to an El Cajon address (not including post office box);

3.     Each permit will be issued for a maximum period of twenty-four consecutive hours;

4.     A permit holder may obtain no more than three permits to apply over any seventy-two hour period; and

5.     A permit holder may obtain up to fifty-two permits every calendar year.

E.  1.        Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction and, upon         conviction therefor, shall be punished as     prescribed in Chapter 1.24 of the El Cajon         Municipal Code (Sections 1.24.010    through 1.24.080).

2.     As an alternative to enforcement of this section in accordance with paragraph 1 of this subsection E, any person violating any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation for each and every violation, as prescribed in Chapter 1.14 of the El Cajon Municipal Code (Sections 1.14.010 through 1.14.050).

(Ord. 4916 § 2, 2008.)

 

10.28.080 All-night parking of commercial vehicles prohibited.
        No person shall park any commercial vehicle of a rated capacity of more than ten thousand pounds on any street or alley for more than one hour of total elapsed time, between the hours of nine p.m. and six a.m. of the next succeeding day, whether the place of parking is the same or is changed, and whether the time of parking is continuous or interrupted. (Ord. 3052 § 1, 1977: prior code § 17-69.2.)

 

10.28.090 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4746, 2003: prior code § 17-70.)

 

10.28.100 Repairing vehicles in street.
        No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Prior code § 17-71.)

 

10.28.110 Washing or polishing vehicles on streets prohibited.
        No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street when a charge is made for such service. (Prior code § 17-72.)

 

10.28.120 Parking adjacent to schools.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B.     When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.

(Prior code § 17-73.)

 

10.28.130 Parking on narrow streets.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.

(Prior code § 17-74.)

 

10.28.140 Parking on hills.
        No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Prior code § 17-75.)

 

10.28.150 Selling merchandise from parked vehicles.
A.    No person shall stand or park any vehicle or structure wholly or partly in any city street for the purpose of selling the same, or for the purpose of soliciting, selling, bartering or exchanging therefrom or therein any article or thing, except as provided in subsection B of this section.

B.     Any lunch wagon, eating car or pushcart may stand or park at the request of a bona fide purchaser only, for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes in any one place. However, no lunch wagon, eating car or pushcart shall stand or park in any street for the purpose of soliciting, selling, bartering or exchanging therefrom or therein any article or thing upon any street within two hundred feet of public school property.

(Ord. 3498 § 1, 1980: prior code § 17-76.)

 

10.28.160 Establishment and use of no-parking zones.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.

        When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.32. (Prior code § 17-77.)

 

10.28.170 No-stopping zones.
        The city traffic engineer shall designate established no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.

        During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop any vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the city council as no-stopping zones. (Prior code § 17-78.)

 

10.28.180 Marking and use of parking spaces.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

        When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Prior code § 17-79.)

 

10.28.190 Temporary no-parking regulations.
A.    Whenever the city traffic engineer or the chief of police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer or the chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer or the chief of police shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer or the chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.

(Prior code § 17-80.)

 

10.28.195 Time designated parking zones.
        When authorized signs have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle during the hours and on the days designated on the signs. Specific location and time restrictions shall be designated by city council resolution, as may be amended from time to time and kept on file in the office of the city clerk.(Ord. 4404, 1993.)

 

10.28.200 Limited parking zones—Twenty-four minutes.
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the designated hours of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes. (Prior code § 17-8 1.)

 

10.28.210 Limited parking zones—Forty minutes.
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the designated hours of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than forty minutes. (Prior code § 17-82.)

 

 

10.28.220 Limited parking zones—One hour.
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the designated hours of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. (Prior code § 17-83.)

 

10.28.230 Limited parking zones —Two hours (Sundays and holidays excepted).
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the designated hours of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. (Ord. 4850 § 2, 2006.)

 

10.28.231 Limited parking zones—Two hours.
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the designated hours of any day for a period of time longer than two hours. (Ord. 4850 § 3, 2006.)

 

10.28.235 Limited parking zones—Two hours—East Main Street between South Anza and First Streets.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on East Main Street between South Anza Street and First Street at any time, on any day, for a period of time longer than two hours. This restriction shall be enforceable only when signs or curb markings authorized and determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary to give notice thereof are in place. (Ord. 4839 § 1, 2006.)

 

10.28.236 Limited parking zones—Two hours—Jamacha Road between Granite Hills Drive and Washington Avenue.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle along the east and west curblines of Jamacha Road between Granite Hills Drive and Washington Avenue at any time, on any day, for a period of time longer than two hours. This restriction shall be enforceable only when signs or curb markings authorized and determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary to give notice thereof are in place. (Ord. 4844 § 1, 2006.)

 

10.28.237 Limited parking zones —Two hours—315 to 365 West Bradley Avenue.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle along the entire south segment of Bradley Avenue between Pioneer Way and the easterly city limit located 1167 feet east of the easterly extended curbline of Pioneer Way at any time, on any day, for a period of time longer than two hours. This restriction shall be enforceable only when signs or curb markings authorized and determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary to give notice thereof are in place. (Ord. 4848 § 1, 2006.)

 

10.28.240 Angle parking.
        On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the city council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except:

A.    At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space;

B.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb.

        The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.28.050 shall be complied with. (Prior code § 17-85.)

 

10.28.245 Handicap parking space.
        No person shall park, stand or operate any vehicle in any designated handicap parking space without displaying a valid disabled placard. (Ord. 4433, 1993.)

 

10.28.250 Parking on city property or city-controlled property.
A.    Upon determining that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that parking, standing or movement of vehicles on city property or city-controlled property, including but not limited to the city-county parking lot, be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager is authorized to order signs of such prohibition, limitation or restriction to be posted .

B.     No person shall park, stand or operate any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of signs posted in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(Ord. 4433, 1993; Ord. 3469 § 1, 1980; prior code § 17-86.)

 

10.28.260 Right of first arriver to use of parking space.
A.    For the purpose of this section, a “limited curb parking space” means an area open for lawful parking along side of, and adjacent to, a curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two or more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time.

B.     Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited curb parking space, whose vehicle arrives at the parking space prior to any other vehicle, and who proceeds beyond the space a distance not to exceed ten feet for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right-of-way over any person driving or attempting to drive any other vehicle directly into such limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs such limited curb parking space, and the driver of such other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to the driver who first arrived at the parking space.

(Prior code § 17-87.)

 

10.28.270 Payment of parking penalty.
        The owner, lessee, or renter of a vehicle who violates any section of this chapter, or any of the following sections of the Vehicle Code shall be issued a citation pursuant to Section 40203 of the Vehicle Code which includes the amount of the penalty, the address of the person authorized to receive payment, and a statement in bold print that payments of parking penalty for the parking violation may be sent through the mail.

        The payment may be made in person or by mailing said sum, within ten days of the date of issuance of the citation, to the City of El Cajon, (Attention: Finance Dept.), 200 East Main Street, El Cajon, CA, 92020.

        Upon the failure of the owner, lessee, or renter to pay said sum within ten days, a notice of delinquent parking violation shall be served or mailed to the registered owner pursuant to the procedure set out in the Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq.

        All penalties not paid within twenty days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation shall be increased in accordance with the schedule of parking penalties for parking violations.

        The current schedule of parking penalties shall be on file with the city clerk and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 4433, 1993; Ord. 4308 § 1, 1991; Ord. 4182 § 1, 1989; Ord. 3913 § 1, 1985; Ord. 3685 § 1, 1983; Ord. 3584 § 1, 1981; Ord. 3417 § 1, 1980.)

 

10.28.280 Contesting parking citation/notice of delinquency.
A.    Initial Review. A person receiving a parking citation may contest such citation within 21 days of the date of issuance of the citation. A person receiving a notice of delinquency of

        parking penalty may contest such notice within ten days after mailing of the notice. The police department shall investigate the circumstances of the citation or notice with respect to a contestant’s written explanation of reasons for contesting the parking violation and shall mail the results of the investigation to the person who contested the citation or the notice within 5 days of receipt of such written explanation.

B.     Administrative Review. All administrative reviews shall be conducted by the city’s designated examiner in accordance with the city’s established written procedure. Within fifteen days of the mailing of the results of the initial review, the person contesting the citation or notice may request an administrative review. Except as may otherwise be provided by the written procedure, and prior to such review, contestant must deposit the amount of the parking penalty together with administrative costs, as established by resolution and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Such review may be by mail or by personal conference as indicated by the contestant. The examiner’s final decision may be delivered personally to the contestant or by first-class mail.

C.     Judicial appeal. Within twenty days after the mailing or personal delivery of the final decision, contestant may seek judicial review.

(Ord. 4433, 1993)

Chapter 10.30 HANDICAPPED PARKING
10.30.010 Applicability.
        This chapter shall apply to all parking facilities, held open to the public within the city.

        As used in this chapter “parking facility held open to the public” means any off-street facility, or a discernible portion thereof, held open for use by the public for parking vehicles and includes any publicly or privately owned facilities for off-street parking where no fee is charged for the privilege to park, and which are held open for the common public use of retail customers, business patrons, or visitor parking. (Ord. 4176 § 1, 1989; Ord. 4158 § 1, 1989.)

 

10.30.020 Designation and marking.
A.    The owners of parking facilities, as described in Section 10.30.010, shall designate and mark handicapped or disabled (as defined by Vehicle Code Section 22511.5) parking spaces:

1.     By outlining or painting the stall or space in blue and outlining on the ground in the stall or space in white or suitable contrasting color a profile view depicting a wheelchair with occupant; and

2.     By posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background.

B.     The number, size, location, and all other features of the handicapped space(s), including signs and pavement markings, shall conform to the provisions of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.

(Ord. 4270 § 1, 1991; Ord. 4230 § 1, 1990; Ord. 4158 § 1, 1989.)

 

10.30.030 Nonconforming parking facilities.
A.    Parking facilities constructed prior to April 14, 1989, and which, but for the provisions of this chapter would be conforming, are declared lawful nonconforming uses.

B.     All lawful nonconforming parking facilities shall be made to conform to this chapter upon the occurrence of one or more of the following:

1.     Within eighteen months from the effective date of adoption of this chapter;

2.     Upon processing of a building permit on the property pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this code;

3.     Upon any occasion that the property owner initiates any change requiring a review of an approved development plan on the property.

C.     Property owners shall be permitted to encroach into required open space areas or to reduce the number of standard parking spaces as necessary, to provide parking spaces with the proper dimensions for handicapped parking.

(Ord. 4158 § 1, 1989.)

 

10.30.040 Enforcement.
        All parking facilities which are not made to conform to the provisions of this chapter by November 1, 1990, may be declared a nuisance, and shall be caused to conform after notice and an opportunity to request a hearing has been provided. The city shall enforce violations of this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15.18 of this code. (Ord. 4158 § 1, 1989.)

 

10.30.050 Penalty.
        Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. All violations of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 4158 § 1, 1989.)

Chapter 10.32 LOADING ZONES
10.32.010 Designation and marking.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

1.     At any place in a business district;

2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C.     Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones.

(Prior code § 17-88.)

 

10.32.020 Use generally.
A.    Permission granted by Chapters 10.04 through 10.32 to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C.     Permission herein granted to stop or park for purpose of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

D.    Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.

(Prior code § 17-89.)

 

10.32.030 Use of yellow loading zone.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.32.020. (Prior code § 17-90.)

 

10.32.040 Use of passenger loading zones.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.32.020. (Prior code § 17-91.)

 

10.32.050 Loading or unloading in alleys.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. The loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, and the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes, with the exception of those alleys or portions of alleys in which parking may be permitted by this code, or by any ordinance or resolution of the city, and providing that the alley or portion of alley is appropriately signed. (Prior code § 17-92.)

 

10.32.060 Bus zones and taxicab stands.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones and taxicab stands opposite curb space and to determine the locations thereof. Such zones and stands may be separately located or combined.

B.     The city traffic engineer shall designate bus zones and taxicab stands by painting curbs red and designating thereon either bus zone or taxi stand, or by designating such zones by signs.

(Prior code § 17-93.)

 

(Ord. No. 4528, Amended, 03/11/97)

 

10.32.070 Special passenger zones.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any special passenger loading zone when approved permanent or portable signs are in place, as hereinafter provided, for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes.

        Special passenger loading zones, as used herein, shall be those areas adjacent to the curb, not more than sixty feet in length, located between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of or adjacent to, and within the projected real property boundaries of any church, theater, club, or place of business, or public gathering. The signs shall be provided and paid for by the church, theater, club or place of business or public gathering for which they are used, and shall be approved by the city traffic engineer. (Prior code § 17-94.)

 

10.32.080 Funeral zones.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, and not to exceed three minutes at any place between the limit markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any undertaking establishment, private residence, or any public or private place at any time during or within forty minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or funeral service, unless the operator of the vehicle is directed by or has received permission from the director or other person in charge of such funeral or funeral service to park such vehicle in such place; provided that the director or person in charge shall have placed and maintained prior to and during the time limit herein specified two approved portable signs, one at each extremity of such place, upon the sidewalk or pavement area and within two feet of the curb. (Ord. 2897 § 2, 1975: prior code § 17-95.)

Chapter 10.36 REPEALED
10.36.010 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-1.)

 

10.36.020 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-2.)

 

 

10.36.030 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-3.)

 

10.36.040 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-4.)

 

10.36.050 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2869 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-5.)

 

10.36.060 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-6.)

 

10.36.070 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-7.)

 

10.36.080 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-8.)

 

10.36.090 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-9.)

 

10.36.100 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-10.)

 

10.36.110 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-11.)

 

10.36.120 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 4924, 2009; Ord. 4182 § 2, 1989; Ord. 2853 § 1, 1975: prior code § 6-12.)

TITLE 10 ENDNOTES
 

1.     For statutory definitions of terms in the Vehicle Code, see Veh. Code § 100 et seq.

 

2.     For statutory provisions regarding traffic signs, signals, and markings, see Veh. Code § 21350 et seq.

 

3.     For the statutory authority of cities to prohibit or restrict parking by ordinance or resolution, see Veh Code §§ 22506 and 22507.

 

4.     For statutory provision regarding bicycle equipment standards, see Veh. Code 2§ 1201 et seq.; for provisions regarding bicycle licensing, see Veh. Code § 3900 et seq.

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 5104. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.
Chapter 12.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 12.06 VENDING ON CITY SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS
Chapter 12.08 OBSTRUCTIONS, LOITERING
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 12.09 SIDEWALK DINING
Chapter 12.10 NEWSRACKS
Chapter 12.12 CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS IN CONJUNCTION WITH BUILDING CONSTRUCTION[1]
Chapter 12.16 CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL OF CURBS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRIVEWAYS GENERALLY
Chapter 12.20 EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 12.24 PARADES
Chapter 12.35 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DEFERRALS
TITLE 12 ENDNOTES

Chapter 12.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
12.04.010 City base for elevations.
        The official city base or plane of reference for elevations in the city is fixed at the mean sea level as established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. (Prior code § 25-1.)

 

12.04.020 Descriptions of official elevations to refer to city base.
        All official elevations established in this city shall be described with reference to their elevations as compared with the official base in feet and decimal parts of a foot. (Prior code § 25-2.)

 

12.04.030 Primal bench mark.
        The top of a brass pin one inch in diameter, set in a concrete monument at the most northerly corner of Wildemere Park, being also at the intersection of the east line of Highland Avenue with the west line of Prescott Avenue in the city, is declared to be the primal bench mark.

        The elevation of the primal bench mark is four hundred thirty-five and sixty-three hundredths feet above the city base.

        This pin is nine feet due south of the south corner of the ornamental lamppost at the north point of the park. (Prior code § 25-3.)

 

12.04.040 Drainage which damages streets prohibited.
        No person shall drain water or permit water to be drained from his land onto any city street or alley by any means which results in damage to a street or alley of the city. (Prior code § 25-4.)

 

12.04.050 Water storage or distribution which damages streets prohibited.
        No person shall store or distribute water for any purpose so as to permit it to flow onto, saturate by seepage or obstruct a city street or alley to the damage of the street or alley. (Prior code § 25-5.)

 

12.04.060 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this title, with the exception of Chapter 12.35, is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 9, 1991.)

Chapter 12.06 VENDING ON CITY SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS
12.06.010 Purpose and intent.
        The city of El Cajon hereby finds and determines that the unrestricted use of the city’s public rights-of-way, parks, and facilities by both stationary and roaming sidewalk vendors poses a serious and objective threat to the health, safety, and welfare of persons utilizing such public facilities for their intended purposes. Such threats include the potential of fires with unregulated cooking or heating of food; blocking or otherwise restricting use of sidewalks by pedestrians; blocking or impeding the use of driveways, pedestrian access ramps, doorways, and safe parking of vehicles; interfering with the intended and designated recreational uses of parks and playgrounds; conflicts with those persons with disabilities and traveling on sidewalks and pedestrian paths, and recreating in city parks; noise in residential zones at unreasonable hours. Accordingly, the city finds that those regulations, established by this chapter, are directly related to addressing such objective health, safety, and welfare concerns. (Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

 

12.06.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this chapter whether the words or phrases are capitalized or not.

        “Driveway” means any approved curb cut designed to allow vehicular traffic ingress from or egress to or from a street or alley.

        “Immediate vicinity,” for the purposes of this chapter, means the public sidewalk or pedestrian path area next to, and having access to an area being used by a properly permitted certified farmers’ market, swap meet, parade, or other event having obtained a temporary special use permit for the occupation of an area in a park, on city property, or in a city street or alley.

        “Pedestrian path” means an improved pathway within a city park designed and constructed to allow pedestrian traffic to circulate within the park from a public sidewalk or parking lot, to other locations within the park.

        “Public sidewalk” means that portion of public right-of-way improved with an impervious surface to allow pedestrian traffic, including wheelchairs (whether motorized or self-propelled), to traverse adjacent to a street or alley. Public sidewalk does not include any portion of a street or alley, and (except as otherwise provided in this chapter) does not include improved walkways located on public property used to access public buildings, not otherwise located in a dedicated right-of-way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a public sidewalk shall include any pedestrian path located in any park owned or operated by the city.

        “Ramp” means any transition from the street to a public sidewalk designed to allow the safe movement of wheelchairs and pedestrians.

        “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place, stopping only to complete a transaction.

        “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. A sidewalk vendor is either a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor.

        “Sidewalk vendor’s license,” or “license” shall mean that certain regulatory license established under subdivision (B) of section 12.06.030. The license shall be in addition to any other licenses or permits required by the city or San Diego County.

        “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location on a public sidewalk or pedestrian path.

        “Temporary special use permit” means a community event permit, as defined in Chapter 5.52, and temporary use permit, as defined in Chapter 17.75. Any holder of a temporary special use permit that is required to provide notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to affected businesses and property owners must also provide the same notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to properly licensed sidewalk vendors. (Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

 

12.06.030 Licenses required.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or allow to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any business as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor without having first obtained a business license pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code, a sidewalk vendor’s license from the public works department pursuant to this section 12.06.030 (B); and a seller’s permit issued by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, it shall also comply with Chapter 8.12 and obtain the necessary health-related permit from the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health.

B.     In order to regulate the activities of sidewalk vendors in the city, a sidewalk vendor’s license is hereby created.

1.     A sidewalk vendor’s license shall be issued by the public works department upon application of any person.

2.     The cost of a sidewalk vendor’s license shall be set forth by resolution of the city council from time to time, and may be included in the city’s list of rates, fees, and charges.

3.     The director of the public works department, or such person designated by the director of public works, shall issue the license to an applicant upon receipt of such fees, information, and copies of such documents required in this chapter.

4.     The license shall at all times be prominently displayed on the person, pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack or other non-motorized conveyance.

5.     If a license is lost, stolen, or damaged, the sidewalk vendor shall not conduct business without first obtaining a temporary license from the public works department to be displayed as described in paragraph (4), above. The department may charge a fee for the replacement of a lost, stolen, or damaged license, which fee shall not exceed the costs of the department in processing the temporary and replacement licenses.

6.     Each license shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months.

C.     In issuing a business license to a sidewalk vendor, the department of finance shall accept either a California driver’s license or identification number, or an individual taxpayer number in lieu of a social security number if the department of finance otherwise requires a social security number prior to the issuance of a business license.

D.    This chapter does not relieve any license holder from compliance with any requirement of any ordinance, rule, regulation, or specification of the city.

(Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

 

12.06.040 Sidewalk vending operating requirements.
        All stationary sidewalk vendors or roaming sidewalk vendors shall comply with the following requirements:

A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, stationary sidewalk vendors and roaming sidewalk vendors may only conduct transactions on public sidewalks in the public right-of-way, and on pedestrian paths in parks owned or operated by the city.

B.     Stationary sidewalk vendors shall only be located on public sidewalks and pedestrian paths of not less than ten feet (10′) in width measured from the street-side edge of the sidewalk or from edge to edge of the path.

C.     Roaming sidewalk vendors may travel on public sidewalks and pedestrian paths of not less than four feet (4′) in width measured from the street-side edge of the sidewalk or from edge to edge of the path while moving. Roaming sidewalk vendors stopping to conduct a transaction must do so only where the sidewalk or path is ten feet (10′) in width or must yield to pedestrian traffic in conflict with the conduct of their business.

D.    Operations of stationary sidewalk vendors on a public sidewalk shall only occur during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. of the following day.

E.     Operations of stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in the O-S, PRD, RS-40, RS-20, RS-14, RS-9, RS-6, RM-6000, RM-4300, RM-2500, RM-2200, RM-1450, and RM-HR zones.

F.     Operations of roaming sidewalk vendors may occur in the O-S, PRD, RS-40, RS-20, RS-14, RS-9, RS-6, RM-6000, RM-4300, RM-2500, RM-2200, RM-1450, and RM-HR zones, but only occur during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

G.    Operations of sidewalk vendors in public parks shall only occur on the pedestrian path, or a public sidewalk, and only during the period that the park is open. In order to protect the fragile nature of greenspace in parks, sidewalk vendors conduct all activities from a public sidewalk or pedestrian path.

H.    In order to limit obstructions caused by a congregation of customers during periods of operations, and to clearly delineate responsibilities in operation, sidewalk vendors shall be located not closer than twenty feet (20′) from another sidewalk vendor.

I.      In order to reduce vector, rodent, and other pest infestations, stationary sidewalk vendors shall be responsible for the cleanliness of the area within ten feet (10′) of their operations. Stationary sidewalk vendors shall provide a means to collect and properly dispose of all trash and recycling materials, including owning and making available appropriate trash and recycling receptacles. Roaming sidewalk vendors shall have trash bags attached to their cart or carried by the vendor sufficient to provide for the collection of such trash or recycling materials generated by the type of goods, produce, pre-packaged goods, etc., being sold from the vendor. All sidewalk vendors shall provide the city with an acceptable plan for collection and disposal of wastes at the time that an application for those permits required by this chapter, which plan must be approved by the Director of Public Works or such person designated by the Director of Public Works. Such plans must include the means for avoiding the use of city-owned trash and recycling receptacles.

J.      No sidewalk vending is allowed within the immediate vicinity of any permitted certified farmers’ market or permitted swap meet in the city. No sidewalk vending is allowed within the immediate vicinity of any street or alley, park, plaza, parking lot, or city-owned property, in any event that is being used by the city or a third party under a temporary special use permit. No sidewalk vending is allowed in any park where the city has signed an agreement with a concessionaire for the exclusive right to sell food or merchandise in the park.

K.    No sidewalk vendor shall sell any alcohol-related beverage; tobacco or electronic vaping products; cannabis products; weapons, including knives, guns, or explosive devices; pharmaceuticals; items described in the definition of adult entertainment activities in Chapter 17.45 of this code; or such other products identified in a list adopted by resolution or ordinance of the city council as prohibited for sidewalk vending based on public health, safety, or welfare concerns.

(Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

 

12.06.050 Enforcement.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal, any police officer, any code compliance officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any provision of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

 

12.06.060 Violation; penalties.
A.    Notwithstanding any provisions in section 1.24.020 of this code, no person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution as a result of a violation of this chapter.

B.     Except as provided in subsections (C) and (D), in this section, any person violating any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation for each and every violation, in the manner as prescribed in sections 1.14.010 through 1.14.060 of Chapter 1.14 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

C.     Notwithstanding any provisions in section 1.14.070 of Chapter 1.14, no administrative fine shall exceed $500.00 for any violation of section 12.06.040.

D.    Notwithstanding any provisions in section 1.14.070 of Chapter 1.14, for any violation of section 12.06.030, the amount of administrative fine, which may be imposed for each separate violation of the same provision of the code, shall be established by resolution of the city council within the following limits:

1.     For a first violation, a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars per day, per violation;

2.     For a second violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars per day, per violation; and

3.     For any additional violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per day, per violation.

E.     Sections 1.14.080 through 1.14.150 shall apply to any administrative citation issued to enforce this chapter.

(Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

 

12.06.070 Public nuisance and abatement.
        The placement of any vending cart on any sidewalk in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. The Director of Public Works may cause the removal of any vending cart found on a sidewalk in violation of this chapter and is authorized to store such vending cart until the owner thereof shall redeem it by paying the removal and storage charges established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 5075 § 6, 2018.)

Chapter 12.08 OBSTRUCTIONS, LOITERING
12.08.010 Prohibited generally.
        No person shall use or occupy any part of a public sidewalk, street or alley for any purpose other than normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic, except as otherwise provided by law or by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 25-6.)

 

12.08.020 Obstructions prohibited.
        No person, after first being warned by an owner, operator or agent, or by a law enforcement officer, shall intentionally loiter or stand in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property held open to the public, or alley, or other public way open for pedestrian travel, or otherwise occupy, bodily or with animals and/or possessions, any portion thereof in such a manner as to maliciously obstruct or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; nor shall any person, bodily or with animals and/or possessions, block or obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance to any building open to the public.

        This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws. (Ord. 4449, 1994; Ord. 4109 § 2, 1988; Ord. 4109 § 2, 1988; prior code § 25-6.1.)

 

12.08.030 REPEALED.
(Repealed by Ord. 5076; Ord. 4528, 1997; prior code § 25-6.2.)

 

12.08.040 Building construction.
        The use of a public sidewalk, street or alley may be permitted, with approval of the public works department, when the use is in conjunction with building construction for which a building permit has been secured, and conformity with all sections of Chapter 44, Uniform Building Code, have been met. (Prior code § 25-6.3.)

 

12.08.050 Sale of newspapers, magazines.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, offering for sale, or custody or possession for sale of newspapers, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, occurring upon the public rights-of-way and not upon any roadway (as defined in Section 12.10.020); provided, that when a newsrack (as defined in Section 12.10.020) is used for such purpose, it shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 12.10 of this code. (Ord. 3197 § 1, 1978; prior code § 25-7.)

 

12.08.060 Sale of brochures of nonprofit groups.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the sale or offering for sale of programs or similar brochures detailing or listing any nonprofit group or corporation or its agents, servants or employees, upon public sidewalks, and also upon public streets, when such streets are closed to normal vehicular traffic by proper authority for the purpose of a parade or entertainment; provided, that such activity shall not unreasonably obstruct the normal and necessary public use of such sidewalk or street. (Prior code § 25-8.)

 

12.08.070 Loading and unloading goods in front of places of business.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the right of any person to load or unload goods, wares and merchandise in front of the place of business of such person and to leave such goods, wares and merchandise upon such sidewalk or curb for such length of time as is necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading the same. (Prior code § 25-9.)

 

12.08.080 Authorized installation of seats.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the right of any person to install seats with the consent of the city council. (Prior code § 25-10.)

 

12.08.090 Riding or driving horses or livestock on sidewalks.
        No person shall ride, drive or lead a horse or other livestock upon any sidewalk in the city. (Prior code § 25-11.)

 

12.08.100 Riding dockless vehicles upon public sidewalk prohibited.
        No person shall ride a dockless vehicle as defined in chapter 10.26 upon any public sidewalk within the city. (Ord. 5076 § 12, 2019.)

Chapter 12.09 SIDEWALK DINING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 5104. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


12.09.010 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose and intent of this chapter are to permit sidewalk dining in the commercial areas of the city of El Cajon while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the public by maintaining and continuing to have available the sidewalk area for the use that it was originally intended. (Ord. 4688 § 1, 2002.)

 

12.09.020 Definition.
        “Sidewalk dining” is the temporary use of the public sidewalk area within the public rights-of-way adjacent to an eating and drinking establishment by setting tables, with or without cloth umbrellas, and chairs upon the sidewalk area for the exclusive purpose of dining and drinking. (Ord. 4688 § 2, 2002.)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 12.09.030 General provisions.
        The general provisions for sidewalk dining are as follows:

A.    Sidewalk dining will only be allowed in commercial zones.

B.     Except as provided in subsection (M), below, establishment of sidewalk dining shall require the approval of a conditional use permit for outdoor dining and the issuance of an annual encroachment permit for sidewalk dining. Operators shall comply with all requirements of this chapter, and all conditions imposed by the conditional use permit and encroachment permits.

C.     Operators of the sidewalk dining shall provide adequate public liability insurance in accordance with city council policy and to the satisfaction of the city attorney.

D.    There shall be no damage caused by the sidewalk dining to the paving or the existing features of the sidewalk.

E.     The sidewalk dining shall be adjacent to the operator’s associated licensed establishment selling food and beverages for consumption on the premises. See Section 12.09.050(F).

F.     The hours of operation of the sidewalk dining shall not extend beyond the hours of operation of the operator’s associated eating and drinking establishment.

G.    Alcoholic beverages will only be available in conjunction with the food service at the sidewalk dining portion.

H.    The sidewalk dining portion shall be kept free of trash, food, and spills at all times.

I.      If there is a sound system in the sidewalk dining portion, it shall be limited to background music only, shall comply with all city noise regulations, and shall not be audible to pedestrians beyond ten feet of the sidewalk dining portion, nor vehicles.

J.      Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way where the food servers and customers have to cross or wait on the sidewalk area outside the sidewalk dining area.

K.    The sidewalk area shall be cleared of all encroachments for special events and maintenance work on the subject and adjacent properties. Some special events will require that the encroachments be removed prior to midnight of those events (e.g. Mother Goose Parade, etc.) in order to make the entire sidewalk available for pedestrians. Sidewalks must be cleaned and free of all trash, food, and spills, and made safe by the operator for pedestrian use when the encroachments are removed.

L.     The furniture may remain on the sidewalk in the public right-of-way outside the hours of operation only if approved by the city manager or his or her designee. Granting or withholding such approval shall be at the sole discretion of the city manager or his or her designee. Any approved fencing shall be subject to the design criteria set forth in Section 12.09.050, herein.

M.    The requirement for a conditional use permit for sidewalk dining shall not be required during the period of June 15, 2020 and December 31, 2020, inclusive.

(Ord. 5101 § 2, 2020; Ord. 5100 § 2, 2020; Ord. 4696 § 2, 2002; Ord. 4688 § 3, 2002.)

 

12.09.040 Clear sidewalk for pedestrians.
        There shall be a minimum of five feet of clear sidewalk area for pedestrian, stroller and wheelchair traffic. This area shall be clear of all signs, street lights, fire hydrants, parking meters, bumper overhangs and all other obstructions. Recesses may be considered by the director of public works if they are sufficient to allow the safe and steady movement of disabled pedestrians and wheelchairs. (Ord. 4688 § 4, 2002.)

 

12.09.050 Design criteria.
A.    All sidewalk dining equipment and furnishings shall be nonpermanent and moveable, except the fencing may be attached to the sidewalk by affixing posts onto the sidewalk in a manner to minimize damage to the sidewalk upon removal, and otherwise acceptable to the director of public works.

B.     Fencing to define the sidewalk dining area shall be no more than thirty-six inches high and shall not be view obscuring.

C.     Lighting shall not extend past the sidewalk dining area and shall not be a hindrance to pedestrians or vehicles.

D.    Awnings and umbrellas shall be adequately secured and shall be a minimum of seven feet clear height from the sidewalk and shall not project into the sidewalk outside the encroachment, street or driveways. Except as otherwise permitted by Chapter 17.66 of this code, no signs shall be allowed to be affixed to, or as a part of, any awnings or umbrellas located in the sidewalk dining area.

E.     Freestanding signs are not allowed in the sidewalk dining area except as otherwise permitted by Chapter 17.66 of this code.

F.     No portion of the sidewalk dining shall be located outside the area of the extended property lines of the operator’s associated eating and drinking establishment.

G.    The sidewalk dining area shall be at the same elevation as the adjacent sidewalk.

H.    Gates and other items shall not open or operate into the adjacent sidewalk area.

I.      Any damage caused by the operator of the sidewalk dining to the sidewalk, including stains on the sidewalk, shall be fixed and cleaned to the satisfaction of the director of public works at the sole expense of the operator.

(Ord. 4696 § 4, 2002; Ord. 4688 § 5, 2002.)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 12.09.060 Permits and approval process.
        Sidewalk dining must be approved by a conditional use permit before an encroachment permit for the sidewalk dining will be issued by the public works department provided, however, that no conditional use permit shall be required during the period of June 15, 2020 and December 31, 2020, inclusive. The encroachment permit shall be an annual permit with new fees based on the city’s costs paid each year. Renewal of the encroachment permit will be subject to the satisfactory compliance with the conditions of approval and the encroachment permit. New conditions of approval of the encroachment permit will be subject to the approval of the city council and/or the city manager or his or her designee. The encroachment permit may be revoked upon thirty days written notification to the operator and will be subject to appeal to the city manager and, if necessary, to the city council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the revocation of the encroachment permit may be effective immediately upon written notification of any violation which endangers the public safety, health, and welfare as determined by the city manager or his or her designee. In such event, the sidewalk dining area shall be posted with a notice that it shall not be occupied until such time as the area is determined safe for further occupancy.

(Ord. 5101 § 2, 2020; Ord. 5100 § 2, 2020; Ord. 4688 § 6, 2002.)

 

12.09.070 Appeal procedure.
A.    An individual may appeal the decision of the public works department to revoke an encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter to the city manager within ten calendar days following notification of the revocation decision. Appeals shall be in writing, filed with the city manager and shall state the basis for the appeal. Failure to file a written appeal within ten calendar days shall be grounds to deny the appeal.

B.     The city manager shall make a decision regarding revocation of an encroachment permit within five calendar days of receipt of the appeal.

C.     An individual may appeal the decision of the city manager regarding an encroachment permit to the city council appeals shall be filed within five calendar days following the city manager’s decision. Appeals shall be in writing, filed with the city clerk and shall state the basis for the appeal. Failure to file a written appeal within five calendar days shall be grounds to deny the appeal. Fees for filing an appeal shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the city council.

D.    The city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to the appellant and operator of the time and place of hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such persons at their last known address.

(Ord. 4688 § 7, 2002.)

 

12.09.080 Hold harmless.
        All operators and property owners will be required to execute a hold harmless agreement in the form approved by the city attorney to protect the city from any and all liability associated with the approval and operation of the sidewalk dining within the public rights-of-way. The hold harmless agreement shall remain in full force and effect so long as the operator is conducting sidewalk dining, and shall extend beyond the term of such operations for a period of not less than five years. (Ord. 4688 § 8, 2002.)

 

12.09.090 Insurance.
        A public liability insurance policy meeting the requirements of city council policies, and satisfactory to the city attorney, will be required prior to the issuance of the encroachment permit. The policy must remain in effect the entire time of the encroachment permit and adequate notification to the city will be required if the policy is canceled or reduced. (Ord. 4688 § 9, 2002.)

Chapter 12.10 NEWSRACKS
12.10.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The council finds and declares that the unregulated placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city in that, unless regulated, newsracks may:

1.     Interfere with the safe flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;

2.     Impair the vision of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children and cause injury to the person or property of such persons;

3.     Inhibit safe entry and departure from vehicles or buildings;

4.     Detract from the appearance of streets, sidewalks and adjacent businesses;

5.     Cause loss of funds to patrons in the event of malfunction;

6.     Allow minors to view harmful matter.

B.     Newsracks presenting any of the characteristics enumerated in subsection A of this section constitute a public nuisance, which the provisions of this chapter are enacted to prevent.

(Ord. 4124 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

12.10.020 Definitions.
        Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, distribution or sale of publications.

B.     “Public right-of-way” means any place owned by or dedicated to use of the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel, including but not limited to a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parkway, highway, alley, mall, court, park or square.

C.     “Roadway” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designed or used primarily for vehicular travel.

D.    “Uniform newsrack” means a newsrack of a style, size and color designated by council by resolution pursuant to Section 12.10.060, to be permanently installed pursuant to such section.

E.     “Harmful matter” means matter which when taken as a whole, predominantly appeals to the prurient interests of the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and which is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors.

        When it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the predominant appeal of the matter shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.

F.     “Blinder rack” means any opaque material placed in front of the harmful matter and within the publication vending machine which prevents exposure to public view.

(Ord. 4124 § 2, 1988; Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

12.10.030 Prohibitions.
A.    No person shall place or maintain a newsrack or a uniform newsrack upon or over a roadway or upon or over a public right-of-way so as to endanger safety of person(s) or property or unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

B.     In addition, no person shall place or maintain upon or over a public right-of-way a newsrack, unless in conformance with all provisions of Sections 12.10.040, 12.10.045, 12.10.050 and 12.10.070; or a uniform newsrack, unless in conformance with Sections 12.10.040, 12.10.045, 12.10.050, 12.10.060 and 12.10.070.

(Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

(Ord. No. 4429, Amended, 10/5/93)

 

12.10.040 Standards.
A.    No newsrack shall exceed sixty inches in height, thirty inches in width, or twenty-four inches in thickness.

B.     No advertising signs or material other than those dealing with the name of the publication contained within the newsrack shall be displayed on the outside of any newsrack.

C.     Each newsrack shall be equipped with a working coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to obtain an immediate refund in the event a person is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.

D.    Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place a notice setting forth the name and address of the person responsible for maintaining the newsrack and a working telephone number to call to report a malfunction, or to obtain a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism. The name, address and telephone number given shall be those desired for receipt of the notices required by Sections 12.10.060 and 12.10.080.

E.     Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be reasonably free of dirt and grease; be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint; be reasonably free of rust and corrosion; have no broken cracked, dented, blemished or discolored plastic or glass parts; have no torn, peeling or fading paper or cardboard parts or inserts; and have no broken or misshapen structural parts.

F.     Newsracks are prohibited under Section 12.10.045 from displaying harmful matter.

(Ord. 4124 § 3, 1988; Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

(Ord. No. 4429, Amended, 10/5/93)

 

12.10.045 Display of harmful matter prohibited.
A.    Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 313.1(d), any harmful matter displayed in a public place from which minors are not excluded must be concealed with blinder racks, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view.

B.     Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 313, the following definitions apply to this section:

1.     “Harmful matter” means matter, taken as a whole and evaluated under contemporary statewide standards, which to the average person:

a.     appeals to the prurient interest, and

b.     depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and

c.     lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for minors.

2.     “Matter” means any printed or written material, any pictorial representation, or any reproduction of such materials.

(Ord. 4124 § 4, 1988.)

 

(Ord. No. 4476, Amended, 07/11/95)

 

12.10.050 Location.
A.    No newsrack shall be located, maintained or placed at or within:

1.     Any roadway;

2.     Three hundred feet of a uniform newsrack location established pursuant to Section 12.10.060, except for any period, not to exceed thirty days, during which a uniform newsrack permit has been granted at the location but the applicant has been unable to obtain a uniform newsrack;

3.     Five feet of

a.     any crosswalk,

b.     bus bench,

c.     fire hydrant, fire sprinklers connection, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

d.     any curb painted blue, pursuant to the provisions of California Vehicle Code section 21458;

e.     the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

4.     One foot of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees;

5.     Five feet ahead or forty-five feet to the rear of a bus stop sign, or anywhere in an established bus stop area;

6.     Ten feet of any driveway; or

7.     One hundred feet of a newsrack containing the same edition of the same publication, except where bulk of a particular edition is such that more than one rack is required, in which case said newsracks shall be placed side-by-side;

8.     Three feet of the entrance or exit to any building;

9.     At any location whereby the clear space of the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four (4) feet;

B.     Except as otherwise prohibited by this chapter, newsracks which comply with the following standards shall be considered in compliance with the locational restrictions:

1.     Newsracks shall be located only at the edge of sidewalks or pedestrian ways farthest from the curb or roadway (if any).

2.     All newsracks shall face inward toward the centerline of sidewalks or pedestrian ways.

3.     No newsrack shall be located on a pedestrian way directly opposite another newsrack.

4.     Newsracks shall be located not more than twelve (12) inches from the edge of the sidewalk or pedestrian way.

5.     Newsracks located adjacent to a building shall be located parallel to and not more than six (6) inches from the wall thereof.

6.     No newsrack shall be located directly in front of any display window of any building abutting a sidewalk or pedestrian way, without the written consent of the person or entity legally in occupancy or otherwise in control of the premises on which the display window is located. Proof of such consent shall be included in the encroachment permit application provided by section 12.10.055. If such consent is withdrawn, any newsrack placed in front of a display window shall be removed within 14 days of the date of written notice from the city to the owner of such newsrack.

C.     No newsrack shall be chained or otherwise attached to any fixture. All newsracks must be permanently affixed to the pavement or otherwise anchored to a concrete base. Newsracks anchored to concrete bases shall have a minimum weight of 100 pounds empty. Uniform newsracks which have been established and permitted pursuant to Section 12.10.060 of this code, may be permanently affixed to the pavement or authorized support structures as established by city council resolution.

(Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

12.10.055 Encroachment permit—specific locations.
A.    Any person who desires to install or place a newsrack within the public right-of-way must first obtain a city-wide encroachment permit. The permit application shall describe the specific locations for all newsracks owned and/or operated by the same vendor throughout the city and shall be in addition to any permit required for the installation of a uniform newsrack. For the purposes of this permit, a general description of the location of a uniform newsrack will be acceptable. There will be a one-time fee for this permit of     twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

B.     Permits shall be amended as newsracks are added to or deleted from the listed locations. Failure to amend the permit within a reasonable time shall constitute a violation of this section. There shall be no fee for amendments to the encroachment permit.

C.     No person shall be permitted to install or maintain any newsrack in the city unless a certificate of insurance issued by a company approved by the city attorney and in conformance with city council policy is on file with the planning department.

(Ord. No. 4429, Enacted, 10/05/93)

 

12.10.060 Uniform newsracks.
A.    By resolution, the council may from time to time establish uniform newsrack locations. The council shall first hold a public hearing, for which notice shall be sent at least thirty days in advance to all persons requesting notice, or whose name and address appears on an existing newsrack in the subject location, and after such hearing shall find that the location carries a substantial volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, that one or more of the harmful effects stated in Section 12.10.010 are presented by the existence of nonuniform newsracks at the location, and that uniform newsracks are feasible at the location.

B.     The resolution shall: describe the location; designate the particular point(s) at that location where uniform newsracks may be installed; specify the maximum number of uniform newsracks to be allowed at the location; and specify the style, size, color or other attributes required of uniform newsracks at the location. Such specification shall not require uniform newsracks made by any particular manufacturer. The resolution may direct the director of public works to install a kiosk(s), pedestal(s) or other support structure to accommodate a stated number of newsracks.

C.     No person shall install a uniform newsrack at a uniform newsrack location without first obtaining a uniform newsrack permit from the city manager.

1.     Upon the adoption of a resolution by council establishing a uniform newsrack location, interested persons may apply for such permit. The city manager shall hold all such applications until thirty days after the date the resolution was adopted and shall then issue all permits applied for up to the maximum number established, if any, in the resolution.

2.     No fee will be charged for the uniform newsrack permit.

3.     All permits shall expire on December 31st following their issuance. Issuance shall be determined by lot; the first application drawn by lot shall be issued for the most favorable, and so on until the maximum number, if any, is reached. Applicants seeking permits for more than one newsrack in a single location will be allotted adjacent spaces. The remaining applications shall be denied, and the applicants notified. Where fewer applications are received than the maximum number of positions allowed by the resolution, permits for the remaining positions may be allotted on a first-come, first-served basis.

4.     Each year, during the month of December, the city manager shall draw lots in the above manner for permits for the next calendar year from among those holding permits and any new applications received by December 1st.

5.     The council may at any time, on its own motion or upon request of any person, by resolution, increase the maximum number of available positions. In the event of such increase, or in the event a position becomes available by abandonment or otherwise, such position(s) shall be allotted by the above procedure.

D.    Upon being granted a permit, the applicant may permanently install a uniform newsrack as described in the resolution, either affixing it to the pavement or ground, or in the event the resolution directs the director of public works to install support structures, then to such support structure.

(Ord. 4429, 1993; Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

12.10.070 Abandonment or vacancy.
        No newsrack shall remain empty for a period of thirty continuous days.

        Upon discovery or notification of an abandoned or vacant newsrack, the city shall post written notice on the newsrack and notify the owner by mail to remove such rack from the public right-of-way. Vacancies or abandoned newsracks in uniform locations may be refilled only after notification of all newsrack owners and a drawing by lot conducted as provided in subsection C3 of Section 12.10.050. The City shall not be required to wait thirty days to proceed if the intent to permanently abandon or vacate a newsrack or uniform newsrack location has been confirmed in writing by the owner of such newsrack. (Ord. 4429, 1993; Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

12.10.080 Enforcement.
        Upon determining that a newsrack or uniform newsrack exists in violation of any provision of this chapter, the city manager shall:

A.    If the newsrack is in violation of Section 12.10.040D and the city manager is unable to otherwise ascertain the name and address of its owner, cause it to be removed and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law.

B.     If the newsrack is in compliance with Section 12.10.040D, cause an order to be issued to the person named in the notice required by Section 12.10.040D to correct the offending condition. The order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person at the address shown on the notice required by Section 12.10.040D. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions necessary to correct it. If the distributor fails to correct properly the offending condition within five days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) after receipt of the order, and no request for a hearing is filed pursuant to Section 12.10.090, the city manager shall cause the offending newsrack to be seized. The person named in the notice required by Section 12.10.040D shall be notified of the seizure by certified mail within thirty days. If no response is made, the city manager shall cause the newsrack to be processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law.

C.     Whether or not a newsrack is in compliance with Section 12.10.040D, if the newsrack poses an immediate danger to pedestrians or vehicles, cause it to be seized and processed as under the provisions of subsection B of this section.

D.    In the case of minor violations of this chapter that can be corrected at the site, any city employee, as an alterative to removal of the newsrack, is authorized to correct the violation summarily.

E.     Any newsrack existing in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law.

(Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

 

12.10.090 Hearing.
A.    Within ten days after receipt of the order of the city manager pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.10.080B, any party affected by the order may file with the city manager a written request for an administrative hearing.

B.     Any dispute regarding matters covered by this chapter shall be reviewable by the city manager or designee. Any party affected may file with the city manager a written request for an administrative hearing.

C.     The city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify all parties thereof at least five days before the hearing date. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the request is filed. Unless appealed, the decision of the city manager shall be final.

D.    Any affected person who claims that an arbitrary decision has been made by the city manager may appeal the decision to the city council.

(Ord. 4429, 1993; Ord. 3197 § 2, 1978.)

Chapter 12.12 CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS IN CONJUNCTION WITH BUILDING CONSTRUCTION[1]
12.12.010 Definitions.
A.    The term “person” as used in this chapter includes, in addition to the definition in Chapter 1.04, any owner, lessee or agent constructing or arranging for the construction or modification or alteration of a building or dwelling.

B.     The term “improvements” includes the following: sidewalks, gutters, pavements, driveways, curbs, streets, alleys, storm drainage facilities on or adjacent to the site, sanitary sewer systems, fire protection installations, and pavement transitions.

(Prior code § 25-12.)

 

12.12.020 Constructor to dedicate right-of-way—Improvements to conform to specifications.
        Any person who constructs or causes to be constructed any building or dwelling in the city shall dedicate the required right-of-way and construct all necessary improvements in accordance with city specifications upon the property and along all street frontage adjoining the property upon which such building or dwelling is constructed, unless such existing improvements are adequate or met design standards when originally constructed. In each instance the department of public works of the city shall determine whether or not necessary improvements exist and are adequate, and each building permit shall be so endorsed. If a zone change to a more intensive use is involved, all improvements will be required to meet present design standards. (Prior code § 25-13.)

 

12.12.021 Permit to install improvements—Performance bond required.
        Prior to the installation of the necessary public improvements, a permit shall be obtained from the department of public works of the city, a performance bond shall be posted to guarantee the installation of said improvements, and a fee paid to cover the cost of inspection. (Ord. 3239 § 5, 1978.)

 

12.12.022 Improvement plan review and miscellaneous plan check fees.
        All construction and installation of improvements shall be subject to plan review and inspection by the city engineer or other appropriate department, and arrangements shall be made for inspection prior to commencing construction of the improvements. The costs to the city in examining improvement plans and inspecting improvements shall be paid by the person causing said improvements to be made. An improvement plan review fee shall be paid to the city upon submittal of improvement plans for review. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        A public improvement construction inspection fee shall be paid prior to approval of the final map or the commencement of construction of the improvements, whichever occurs first. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 3239 § 5, 1978.)

 

12.12.030 Construction exceeding eighty thousand dollars in valuation.
        Any person who constructs, enlarges, expands, or causes to be constructed, enlarged or expanded, any building or dwelling on an occupied parcel in the city shall dedicate the required right-of-way and, where the valuation of such construction, for a single permit or the cumulative total for multiple permits during a one-year period, exceeds the sum of eighty thousand dollars, shall construct all necessary public improvements in accordance with city specifications upon the property upon which such building or dwelling is situated, unless such existing improvements are adequate. In each instance, the department of public works of the city shall determine whether or not necessary improvements exist and are adequate, and each building permit shall be so endorsed. This requirement shall not include (1) building permits for interior alterations where the floor area is not increased, (2) roofing permits to replace an existing roof, or (3) building permits for swimming pools. (Ord. 4819 § 2, 2005.)

 

12.12.031 Security to guarantee improvements.
        No building permit shall be issued pursuant to Section 12.12.030 until cash or the equivalent thereof has been posted by the applicant to guarantee the installation of the required public improvements as determined by the department of public works or, if no enlargement of the building is taking place and the city determines the improvements to be impractical at this time, a lien contract may be required by the city deferring the required improvements. (Ord. 3368 § 2, 1979.)

 

12.12.040 Evidence of relocation arrangements required.
        In the event that the city building inspector determines that the contemplated construction of necessary improvements as may be required by this chapter in individual cases will necessitate the relocation or alteration of public utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electricity, telephone and water, the building inspector may require the person requesting a building permit to produce satisfactory evidence that such person has made arrangements with such public utility companies for the relocation or modification of such public utility facilities. (Prior code § 25-15.)

 

12.12.050 Denial of final approval and acceptance.
        The building inspector shall deny final approval and acceptance, and shall refuse to allow final public utility connections to any such building or dwelling, unless necessary improvements exist, are constructed, or unless the city manager, pursuant to Section 12.12.060, determines that the installation of such improvements may be made at some future date, and in such event, their construction and installation shall be guaranteed to the satisfaction of the city manager. (Prior code § 25-16.)

 

12.12.060 Conditions for waiver of requirements.
        Upon written application, the city manager by written order may waive or modify the requirements of this chapter when any one of the following conditions exists. Such conditions are as follows:

A.    The city manager determines that because of lack of adequate data in regard to grades, plans or surveys, the construction of improvements should be deferred to a later date.

B.     The city manager determines that the construction of improvements is included in a budgeted city project or an approved assessment district.

C.     The city manager determines that the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city would not be endangered by the deferment of the construction of improvements in conjunction with the proposed construction or expansion.

(Prior code § 25-17.)

 

12.12.070 Waiver—Grant or denial—Appeal.
        The order of the city manager granting or denying waiver or modification of the requirements of this chapter shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten days after said order has been mailed to the last known address of the applicant, an appeal in writing is filed by any person with the city clerk. The filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of such order until such time as the city council has acted upon the appeal as hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 25-17.1.)

 

12.12.080 Right of appeal—Notification of date of hearing.
        Upon receipt of a written appeal filed with the city clerk as provided herein, the city council shall appoint a time for hearing upon said appeal within not less than five days nor more than thirty days after receipt thereof. The city clerk shall mail written notification of the date set for hearing to the appellant and the applicant at their last known addresses not less than five days prior to said hearing date. (Prior code § 25-17.2.)

 

12.12.090 Hearing—Swearing of witnesses—Presentation of evidence.
        At such hearing the city council may, at its discretion, require witnesses to be sworn. The applicant or his agent, or any other person, may present evidence on the issue of the granting, denying or modifying a waiver of the requirements of this chapter. (Prior code § 25-17.3.)

 

12.12.100 Action by council conclusive.
        The action by city council on the granting or denial of a waiver or modification of the requirements of this chapter shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 25-17.4.)

Chapter 12.16 CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL OF CURBS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRIVEWAYS GENERALLY
12.16.010 Permits—Required.
        No person shall cut, break, construct or remove any curbing, sidewalk or driveway, or cause to have cut, broken, constructed or removed, any curbing, sidewalk or driveway on any public street in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city engineer. (Prior code § 25-42.)

 

12.16.020 Permits—Fees.
        For the purpose of providing adequate supervision of construction or removal of curbing, driveways or sidewalks, permit fees have been established. Payment of these fees to the city shall be required as a condition precedent to the granting of permits required by Section 12.16.010. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        The permit fees covered in this section shall not be added to fees charged for an encroachment permit which covers sidewalks, curb cuts and driveways as a part of a larger project. The fees as established by this section shall not be charged to any school establishment or school district. (Prior code § 25-43.)

 

(Ord. No. 4395, Amended, 03/02/93)

 

12.16.030 Regulations relative to size and location of driveways.
        No permit shall be issued under the provisions of Section 12.16.010 in conflict with the following regulations:

A.    Conformance to San Diego Area Regional Standard Drawings. No permit shall be issued to construct a driveway depression in an existing curb or a new curb being constructed, unless a concrete driveway approach is installed according to the San Diego Area Regional Standard Drawings which are in effect at the time of such work. Said drawings are maintained and published by the San Diego County department of transportation, and a copy thereof is on file with the city clerk and the city engineer.

B.     Interference With Sidewalks. No driveway shall be located so as to interfere with intersecting sidewalks, traffic signals, lampposts, fire hydrants, air raid sirens, utility poles, drainage structures or curb returns, except as provided in the San Diego Area Regional Standard Drawings.

C.     Distance Between Driveways. The distance between driveways serving the same lot or parcel of land shall be a minimum of twenty feet between curb openings for residential zones, and a minimum of four feet in commercial zones. In commercial zones no driveway shall be located such that the distance between curb openings is more than ten feet but less than twenty-six feet.

D.    Distance Between Driveway and Property Line. Curb openings, except for joint-use driveways and driveways on lots having twenty-one feet of frontage or less, shall be located at least three feet from the side property line extended. No portion of any driveway shall be allowed to cross over a line extending perpendicular to the roadway from the front corner of the property, except that joint-use driveways may be permitted in special instances where written approval of both property owners is filed with the city engineer, or under conditions provided for in Section 12.16.040.

E.     Abandoned Driveways. Any abandoned driveway shall be removed and the curb and sidewalk shall be properly restored in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

F.     Single-Family Residential Zone.

1.     The maximum driveway width shall be thirty feet (thirty-six foot curb opening).

2.     The minimum driveway width shall be twelve feet (eighteen foot curb opening).

3.     Not more than forty percent of the property frontage may be allocated for driveway curb openings, except that all lots are entitled to one twelve-foot driveway (eighteen foot curb opening).

G.    Multiple-Family, Commercial and M Zones.

1.     The maximum driveway width shall be thirty feet (thirty-six foot curb opening).

2.     The minimum driveway width shall be twelve feet (eighteen foot curb opening).

3.     Not more than sixty percent of the property frontage may be allocated for driveway curb openings, except that all lots are entitled to one twelve-foot driveway (eighteen foot curb opening).

H.    Requirements for Conditional Uses. The requirements for curb cuts and driveway locations for uses which require a conditional use permit shall be determined by the city engineer according to the provisions of this chapter which bear the most reasonable relation to the use for which the conditional use permit has been granted.

(Ord. 3190 § 1, 1978.)

 

12.16.040 Variances from requirements of chapter.
        Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter, result through the strict and literal interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer shall have the authority, as an administrative act, to grant, upon such conditions as he may determine, such variances from the provisions of this chapter, as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent. (Prior code § 25-45.)

Chapter 12.20 EXCAVATIONS
12.20.010 Compliance.
        The excavation of all trenches and refilling of the same in any public street, alley or other public place in the city shall be done according to the specifications set forth in Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180. (Prior code § 25-18.)

 

12.20.020 Applicability.
        The provisions of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 as to the method of doing excavation work shall apply to all excavations made by direction of the city council. (Prior code § 25-19.)

 

12.20.030 Applications to city council—Required—Filing with city clerk.
        No person shall make any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place in the city without first making application in writing to the city council and filing the same with the city clerk. (Prior code § 25-20.)

 

12.20.040 Application—Contents.
        The application required in Section 12.20.030 shall contain a specific description of the location and area of the excavation intended to be made. (Prior code § 25-21.)

 

12.20.050 Cash deposits for damages—Required.
        No person shall make any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place in the city without first making a cash deposit for damages as provided in Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180. (Prior code § 25-22.)

 

12.20.060 Deposit for damage not to relieve obligation of submitting application.
        A cash deposit as required by Section 12.20.050 shall not relieve the person depositing the same from making written application of intention concerning each excavation as prescribed in Section 12.20.030 before beginning such excavation. (Prior code § 25-23.)

 

12.20.070 Deposit—Amounts.
        The amount of money to be deposited for making excavations shall be as follows:

A.    The minimum amount to be deposited with any single application for excavation for any water or sewer lateral on a dirt street, alley or public place not exceeding two feet in width and ten feet in length shall be five dollars. Such deposit may remain as a general deposit.

B.     For opening a trench on a dirt street, alley or public place not exceeding two feet in width and ten feet in length, and not exceeding two blocks, every person filing an application to make an excavation shall deposit with the application twenty-five dollars for any damages that may be caused by the making of such excavation.

C.     For opening a trench in any street or other public place which may be wholly or partially paved with concrete cement, the person making the application to make an excavation shall deposit one hundred dollars for any damages that may be caused by the making of such excavation.

(Prior code § 25-24.)

 

12.20.080 Deposit—Receipt by city clerk.
        The city clerk, on receiving the written application and the deposit required under Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 shall then issue a receipt therefor, and shall open and keep an account thereof. (Prior code § 25-25.)

 

12.20.090 Deposit—Receipts for deposits—Contents.
        The receipt from the city clerk for a cash deposit made pursuant to Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 shall specify the person to whom it is issued, the amount of the deposit, the street, alley or other public place where the excavation is to be made, the particular portions thereof to be excavated and the extent of such excavation. (Prior code § 25-26.)

 

12.20.100 Deposit—Receipt—Constitute permits to make excavations.
        Every receipt issued under Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 shall be considered a permit to do the excavation work stated in such receipt. (Prior code § 25-27.)

 

12.20.110 Refilling.
        The refilling of excavations made pursuant to Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 shall be made in the following manner:

A.    The dirt shall be replaced and carefully tamped in layers not exceeding twelve inches in thickness and each layer shall be well flooded with water before the next layer is put on. The last layer shall be well flooded and tamped although the same may be less than twelve inches in thickness.

B.     In all cases where a pipe not exceeding four inches in diameter is placed in such excavation, all the dirt removed therefrom shall be replaced therein.

C.     When the street or other public place where an excavation is made is paved with concrete cement, the person making the excavation shall refill the same as provided in subsections A and B of this section, up to the underside of the pavement. When such refilling is in proper condition, the person making the excavation shall proceed to replace and repair the pavement torn up or damaged by such excavation in accordance with the specifications used by the state highway commission and the city for the laying of such concrete cement pavement.

(Prior code § 25-28.)

 

 

12.20.120 Warning lights required at night.
        Every person making any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place shall place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation and at a distance of not more than fifty feet along the line thereof from sunset to sunrise until such excavation is entirely refilled. (Prior code § 25-29.)

 

12.20.130 Work to be done with minimum obstruction to travel on streets.
        After any excavation under Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 is commenced, the work of making and refilling the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence and so as not to obstruct the streets or other public places or travel thereon more than is actually necessary therefor. (Prior code § 25-30.)

 

12.20.140 Notice of noncompliance.
        If excavation work is not being done as required by Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 or if the work of refilling does not, in the judgment of the city council, comply with the terms of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180, the city council shall notify the person named in the receipt referred to in Section 12.20.090 that the work is not being prosecuted with due diligence or that the refilling of such excavation has not been properly done, as the case may be, and require such person within five days from the service of such notice to proceed with the diligent prosecution of such work and to properly complete the same in compliance with the terms of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180. (Prior code § 25-31.)

 

12.20.150 Notice of noncompliance to be in writing—Service.
        The notice referred to in Section 12.20.140 shall be in writing and shall be served personally on the person named in the receipt of application and deposit. (Prior code § 25-32.)

 

12.20.160 City to do work upon noncompliance with notice.
        If the notice referred to in Section 12.20.140 is not complied with, the city council shall do whatever work is necessary to refill any excavation and to restore any street or other public place or part thereof so excavated to as good a condition as before such excavation was made and charge the cost thereof against any balance on hand of such person. If there is still a balance due, the same shall be paid before any other permit is issued, and it shall be considered a debt of such person to the city. (Prior code § 25-33.)

 

12.20.170 Excavator liable for refilling and repair.
        The person by whom any excavation in a paved street shall be made shall be deemed and held to warrant the work of refilling and repair thereof for the period of one year after the refilling of such excavation, against all defects in material or workmanship. On five days’ notice such person shall proceed to repair the same, and on failure thereof, such repair work may be done by the city council and the cost thereof deducted from any deposits of such person then in his hands. If any balance remains due, the same shall be paid by such person before any other permit is issued, or the damages may be collected by suit. (Prior code § 25-34.)

 

12.20.180 All work to be done under supervision of city council.
        All excavations, refilling of excavations and repairing of pavements under the provisions of Sections 12.20.010 through 12.20.180 shall be made under the supervision and direction of the city council or such person as they shall duly appoint. (Prior code § 25-35.)

 

12.20.190 Permit for breaking pavement for sewer installation—Required.
        No person shall, without a special permit, cut into or break the surface of any public street or alley under the jurisdiction of the city for the installation of sewer lines. (Prior code § 25-36.)

 

12.20.200 Permit for breaking pavement for sewer installation—Application.
        Before a permit shall be issued to break or cut into the surface of any public road or alley under the jurisdiction of the city for the installation of sewer laterals, every applicant for such permit shall make application to the city clerk agreeing to comply with this code and all other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state, regarding obstructions in public streets and alleys and the installing of proper lights, signs and barriers. (Prior code § 25-37.)

 

12.20.210 Permit for breaking pavement for sewer installation—Expiration.
        If the cutting or breaking of the public street or alley under a permit issued under Sections 12.20.190 through 12.20.240 is not completed within six months after the issuance of such permit, the permit shall thereupon become void, and no work shall be done to such street until a new permit is issued. (Prior code § 25-38.)

 

12.20.220 Notice to city clerk of time of completion and inspection of work—Generally.
        The holder of each permit issued under Sections 12.20.190 through 12.20.240 shall, twenty-hour hours before the completion of the work referred to in Section 12.20.190, notify the city clerk in writing of the approximate time of the completion of such work and the inspection thereof. (Prior code § 25-39.)

 

12.20.230 New notice required in certain instances.
        If the work authorized under Sections 12.20.190 through 12.20.240 and the inspection thereof has not been completed at the appointed time as stated in the notice of such work and inspection to the city clerk, a new notice to the city clerk shall be required as in Section 12.20.220. (Prior code § 25-40.)

 

12.20.240 City street department to make repairs—Street improvement fund to be used for repairs.
        The city street department shall, from the funds available in the street improvement fund, repair the cut and break authorized in the permits issued under Sections 12.20.190 through 12.20.240. (Prior code § 25-41.)

Chapter 12.24 PARADES
12.24.010 Definitions.
A.    The term “parade” as used in this chapter means any march, procession or assembly consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, upon any street, sidewalk or alley which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.

B.     The term “special event” as used in this chapter means any celebration, festival, fair, carnival or similar local special event which is held wholly or partially within a street, the participants in which do not comply with the normal or usual traffic regulations or controls.

(Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.020 Permit—Required.
        No person shall conduct or manage a parade or special event without a written permit from the city manager or designee or the city council. (Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.030 Permit—Issuance.
A.    The chief of police may issue permits in accordance with this chapter.

B.     Upon appeal from a decision of the city manager or designee the city council shall conduct a public hearing as hereinafter provided.

C.     Any such permit may be issued subject to such reasonable conditions as the city manager or designee or the city council may prescribe.

D.    The city manager or designee shall not, without the approval of the city council, issue a permit for a parade or a special event which requires the temporary closing of a portion of a street for more than twenty-four hours.

(Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.040 Permit—Standards for issuance of special event permit.
        No permit for a special event shall be issued unless the city manager or designee or the city council determines that the special event is primarily for the benefit of the community and that the use of the street for such purpose is in the public interest. (Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.050 Permit not to be issued—When.
        No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or special event which the city manager or designee or city council determines:

A.    Is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise or event and is designed to be held purely for private profit;

B.     Is likely to cause injury to persons or property;

C.     Will unduly interfere with the movement of traffic along or across its route or the movement of fire-fighting equipment or ambulances to a fire or emergency; or

D.    Will require unreasonable, extraordinary police service.

(Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.060 Application.
        Any person desiring to conduct or manage a parade or special event shall, not less than ninety (90) nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct such parade or special event, file with the city manager or designee an application for a permit for such parade or special event; provided, the city manager or designee may accept and act on any application filed less than ninety (90) days before such parade or event. The application shall be in a form and contain such information as the city manager or designee may require. (Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.070 Right to a public hearing.
        Said request shall be submitted within ten (10) days after the applicant has been notified of denial or imposition of conditions.

A.    The city clerk shall appoint a time within thirty (30) for such public hearing.

B.     The city clerk shall serve notice of such hearing upon the applicant by certified mail at the address shown on the application for the permit.

C.     Such notice shall state the grounds for denial of the permit, or reasons for the conditions imposed, and shall state the time and place when and where such public hearing shall be held.

D.    At such hearing the city council may, at its discretion, require witnesses to be sworn. The applicant or his agent may present evidence to show the denial of the permit was unreasonable, or that unreasonable conditions were imposed. Any other person may, at the discretion of the council, be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence.

E.     Within fifteen days of the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall announce its decision and findings by resolution. A copy of such resolution shall be mailed to the applicant and to any other person requesting notice of the action.

F.     The action of the city council on the denial of the permit or the conditions imposed shall be final and conclusive.

(Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.080 Interference with parades or special events.
        No person shall, without the consent of the permittee, join or participate in a parade or special event, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. (Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

 

12.24.090 Temporary closing of street.
        The chief of police may temporarily close a portion of a street for a parade or special event for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter when in his opinion such closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons using that portion of the street during the temporary closing. No such closing shall be for more than twenty-four hours without the approval of the city council. (Ord. 5033 § 7, 2015.)

Chapter 12.35 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DEFERRALS
12.35.010 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide qualified low-income owners with an alternative method for payment of special assessments levied against their real property. The council finds and declares that state special assessment laws and city procedural ordinances providing for payment of assessments in lump sums and bonds in annual installments often results in financial hardship to low-income owners and, in the exercise of the council’s power to make suitable provision for the aid and support of the poor, it is in the public interest for the city to provide a method for the deferral of payment of special assessments levied against the real property of qualified low-income owners until such time as the property is transferred or refinanced, or the owners fail to qualify. The council further finds and declares that all expenditures and investments made pursuant to this chapter are incidental to the accomplishment of the primary purpose of making suitable provision for the aid and support of the poor. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.020 Inconsistencies with state law.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s legislative powers to make and enforce ordinances and regulations. To the extent of any inconsistencies between the provisions of this chapter and those of the 1911 Act, 1913 Act, or other state law, state law shall control. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.030 Scope of assessment deferral.
        This chapter is limited to qualified low-income owners residing within the city and 1911 Act and 1913 Act proceedings providing for the issuance of bonds to represent unpaid assessments under the Improvement Act of 1911 (commencing with Section 5000 of the Streets and Highways Code).

        There are no are restrictions for qualified low-income owners. This chapter applies to pending and future special assessment proceedings. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.040 Definitions.
        The meaning of the various terms, as used in this chapter, shall be as follows:

A.    “Assessment bond” means an obligation to pay money at a definite time or times, issued or to be issued, to represent an unpaid assessment pursuant to the provisions of the Improvement Act of 1911 (commencing with Section 5000 of the California Streets and Highways Code).

B.     “City manager” means the city manager of El Cajon and any officer, department, or division of the city designated by him for the administration of this chapter.

C.     “Income” means all income of any nature from any source derived, including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, dividends, interest, capital gains, rents, income from the operation of a farm or business, income from the sale or exchange of property, gifts, inheritances, Social Security payments, other retirement benefits, welfare benefits, alimony and support payments and any other thing of economic value.

D.    “Mortgage” means a mortgage deed, a deed of trust, or any other instrument which constitutes a lien on real property.

E.     “Net assets” means all real and personal property of any character which a low-income owner owns or has an interest in, including stocks, bonds, and savings accounts but excluding the real property subject to assessment deferral.

F.     “Owner” means the person or persons owning and occupying real property in the city which is subject to special assessment pursuant to the 1911 Act or 1913 Act and successors in interest or the legally appointed representatives of such person or persons.

G.    “Refinancing” means any new indebtedness incurred by an owner after delivery to the city of a bond agreement or a mortgage pursuant to this chapter and any extension, modification, or additional advances made upon any indebtedness previously incurred by an owner, where such indebtednesses are secured by a mortgage on all or any part of the real property in which the city has a security interest.

H.    “Transfer,” when referring to real property, means any sale, exchange, gift, or lease of real property or any interest therein, whether made by the original owner, any successor in interest or legally appointed representative of the owner or made pursuant to the laws of inheritance and succession. “Transfer” shall also mean, under the terms of this chapter, any approval of a subdivision map, parcel map, site development plan, building permit for improvements valued greater than fifteen thousand dollars, or any similar change in character of the property, including the rezoning of the property pursuant to application by the property owner.

(Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.050 Assessment deferral fund.
        An assessment deferral fund is hereby established in the city treasury. All moneys appropriated by the council for the purpose of this chapter shall be deposited to the credit of that fund. All income, losses, and expenditures resulting from the provisions of this chapter shall be credited or debited, as the case may be, to that fund. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.060 Maturity of assessments and bonds.
        The resolution of intention may provide for the assessments and bonds upon the real property of qualified low-income owners to be classified into longer maturities than assessments and bonds upon other real property in the assessment district. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.070 Rules and regulations of city manager.
        The city manager shall establish rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter and shall set forth the form and contents of applications, information statements, bond agreements, notes, mortgages, and any other documents necessary for the administration of this chapter; provided, however, that any exception to the requirement that the low-income owner be an occupant of the real property for which the assessment deferral is sought shall be granted only upon the approval of the city council. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.080 Rules and regulations of the city manager regarding assessment deferral options for low-income property owners.
        Property owners may apply for assessment deferral pursuant to this chapter, and upon approval the city manager may pay the full amount of the assessment due or to become due upon owner’s property.

        Alternatively, the city manager may pay the annual bond debt obligation on behalf of the property owner as the payments become due, or in full at any time. (Ord. 4002, § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.090 Qualifications of low-income owners.
        An owner must meet the following eligibility requirements:

A.    Owner’s income must be within the guidelines for lower-income citizens and families set by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Economic Marketing Analysis Division, as adjusted annually for the San Diego metropolitan statistical area.

B.     The real property for which assessment deferral is sought must be owner-occupied unless otherwise excepted and approved by the city council.

C.     The value of owner’s net assets cannot exceed ten thousand dollars, excluding the value of the property being assessed, and one vehicle.

D.    If an owner does not meet the eligibility requirements under subsections A or C of this section, upon a showing of hardship, the city manager may at his discretion present the matter to the city council for special consideration.

(Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.100 Written explanation of assessment deferral program.
        The city manager shall prepare a written explanation of the assessment deferral program in the form of a pamphlet or booklet which the superintendent of streets shall mail to property owners within a proposed assessment district. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.110 Failure to give or receive explanation.
        The failure of the superintendent of streets to distribute or mail written explanations of the assessment deferral program or the failure of any owner to receive the explanation shall not affect the validity of any proposed or pending special assessment proceedings or any assessment bonds issued pursuant thereto. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.120 Application for assessment deferral.
        All owners interested in obtaining an assessment deferral shall file an application with the city manager. Among other things, the application shall contain:

A.    Name and mailing address of all owners;

B.     A description sufficient to identify the real property for which assessment deferral is sought;

C.     A statement that the real property is located in the city, is owned by the applicants, and is or is not occupied by the applicants;

D.    A statement that applicants believe they are eligible as qualified low-income owners and have furnished all pertinent information concerning eligibility, income and net assets;

E.     Signature of applicant under penalty of perjury, attesting that the information provided is true and correct;

F.     Applicant’s income and sources of income, including pertinent data from the most recent income tax return;

G.    List of applicant’s net assets;

H.    List of any and all encumbrances on the property, including names and addresses of encumbrancers;

I.      An estimate of the value of the property.

(Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.130 Approval or denial of application.
        The city manager shall promptly investigate and review all applications for assessment deferrals. The city manager may require applicant to furnish such additional information as may be necessary to determine whether applicant is a qualified low-income owner. Upon completion of the investigation and review, the city manager shall either deny or give preliminary approval to the application. Final approval of the application shall be given by the city manager only upon applicants furnishing the city with the security required by Section 12.35.140. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.140 Security for assessment deferral.
        Before giving final approval to any application for assessment deferral, the city manager shall obtain security for payment of all amounts then or thereafter to become due to the city. In the discretion of the city manager, the security may consist of either of the following:

A.    The purchase by the city of the assessment bond to be issued upon applicant’s real property and the execution of a bond agreement between the city and the applicant pursuant to Section 12.35.150. The purchase price shall be paid from the assessment deferral fund to the contractor or his assignee, or to the bondholder.

B.     The payment by the city of the special assessment to become due upon applicant’s real property and the execution and delivery by applicant to the city of a note and deed of trust pursuant to Section 12.35.170.

(Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.150 Bond agreement.
        Prior to final approval of any application for assessment deferral and to city’s purchase of an assessment bond, the city manager shall negotiate a bond agreement with the applicant. Among other things the bond agreement shall make provision concerning payments due or to become due upon the bond. This agreement may contain a payment plan to allow the applicant to pay off the assessment. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.160 Notes and mortgages.
        Prior to final approval of any application for assessment deferral and to the city’s payment of a special assessment or the redemption and prepayment of an assessment bond, the owner shall execute and deliver a note and mortgage to the city manager.

        The note shall be in a principal amount equal to the special assessment paid by the city upon owner’s real property or, if there is an outstanding bond on the real property, the amount required to be paid by the city for the redemption and prepayment of the bond.

        The principal amount of the note shall bear simple annual interest determined as follows:

A.    Until the maturity date of the bond issued or which otherwise would have been issued on owner’s property, the interest rate on the note shall be the same as the interest rate specified in the bond.

B.     After the maturity date of the bond, the interest rate shall be the average annual interest rate thereafter earned by the city on its long-term investments.

        The entire unpaid principal amount of the note, together with all interest due thereon, shall become immediately due and payable to the city upon and before any transfer or refinancing affecting the real property described in the mortgage securing the note.

        The deed of trust securing the note shall secure the entire unpaid principal of the note, together with all interest due thereon, and shall be such as to constitute an enforceable lien against the real property described therein. The deed of trust shall provide that failure to pay the city the entire amount due upon the note constitutes an event of default, upon the occurrence of which the city may enforce the deed of trust by the sale or foreclosure of the property described therein. The deed of trust shall further require the owner to give prompt written notice to the city manager of any proposed transfer of or refinancing pertaining to the real property. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.170 Owner prepayment upon bond agreement or note.
        Where an owner has executed a bond agreement pursuant to Section 12.35.150 or a note pursuant to Section 12.35.160, the owner may at any time pay the city manager all or any part of the amounts due the city upon the bond agreement or the note. All payments received by the city manager shall be deposited in the assessment deferral fund.

        The city manager shall deliver to the owner a receipted statement showing the full amount of principal, interest and other amounts due the city on the date of payment, the amount of the payment made, and the balance, if any, remaining unpaid on the date of payment. Where a partial payment is made, the payment shall first be applied to reduce the interest then due the city and any remainder applied to reduce the principal and any other amounts then due the city.

        Upon full payment to the city of a bond agreement or note, the city manager shall execute and deliver to the owner a notice of satisfaction of the agreement or note and, in the case of a note, a release of the deed of trust. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.180 Rights of city under deeds of trust and bond purchases.
        Upon delivery of a deed of trust to the city, the city shall have all of the rights and liens specified in the deed of trust. A bond purchase by the city shall not constitute the redemption and prepayment of the bond by the city. Upon the purchase of a bond, the city shall become the owner of the bond and shall succeed to all of the rights and liens of the bondholder to enforce all payments upon the bond. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.190 Recordation of deeds of trust.
        Upon delivery of a note and deed of trust to the city, the city manager shall immediately record the deed of trust with the county recorder of San Diego County. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.200 Annual review of status of securities and owner/applicants.
        At least once each year, the city manager shall review all finally approved applications, the security furnished the city pursuant thereto, and the financial condition of the owner. For that purpose, the city manager may require the owner, either orally or in writing, to furnish information given under penalty of perjury concerning:

A.    Any proposed, pending, or completed transfers or refinancing affecting the real property in which the city has a security interest, including any approval of a rezoning, subdivision map, parcel map, site development plan, building permit for improvements in excess of fifteen thousand dollars, or any similar change in character of the property;

B.     Owner’s continuing eligibility as a qualified low-income owner.

        The failure or refusal of the owner to furnish such information shall be deemed an event of default, upon the occurrence of which the city may enforce its security interest. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.210 Default by owners.
        If an owner ceases to be a qualified low-income owner or fails to make payments to the city when due, or if, in the opinion of the city manager, it appears probable that such payments will not be made when due, the city manager shall report such matters to the council, together with his recommendations. Thereupon the council may instruct the city manager to make further efforts to collect amounts due, authorize the city manager to compromise or write-off all or any part of the amounts due, or order the city manager to refer the matters to the city attorney for enforcement of the city’s security. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

 

12.35.220 Administrative fee.
        Qualifying applications under this chapter will be subject to an administrative fee equal to 1.5 percent of the value of the face amount of the assessment bond due or to become due upon the property. (Ord. 4002 § 1, 1986.)

TITLE 12 ENDNOTES
 

1.     For statutory provision regarding the construction of curbs and sidewalks, see Strs. & Hwys. Code § 5870 et seq.

Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS
Chapter 13.04 WATER
Chapter 13.08 WATERCOURSES AND DRAINS
Chapter 13.10 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Chapter 13.12 WELL CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Chapter 13.16 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—IN GENERAL
Chapter 13.20 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY
Chapter 13.24 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PUBLIC SEWER LATERALS
Chapter 13.28 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTIONS
Chapter 13.32 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS GENERAL
Chapter 13.36 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMITS
Chapter 13.37 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—INSPECTIONS
Chapter 13.38 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—FATS, OILS AND GREASE
Chapter 13.40 SEPTIC TANK CLEANERS
Chapter 13.41 SEPTIC TANK WASTE DISPOSAL
Chapter 13.44 SEWER SERVICE CHARGE

Chapter 13.04 WATER
13.04.010 Waste of water—prohibited.
        No person shall waste or cause or permit to be wasted, any water furnished, supplied or delivered by any agency distributing for public benefit any water dedicated to or provided for public use within the city. (Prior code § 29-1.)

 

13.04.020 Prima facie evidence of waste.
        It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of Section 13.04.010 for any person to permit any water supplied from a public source to the premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person to escape, flow or seep therefrom. (Prior code § 29-2.)

 

13.04.030 Persons deemed prima facie responsible for waste.
        The person ostensibly in possession, control or ownership of any premises upon which water is wasted or permitted to be wasted in violation of Section 13.04.010 shall be prima facie responsible for such violation. (Prior code § 29-3.)

 

13.04.040 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16. of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Chapter 13.08 WATERCOURSES AND DRAINS
13.08.010 Permits—Required for watercourse obstructions.
        No person shall fill or obstruct or maintain any fill or obstruction in any natural watercourse or any channel carrying storm water unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the department of public works. (Prior code § 29A-1.)

 

13.08.020 Permits—Required for construction of drainage structure.
        No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, install or maintain any drainage structure in any natural watercourse or channel carrying storm water unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the department of public works. (Prior code § 29A-2.)

 

13.08.030 Permit—Interference with watercourses prohibited except by permit holders.
        No person shall do anything to any natural watercourse or any channel carrying storm water that will in any manner obstruct or interfere with the flow of water through such watercourse or channel, and any property owner, lessee or tenant of any property through which a natural watercourse or any channel carrying storm water passes shall keep and maintain the same free from any obstructions that will in any manner prevent or retard the flow of water through such watercourse or channel, except that a watercourse or channel may be filled or altered if a permit to do so has been first obtained pursuant to Sections 13.08.010, 13.08.020 and 13.08.040. (Prior code § 29A-3.)

 

13.08.040 Permit—Application.
        Any person desiring to obtain a permit to construct, reconstruct or repair any drainage structure or to alter or change any natural watercourse or natural drainage channel or to fill or obstruct the same shall file an application in writing therefor with the department of public works which shall state:

A.    The name and address of the applicant, and if applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof;

B.     The place where such construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration is to take place;

C.     The type of construction proposed to be used in such construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration, together with the materials to be used, shown on an accompanying diagram of the proposed work, and such other information as the department of public works may require to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

(Prior code § 29A-4.)

 

13.08.050 Notice to remove watercourse obstructions.
        The department of public works or its authorized representatives are authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private property within the city, the agent of such owner, or the occupant or person in charge or control of the property, to properly dispose of obstructions in any natural watercourse located on such owner’s property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.060 Notice form—Service.
        The notice referred to in Section 13.08.050 shall be in writing and shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identity the location of said property, shall direct compliance with removal of the obstruction to the natural watercourse which is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, and shall refer to this chapter and be served in one of the following manners:

A.    By personal service on the owner, agent, occupant or person in charge or control of the property;

B.     By certified or registered mail, addressed to the owner, agent, or person in charge or control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known;

C.     By deposit of the said notice, postage prepaid, in the United States mail.

(Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.070 Appeal from requirements of removal notice.
        Within ten days from the date of personal service or mailing of the required notice provided for in Section 13.08.060, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot or premises affected by such notice may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall set a hearing date upon all appeals at a regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council not less than fifteen days nor more than thirty days after the service of the notice as provided in Section 13.08.060. The city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal at said time, unless continued, and the decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.080 Time limit for compliance with notice.
        It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the occupant or person in charge or control of any property in the city, within thirty days from the date of personal service or mailing of the notice provided for in this chapter, or in the case of an appeal to the city council, within thirty days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to comply with the requirements of such notice. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.090 Noncompliance with notice—City effecting removal of obstruction.
        Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent, after notice as hereinabove set forth, to properly comply with the order to remove any obstruction to a watercourse from the property within the time specified in this chapter, the department of public works, or its authorized representatives, shall cause such removal to be done. When the city has completed such work, or has paid for such work to be done, a report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost on each separate property shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.100 Emergency removal of obstruction.
        Upon a finding by the city council that an obstruction in a natural watercourse constitutes a present danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or threatens immediate injury to private or public property, the notice provision of Section 13.08.050 and the appeal provision of Section 13.08.070 may be waived and the department of public works, or its authorized representatives, shall cause immediate removal of such obstruction. In the event the department of public works, or its authorized representatives, conclude that immediate danger is so imminent as to constitute an emergency, the city manager may cause immediate removal of such obstruction prior to city council approval. When the city has completed such work, or has paid for such work to be done, a report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost on each separate property shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.110 Removal—Cost charged to owner of property.
        When the city has completed the work ordered to be done, or has paid for such work, the actual cost thereof, together with any administrative cost, shall be charged to the owner of the property, and the owner, agent, or the occupant or person in charge or control of the property, shall be billed therefor by mail, if not paid prior thereto. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill will result in a lien upon the property. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.120 Time of hearing upon failure of owner to pay costs.
        Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty days after the date of billing, the city clerk shall set the report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after such thirty-day period has expired. The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and account and a notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the council chambers in the city hall. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.130 Confirmation of special assessment and lien on property.
        The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by interested parties. Any owner of land or person affected by the proposed charge may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision of the city council on the report and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive. The amounts so approved shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill, and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall confirm such assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.140 Interest on unpaid assessments.
        All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the city council shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

 

13.08.150 Authority for assessments.
        Said assessments shall be levied in accordance with the provisions of Title 4, Division 3, Part 2, Chapter 10, Article 6 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 3558 § 1, 1981.)

Chapter 13.10 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
13.10.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance.” (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.020 Purpose and intent.
        The purposes of this chapter are to protect the health, safety and general welfare of City of El Cajon residents; to protect water resources and to improve water quality; to cause the use of management practices by the city and its citizens that will reduce the adverse effects of polluted runoff discharges on waters of the state; to secure benefits from the use of storm water as a resource; and to ensure that the city is compliant with the MS4 Permit (as defined in section 13.10.030), as may be amended, and with applicable state and federal law. This chapter seeks to promote these purposes by:

A.    Prohibiting polluted non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system;

B.     Establishing minimum requirements for storm water management, including source control requirements, to prevent and reduce pollution;

C.     Establishing requirements for development project site design, to reduce storm water pollution and erosion;

D.    Establishing requirements for the management of storm water flows from development projects, both to prevent erosion and to protect and enhance existing water-dependent habitats;

E.     Establishing standards for the use of off-site facilities for storm water management to supplement on-site practices at new development sites; and

F.     Establishing notice procedures and standards for adjusting storm water and non-storm water management requirements where necessary. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.030 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this chapter, including use in the City of El Cajon’s Jurisdictional Runoff Management Program (JRMP) document, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized.

        “Attached residential development” means any development that provides 10 or more residential units that share an interior/exterior wall. This category includes, but is not limited to: dormitories, condominiums and apartments.

        “Authorized enforcement official” means the city manager or the city council of the city of El Cajon or any designee of the city manager or the city council of the city of El Cajon, who is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to, the directors, their management staff, and designees.

        “Authorized enforcement staff” means any city employee who is assigned to duties involving permits and other city approvals, inspections, or enforcement related to this chapter.

        “Automotive repair shop” means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following standard industrial classification codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539.

        “Best management practices” or “BMPs” defined by 40 CFR 122.2 means schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or the storm water conveyance system. Best management practices also include, but are not limited to, treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best management practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure, approved by the city and consistent with the MS4 Permit that can help to achieve compliance with this chapter.

        “Biofiltration” means practices that use vegetation and amended soils to detail and treat runoff from impervious surfaces. Treatment is through filtration, infiltration, adsorption, ion exchange, and biological uptake of pollutants.

        “Channel” means a natural or improved watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water either continuously or intermittently.

        “City” means the city of El Cajon.

        “Clean Water Act section 303(d) impaired water body” means an impaired water body in which water quality does not meet applicable water quality standards and/or is not expected to meet water quality standards, even after the application of technology based pollution controls required by the Clean Water Act. The discharge of runoff to these water bodies by the co-permittees is significant because these discharges can cause or contribute to violations of applicable water quality standards.

        “Code” means the El Cajon Municipal Code and each and every title, chapter, and section contained therein.

        “Co-permittee” is defined at 40 CFR 122.26(b)(1), and means a permittee to an NPDES permit that is only responsible for permit conditions relating to the discharge for which it is operator.

        “Commercial development” means any development on private land that is not exclusively heavy industrial or residential uses. The category includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses, hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, automotive dealerships, commercial airfields, and other light industrial complexes.

        “Commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use development greater than one (1) acre” means any commercial, industrial, residential, or mixed-use development that results in the disturbance of one (1) acre or more in land.

        “Construction site” means any project, including projects requiring coverage under the state general construction storm water permit, that involves soil disturbing activities including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation.

        “Contamination” as defined in section 13050 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act is “an impairment of the quality of waters of the State by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not waters of the State are affected.” In the event section 13050 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act is amended or superseded, the amended or superseding section shall define “contamination.”

        “Constructed wetland” means a vegetated area that has been deliberately modified to provide or enhance habitat, to provide water quality benefits, or to moderate water flow rates or velocities, that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.

        “County” means the County of San Diego.

        “Detached residential development” means any development that provides ten (10) or more freestanding residential units. This category includes, but is not limited to: detached homes, such as single-family homes and detached condominium.

        “Developer” or “development project proponent” means a person who seeks or receives permits for, or who undertakes, land development activity.

        “Development projects” means the construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private projects.

        “Directly connected impervious area” or “DCIA” means the area covered by a building, impermeable pavement, and/or other impervious surfaces, which drains directly into the storm drain without first flowing across permeable vegetated land area (e.g., lawns).

        “Directors” means the directors or director of the Building Department, Community Development Department and the Public Works Department.

        “Discharge,” when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter storm water, or to allow storm water or non-storm water to directly or indirectly enter the storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, from an activity or operations which one owns or operates. When used as a noun, “discharge” means the pollutants, storm water, and/or non-storm water that are discharged.

        “Discharger” means any person or entity engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities, which will or may result in pollutants entering storm water, the storm water conveyance system, or receiving waters; and the owners of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

        “Discharges directly to” means that storm water or non-storm water enters receiving waters from a facility or activity, without mixing with any storm water or non-storm water from another facility or activity prior to entering such receiving waters.

        “Drainage easement” means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for storm water management purposes.

        “Environmentally sensitive areas” means areas that include, but are not limited to, all Clean Water Act section 303(d) impaired water bodies; areas designated as an Area of Special Biological Significance by the SWRCB and the RWQCB; State Water Quality Projected Areas; water bodies designated as having a RARE beneficial use by the SWRCB and the RWQCB (as designated in the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin and amendments); areas designated as preserves; and any other equivalent environmentally sensitive areas which have been identified by the co-permittees.

        “Erosion” refers to any process in which land is diminished or worn away due to wind, water, or glacial ice. Often the eroded debris (silt or sediment) becomes a pollutant via storm water runoff. Erosion occurs naturally but can be intensified by land clearing activities such as farming, development, and road building.

        “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a plan prepared under the direction of and signed by a Civil Engineer competent in the preparation of such plans and knowledgeable about current erosion and sediment control methods. The plan shall provide for protection of exposed soils, prevention of discharge of sediment, and desiltation of runoff at frequent intervals along flowage areas, at entrances to storm drains, at entrances to streets and driveways, and at the exit of the area being graded.

        “Erosion control system” means any combinations of desilting facilities, retarding basins, flow decelerates, and/or erosion protection (including effective planning and the maintenance thereof) to protect the project site, adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities, graded improvements, existing natural facilities, archaeological artifacts, and relieve waters of suspended sediments or debris prior to discharge from the site.

        “Existing development” means any area that has been developed and exists for municipal, commercial, industrial or residential purposes, uses or activities. May include that area not actively used for its originally developed purpose, but may be re-purposed or redeveloped for another use or activity.

        “Grading” means cutting and/or filling of the land surface to a designed slope or elevation.

        “Groundwater” means subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated.

        “Hillside” means lands that have a natural gradient of 25 percent (4 feet of horizontal distance for every 1 foot of vertical distance) or greater and a minimum elevation differential of 50 feet, or a natural gradient of 200 percent (1 foot of horizontal distance for every 2 feet of vertical distance) or greater and a minimum elevation differential of 10 feet.

        “Hillside development greater than 5,000 square feet” means any development that would create more than 5,000 square feet of impervious surfaces in hillsides with known erosive soil conditions.

        “Hydrologic soil group” means the classification system for soil erodability set out in Soil Survey—San Diego Area, California (December 1973), issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service and U.S. Forest Service. In this system soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from “A” soils, which have high permeability and little runoff production, to “D” soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.

        “Hydromodification” means the change in the natural hydrologic processes and runoff characteristics (i.e., interception, infiltration, overland flow, interflow and groundwater flow) caused by urbanization or other land use changes that result in increased stream flows and changes in sediment transport. In addition, alteration of stream and river channels, installation of dams and water impoundments, and excessive stream bank and shoreline erosion are also considered hydromodification, due to their disruption of natural watershed hydrologic processes.

        “Illicit connection” or “illegal connection” means a pipe, facility, or other device connected to the storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, which has not been reviewed and authorized by the city; or a permitted or authorized pipe, facility, or other device, which conveys illicit discharges.

        “Illicit discharge” or “illegal discharge” means any discharge into the storm water conveyance system, or receiving waters that is prohibited by this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, discharges of non-storm water that are not exempt discharges listed in section 13.10.060 of this code, discharges of irrigation runoff to the storm water conveyance system, any discharge from an illegal connection, and any discharge that contains additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP. Discharges that require a NPDES permit that has not been issued or has not been acknowledged by the discharger to be applicable are illegal discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable NPDES permit are illicit discharges for purposes of this chapter unless compliance with all applicable permit and SWPPP conditions are maintained.

        “Impervious cover” or “impervious surface” means constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall. The term includes, but is not limited to, building rooftops, pavement, concrete or asphaltic sidewalks, and concrete driveways.

        “Impervious surface area” means the ground area covered or sheltered by an impervious surface, measured in plan view (i.e., as if from directly above). For example, the impervious surface area for a pitched roof is equal to the ground area it shelters, rather than the surface area of the roof itself.

        “Industrial activity” means manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage at a commercial, industrial or municipal facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, such manufacturing, processing, or storage in or upon industrial plant yards or immediate access roads used or traveled by carriers of raw materials; manufacture of products, waste material, or by-product creation or storage; material handling; refuse storage or disposal; the application or disposal of processed wastewaters; storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; treatment, storage or disposal of residuals; outdoor shipping and receiving; activities in manufacturing buildings; storage of raw materials and intermediate and finished products; and the ownership, use or control of areas where significant industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to storm water. Material handling activities include the storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product.

        “Infiltration,” when used as a verb, means the process of percolating storm water or non-storm water into the soil. Infiltration, when used as a noun, is water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections and foundation drains) from the ground though such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes.

        “Infiltration BMPs” or “infiltration facility” means any structural treatment BMP designed primarily to percolate water into the subsurface, such as an infiltration trench or infiltration basin. An infiltration facility may include filtering prior to or during infiltration. BMPs that infiltrate some water but which are designed primarily to retain water or to treat water, such as retention basins, constructed wetlands, or filtering swales are not infiltration facilities.

        “Jurisdictional Runoff Management Program document” or “JRMP document” means a written plan describing the specific jurisdictional runoff management measures and programs that each co-permittee implements to comply with the MS4 Permit and to ensure that storm water pollutant discharges in runoff are reduced to the maximum extent practicable and do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.

        “Land development activity” means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private projects.

        “Land disturbance activity” means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the pre-existing vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil; placement of fill materials; paving, pavement removal, exterior construction; substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including, but not limited to, removal by clearing or grubbing; or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Land disturbance activity does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety.

        “Land owner” means the holder of legal title to the land, and other persons or entities who exercise control over a land development project pursuant to rights granted in a purchase agreement, joint venture agreement, development agreement, or long term lease.

        “Low Impact Development” or “LID” means a storm water management and land use development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect pre-development hydrologic functions.

        “Low Impact Development BMPs” or “LID BMPs” include schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of water of the United States through storm water management and land development strategies that emphasize conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect re-development hydrologic functions. LID BMPs may include retention practices that do not allow runoff, such as infiltration, rain water harvesting and reuse, and evapotranspiration. LID BMPs also include flow-through practices such as biofiltration that may have some discharge of storm water following pollutant reduction.

        “Maintenance of a BMP” means periodic action taken to maintain the as-designed performance of a BMP, and includes, but is not limited to, repairs to the BMP as necessary, and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life.

        “Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” is an acceptability standard for BMPs. When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that are still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if: it complies with other regulations as well as storm water regulations; is compatible with the area’s land use, character, facilities, and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources, and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs.

        “MS4 Permit” refers to RWQCB Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit and Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges from the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Draining the Watersheds within the San Diego Region, as may be amended.

        “Municipal facility” means a facility owned or operated by the city of El Cajon that is used for a governmental purpose. Facilities or municipally owned land that are leased or rented to others to generate municipal revenues are not municipal facilities. The commercial or industrial lessees of such facilities may, however, be subject to this chapter as dischargers.

        “Natural drainage” means a natural swale or topographic depression, which gathers and/or conveys runoff to a permanent or intermittent watercourse or water body.

        “New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure; the creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

        “Non-storm water discharge” includes discharges to and from a storm water conveyance system that do not originate from precipitation events. Non-storm water includes illicit discharges and NPDES permitted discharges.

        “NPDES Permit” means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the SWRCB, or the RWQCB. The NPDES is the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 of the Clean Water Act.

        “Parking lot” means land area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, or for business or commerce.

        “Permittee” means any person or owner to whom a grading permit is issued, or for whom a grading plan is approved, pursuant to chapter 15.64 of this code.

        “Pollutant” means any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality such that a condition of pollution or contamination is created or aggravated.

        “Pollution” as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act is the “alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste, to a degree which unreasonably affects either of the following: (A) The waters for beneficial uses”; or “(B) Facilities which serve these beneficial uses.” Pollution may include contamination.

        “Pollution prevention” is defined as practices and processes that reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants, in contract to source control BMPs, treatment control BMPs, erosion and sediment control BMPs or disposal.

        “Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act” or “Act” means Division 7 of the California Water Code as may be amended from time to time.

        “Premises” means any building, lot parcel, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved.

        “Priority Development Project” or “PDP” or “Priority Project” refers to new development and redevelopment project categories as more fully set forth in chapter 16.60 of this code.

        “Project footprint” means the limits of all grading and ground disturbance, including landscaping, associated with a project.

        “Public Nuisance” has the same meaning as in section 1.16.020 of this code.

        “Rainy season” means from October 1 through April 30.

        “Receiving waters” means all waters that are “Waters of the United States,” such as surface bodies of water, which directly or indirectly receive discharges from urban runoff conveyance systems, including naturally occurring wetlands, streams (perennial, intermittent, and ephemeral (exhibiting bed, bank, and ordinary high water mark)), creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, lagoons, estuaries, harbors, bays and the Pacific Ocean.

        “Redevelopment” means any construction, alteration or improvement at an already developed site that will increase the total impervious surface area of that site, or that involves activities that could expose contaminants to rainfall. Redevelopment can include, but is not limited to, the expansion of building footprints, the addition or replacement of a structure, exterior construction and remodeling, replacement of existing impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine maintenance activity, and other activities that create additional impervious surface. Redevelopment also includes disturbance of one or more acres of land and expected to generate pollutants post construction.

        “Restaurant” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (standard industrial classification code 5812).

        “Retail gasoline outlet” means a retail gasoline outlet that is 5,000 square feet or more or with a projected average daily traffic of 100 or more vehicles per day.

        “Runoff” means all flows in a storm water conveyance system including storm water (wet weather flows) and non-storm water (dry weather flows).

        “RWQCB” means the Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego region.

        “Sediment” means soils, sand, minerals or other surficial materials eroded and then transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. Sediments can increase turbidity, clog fish gills, reduce spawning habitat, lower young aquatic organisms’ survival rates, smother bottom dwelling organisms, and suppress aquatic vegetation growth.

        “Significant redevelopment” means development that would create, add, or replace at least 5,000 square feet of impervious surfaces on an already developed site that falls under a priority development project category. Significant redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition to or replacement of a structure; replacement of an impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related with structural or impervious surfaces. Replacement of impervious surfaces includes any activity that is not part of a routine maintenance activity where impervious material(s) are removed, exposing underlying soil during construction.

        “Site design BMPs” also known as a significant part of low impact development, means any project design feature that reduces the amount of impervious surfaces, disconnects impervious surfaces, reduces creation or severity of potential pollutant sources, and/or reduces the alteration of the project site’s natural flow regime. Redevelopment projects that are undertaken to remove pollutant sources (such as existing surface parking lots and other impervious surfaces) or to reduce the need for new roads and other impervious surfaces (as compared to conventional or low-density new development) by incorporating higher densities and/or mixed land uses into the project design, are also considered site design BMPs.

        “Source control BMPs” (both structural and non-structural) means land use or site planning practices, or structures that aim to prevent urban runoff pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. Source control BMPs minimize the contact between pollutants and urban runoff. Examples include roof structures over trash or material storage areas, and berms around fuel dispensing areas.

        “State” means the State of California.

        “State general construction storm water permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000002, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with Construction Activities, and any amendments thereto.

        “State general industrial storm water permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000001, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with Industrial Activities Excluding Construction Activities, and any amendments thereto.

        “Stop work order” means an order issued which requires that specifically identified activity or all activity on a site be stopped.

        “Storm water” means storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. Surface runoff and drainage pertains to runoff and drainage resulting from precipitation events.

        “Storm water conveyance system” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains): (i) owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to waters of the United States; (ii) designated or used for collecting or conveying storm water; (iii) which is not a combined sewer; and (iv) which is not part of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.26.

        “Storm water management” means the use of structural or non-structural BMPs that are designed to reduce urban run-off pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak discharge flow rates or velocities. When applied to the city or another municipality, storm water management also includes planning and programmatic measures.

        “Storm water mitigation plan” means a plan, submitted on a city form or in a city-specific format in connection with an application for a city permit or other city approval, identifying the measures that will be used for storm water and non-storm water management during the permitted activity.

        “Storm water pollution prevention plan” or “SWPPP” means a document (other than a storm water mitigation plan), which meets the requirements for an SWPPP set out in the state general construction storm water permit or the state general industrial storm water permit. An SWPPP submitted to the city must describe the BMPs to be implemented and other steps to be taken by the discharger to meet the requirements of this chapter.

        “Streets, roads, highways, freeways, and driveways” for the purposes of this chapter, means any paved impervious surface used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles.

        “Structural BMP” means a BMP that relies on either a physical condition, other than an entirely natural and undisturbed condition, or on a constructed or installed device to reduce or prevent pollutants in storm water discharges and authorized non-storm water discharges. Constructed or enhanced BMPs that depend on natural materials and processes (e.g., constructed drainage swales or buffers, or constructed wetlands) and that require periodic maintenance to function as designed, are structural BMPs. Structural BMPs in place in connection with a land development or redevelopment project to prevent or reduce contamination in storm water and receiving waters, or to prevent or reduce erosion downstream from the project.

        “Structural post-construction BMP” means a structural BMP, other than a temporary construction-related BMP, put in place in connection with a land development or redevelopment project to prevent or reduce contamination in storm water or receiving waters, or to prevent or reduce erosion downstream from the project. All treatment control BMPs are structural post-construction BMPs.

        “SWRCB” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

        “Treatment control BMP” means any engineered system designed and constructed to remove pollutants from urban runoff. Pollutant removal is achieved by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process.

        “Total maximum daily loads” or “TMDLs” is defined as the maximum amount of a pollutant that can be discharged into a water body from all sources (point and non-point) and still maintain water quality standards. Under Clean Water Act section 303(d), TMDLs must be developed for all water bodies that do not meet water quality standards after application of technology-based controls.

        “Water main” means a potable or recycled water delivery line greater than or equal to four inches in diameter.

        “Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream, creek, or other body of water, either natural or improved, which gathers or carries surface water.

        “Water quality standards” are defined as the beneficial uses (e.g., swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) of water and the water quality objectives adopted by the State or the United States Environmental Protection Agency to protect those uses.

        “Waters of the state” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of the state as defined in section 10350(e) of the Act. The definition of the “waters of the state” is broader than that for the “waters of the United States” in that all water in the state is considered to be “waters of the state” regardless of circumstances or condition.

        “Waters of the United States” means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. In general, this includes “navigable” waters, waters tributary to “navigable” waters, and adjacent wetlands.

        “Watershed” means a geographical area that drains to a specified point on a water course, usually a confluence of streams or rivers (known as a drainage area, catchment, or river basin). (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.040 General provisions.
A.    Responsibility for Administration. This chapter shall be administered for the city of El Cajon by its authorized enforcement officials.

B.     Construction and Application. Interpretation of this chapter shall assure consistency with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall implement the requirements of the MS4 Permit. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. Storm water and non-storm water discharges regulated under a valid facility-specific NPDES permit or facility-specific RWQCB Waste Discharge Requirements Permit are not subject to this chapter, but shall instead be regulated exclusively by the RWQCB.

C.     Severability and Validity. If any section of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid.

D.    JRMP Document. The city has established and adopted a written description of the runoff management measures and programs, including minimum BMPs that the city will implement, or require to be implemented, to ensure compliance with this chapter. Amendments to the JRMP document shall be approved by the authorized enforcement official. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.050 Discharge prohibitions.
A.    Discharges from the storm water conveyance system in a manner causing, or threatening to cause, a condition of pollution, contamination, or nuisance (as defined in the section 13050 of the Act) in receiving waters of the state are prohibited.

B.     Any discharge to a storm water conveyance system that is not composed entirely of storm water is prohibited unless authorized by the RWQCB.

C.     Illegal Discharges. The discharge of pollutants to non-storm water, directly or indirectly into the storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, is prohibited, except as exempted in section 13.10.060 of this chapter. The discharge of pollutants to storm water, directly or indirectly into the storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, is prohibited, unless the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met.

D.    Illegal Connection. The establishment of illegal connections is prohibited. The use of illegal connections is prohibited, even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid city permit and was legal at the time it was constructed.

E.     Prevention of Illegal Discharges. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illegal discharge is prohibited.

F.     Waste Discharges. The discharge of waste or materials from the following categories is prohibited:

1.     The discharge of industrial wastes to conventional septic tank or subsurface disposal systems, except as authorized by the terms described in section 13264 of the Act, is prohibited.

2.     The discharge of waste to land, except as authorized by waste discharge requirements or the terms described in section 13264 of the Act is prohibited.

3.     The discharge of waste to inland surface waters, except in cases where the quality of the discharge complies with applicable receiving water quality objectives, is prohibited.

4.     The discharge of waste in a manner causing flow, ponding, or surfacing on lands not owned or under the control of the discharger is prohibited, unless the discharge is authorized by the RWQCB.

5.     The discharge of radioactive, chemical or biological warfare agent into waters of the state is prohibited.

6.     The dumping, deposition, or discharge of waste directly into waters of the state, or adjacent to such waters in any manner which may allow the waste to be transported into the waters, is prohibited unless authorized by the RWQCB.

7.     The unauthorized discharge of treated or untreated sewage to receiving waters of the state or to a storm water conveyance is prohibited.

8.     The discharge of sand, silt, clay, or other earthen materials from any activity, including land grading and construction, in quantities which cause deleterious bottom deposits, turbidity or discoloration in waters of the state or which unreasonably affect, or threaten to affect, beneficial uses of such waters is prohibited.

G.    Violations of the MS4 Permit. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or threaten to cause, either individually or jointly any discharge into or from the storm water conveyance system that results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 Permit. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.060 Exemptions to discharge prohibitions.
A.    Permitted Discharges. Any discharge to the storm water conveyance system that is regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state pursuant to the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act is allowed, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations.

B.     Groundwater Discharges Typically Requiring Permits. Non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system from the following categories are allowed if: (i) the discharger obtains coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2008-0002, or subsequent order) for discharges to surface waters other than San Diego Bay, and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; or (ii) the RWQCB determines in writing that coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (or subsequent permit) is not required. Otherwise, non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illicit discharges:

1.     Discharges from uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

2.     Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year;

3.     Discharges from water from crawl space pumps;

4.     Discharges from water from footing drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year.

C.     Discharges from Water Lines. Non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system from water line flushing and water main breaks are allowed if the discharges have coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2010-0003, or subsequent order), and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of that NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. This category includes water line flushing and water main break discharges from water purveyors issued a water supply permit by the California Department of Public Health or federal military installations. Discharges from recycled or reclaimed water lines to the storm water conveyance system are allowed if the discharges have coverage under an NPDES permit, and the discharger is in compliance with the applicable NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. Otherwise, discharges from water lines are illicit discharges.

D.    Allowable Discharges. Non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system from the following categories are allowed, unless the authorized enforcement official or the RWQCB identifies the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters, in which case the discharge is considered an illicit discharge:

1.     Discharges from diverted stream flows;

2.     Discharges from rising groundwater;

3.     Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the storm water conveyance system;

4.     Discharges from springs;

5.     Discharges from flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

6.     Discharges from potable water sources, except as set forth in section 13.10.060 of this chapter; and except that irrigation runoff discharges are considered illegal discharges and are not allowed;

7.     Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharges under unusual circumstances; and

8.     Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharges under unusual circumstances.

E.     Conditionally Allowed Discharges. Non-storm water discharges from the following categories are allowed if they are addressed as described below; otherwise, non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illicit discharges:

1.     Air conditioning condensation. Air conditioning condensation discharges shall comply with applicable BMPs such as directing to landscaped areas, pervious surfaces, and sanitary sewer (where feasible) or other equivalent BMPs as identified in the city’s JRMP document.

2.     Individual residential vehicle washing. Wash water from individual residential vehicle washing should be directed to landscaped areas, or other pervious surfaces, or the sanitary sewer, where feasible. Individuals must minimize water usage, washing detergents, and other related vehicle washing products used for residential vehicle washing and implement BMPs from the JRMP document to help prevent the discharge of pollutants associated with individual residential vehicle washing from entering the storm water conveyance system. Non-commercial car washes, such as fundraisers and other similar activities, are not considered to be individual residential vehicle washing. Discharges from such activities are therefore considered illegal discharges.

3.     Swimming pool discharges.

a.     Chlorinated swimming pool water. Residual chlorine, algaecide, filter backwash, and other pollutants shall be eliminated prior to discharging swimming pool water to the storm water conveyance system.

b.     Saline swimming pool water. Saline swimming pool water must be directed to the sanitary sewer, landscaped areas, or other pervious surfaces that can accommodate the volume of water.

F.     Firefighting Activities. Non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system from firefighting activities are allowed if they are addressed as follows:

1.     Non-emergency firefighting discharges. Non-emergency firefighting discharges, including building fire suppression system maintenance discharges (e.g. sprinkler line flushing), controlled or practice blazes, training, and maintenance activities shall be addressed by BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the storm water conveyance system.

2.     Emergency firefighting discharges. BMPs are encouraged to prevent pollutants from entering the storm water conveyance system. During emergencies, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property, and the environment (in descending order). BMPs shall not interfere with emergency response operations or impact public health and safety.

G.    Exemptions not Absolute. Notwithstanding the categories of non-storm water discharges conditionally allowed by A through F of this section, if the RWQCB or the authorized enforcement official determines that any of these categories of otherwise conditionally allowed non-storm water discharges are a source of pollutants to receiving waters, are a danger to public health or safety, or are causing a public nuisance, such discharges shall be prohibited from entering the storm water conveyance system. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.070 Best management practice requirements for all dischargers.
A.    Best Management Practices. Any person engaged in activities which may result in discharges to the storm water conveyance system shall, to the MEP, undertake all measures to reduce the risk of non-storm water discharges and pollutant discharges. The following requirements shall apply:

1.     Every person or entity undertaking any activity or use of a premises that may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illegal discharges, or non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system shall comply with BMP guidelines or pollution control requirements, as may be established by the authorized enforcement official. Such BMPs include the minimum BMPs set forth in the JRMP document.

2.     An authorized enforcement official may require any business or operation that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to the storm water conveyance system to develop and implement a BMP plan, which must include the applicable minimum BMPs from the city’s JRMP document.

3.     Each discharger that is subject to any NPDES permit shall comply with all requirements of all such permits. The discharger must also make reports submitted to the RWQCB or other permitting agency, including monitoring data, available to the city upon request.

4.     Parties undertaking land disturbance activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of section 13.10.080.

5.     Parties undertaking land development and redevelopment activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of section 13.10.090.

B.     Guidance Documents. Any authorized enforcement staff under the supervision of the city engineer may prepare, disseminate and maintain guidance documents addressing the use of BMPs for specific activities or facilities, illegal connections, and illegal discharges. These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that, in specified circumstances, can provide the same environmental protection that is afforded by the BMPs required by this chapter or specified in the JRMP document.

C.     Significant Sources of Pollutants. Where authorized enforcement staff identify a discharge that is in violation, or is likely to result in a violation, of sections 13.10.050 or 13.10.060 of this code. Authorized enforcement staff may order the discharger to install, implement and maintain additional BMPs. Any such order shall specify a reasonable date by which those BMPs must be put in place. A failure to install, implement, or maintain additional BMPs as required by any such order is a violation of this chapter.

D.    Collection and Use of Storm Water. Authorized enforcement staff may modify any requirement imposed by this chapter to allow the on-site collection and use of stormwater, or the collection of storm water for delivery to and use at city-designated sites, provided the modified requirements are enforceable and provide equivalent environmental protection. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.080 Additional requirements for land disturbance activity.
A.    Permit Issuance. No discharger or development project proponent shall receive any city grading, clearing, building or other land development permit or equivalent approval without first meeting the requirements of this chapter and the minimum BMPs listed in the city’s JRMP document.

B.     Owners and Operators Both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing a land disturbance activity (including but not limited to construction activities) in the city, and the owners of land on which a land disturbance activity is performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

C.     Plan Submittal Requirements. Any authorized enforcement staff under supervision of the city engineer may prepare plan submittal requirements for permit applications, consistent with this chapter and the city’s JRMP document. All applications to the city for a permit or approval associated with a land disturbance activity must demonstrate how the proposed activity will comply with all applicable BMP requirements in a format specified by the city. The submitted materials shall specify the manner in which the discharger or applicant will implement the BMPs required by this chapter and the city’s JRMP document for the activity at issue.

D.    Agricultural Grading and Clearing. The requirements imposed by this section for land disturbance activities apply to agricultural grading and clearing, whether or not a city-issued grading and clearing permit is required for that activity. Tilling or cultivating land exclusively for the purpose of growing plants or animals is not considered to be grading or clearing, provided all disturbed material remains on the same site, the tilling or cultivating will not block or divert any natural drainage way, and the land to be tilled or cultivated has been in agricultural production for at least one of the preceding five years. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.090 Additional requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects.
A.    Application to Development and Redevelopment Projects. No land owner or development project proponent in the city shall receive any city grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for land development activity or redevelopment activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this chapter, chapter 16.60, and the city’s JRMP document.

B.     Post-Construction BMPs. BMP requirements imposed by this section and by the city’s JRMP document shall not apply to those physical aspects of the project that have been completed or substantially completed pursuant to and as required by a valid city permit or approval, at the time a complete application for a subsequent permit or approval is submitted.

C.     Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, development project proponents, and land owners for land on which land development activity is performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

D.    Post-Construction BMPs Required. Land development and redevelopment projects with the potential to add pollutants to storm water or to affect the flow rate or velocity of storm water runoff after construction is completed, shall be designed to include and shall implement post-construction BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the MEP, will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of receiving water quality standards in accordance with the requirements defined in chapter 16.60 and in the city’s JRMP document.

E.     Land Development Associated with Agricultural Operations. The requirements imposed by this section for land development activities apply to such activities when they are associated with agricultural operations.

F.     Post-Construction Storm Water Mitigation Plan. Where required by chapter 16.60, the JRMP document, or by the city engineer, all applicable project applications to the city for a permit or approval associated with a land development or redevelopment activity must be accompanied by a post-construction storm water mitigation plan on a form or in a format specified by the city. The plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the post-construction BMPs required by this chapter. The plan must address those aspects of the project that, at the time a complete application is submitted, are subject to further environmental review pursuant to section 15162 of the California Environmental Quality Act. Post-construction BMPs for other aspects of the project need not be addressed in this plan.

G.    Storm Water Mitigation Plan Review Fee and Deposit. Fees for storm water mitigation plan review and deposit thereof shall be adopted by resolution of the city council.

H.    Additional Minimum Post-Construction BMPs for Land Development Activity. Whether a permit or approval is required, and whether a storm water mitigation plan is required to be submitted, all dischargers engaged in land development or redevelopment activities in the city shall implement post-construction BMPs as required by the city’s JRMP document if applicable to the project.

I.      Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All dischargers engaged in land development and significant redevelopment activities shall install, implement and maintain post-construction BMPs as needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in storm water from land disturbance to the MEP. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.100 Maintenance of best management practices.
A.    Existing Development. Dischargers shall maintain the designed functionality of the storm water conveyance system and BMPs they rely upon to achieve and maintain compliance with this chapter.

B.     Development Projects. The proponents of any development project or redevelopment project that requires a city permit shall provide to the city, prior to issuance of permits for the project, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the city that will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the proposed project. The property owners shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless, and until, an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the city and becomes effective, and shall themselves maintain those BMPs if other persons or entities who are also obliged to maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to this chapter) fail to do so.

C.     Maintenance Obligations Assumed by Contract or Other Agreement. Primary responsibility to maintain a BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement. If that contract provides that it will be submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter as part of a development permit application, and if that contract is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contract or agreement will also be legally obligated to maintain that BMP pursuant to this chapter.

D.    Obligation to Maintain BMPs Not Avoided by Contracts or Other Agreements. For purposes of city enforcement, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this chapter.

E.     Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer who transfers ownership of land on which a BMP is located or will be located, or who otherwise transfers ownership of a BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer.

F.     Maintenance Plans for Land Development Activities. The proponents of any land development project or redevelopment project that requires installation of structural post-construction BMPs shall (prior to issuance of permits for the project) provide to the city for review and approval a plan for maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the project. The plan shall specify the persons or entities responsible for maintenance activity, the persons or entities responsible for funding, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the BMPs, worker training requirements, and any other activities necessary to ensure BMP maintenance. The plan shall provide for servicing of all structural post-construction structural BMPs at least annually and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three (3) years.

G.    Access for Maintenance. Structural post-construction BMPs shall provide for adequate access for long-term inspection and maintenance purposes by city’s authorized enforcement staff. Where deemed necessary by the city engineer, the proponents of any land development project or redevelopment project that requires a city permit, shall provide to the city for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit an executed, permanent, easement onto the land on which post-construction structural BMPs will be located (and across other lands as necessary for access), to allow inspection or maintenance (or both) of those BMPs.

H.    Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development activity or redevelopment activity that requires a city permit shall provide to the city, prior to issuance of permits for the project, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the city that will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless, and until, an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the city and becomes effective.

I.      Security for Maintenance for Land Development Projects. If it is determined by the authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of a bond or other security to assure the maintenance of a BMP, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.110 Inspection and sampling.
A.    Regulatory Inspections and Certification Programs. The authorized enforcement official may establish inspection or certification programs to evaluate and enforce compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Authorized enforcement officials and authorized enforcement staff may inspect facilities, activities and properties subject to this chapter at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to carry out the purposes of this chapter. If entry for a regulatory inspection is refused by the facility owner or operator, or by the occupant of a residence, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection.

B.     Inspections of Improvements Associated with Development Projects. In order to comply with this chapter, when any storm drain system or structural BMP is installed on private property as part of a project that requires a city permit, the property owner shall grant to the city permission to access and enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure compliance with this chapter. This includes the right to enter the property without prior notice for routine inspections, to enter as needed for additional inspections during construction, to enter for any needed follow-up inspections, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter.

C.     Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any illegal discharges or illegal connections exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with this chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly maintained, and whether the facility or activity complies with the other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.120 Enforcement authority.
        Authorized enforcement officials may enforce this chapter and abate public nuisances as follows:

A.    Administrative Authorities.

1.     Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to chapter 1.13 of this code. Administrative penalties may include the recovery of fines assessed against the city by the RWQCB. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in this code shall also be applicable to this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein.

2.     Cease and Desist Orders. Written or verbal orders may be issued to stop illegal discharges and/or remove illegal connections. If it is determined by an authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of bond or other security to assure the violation is corrected, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official.

3.     Notice and Order to Clean, Test, or Abate. Written or verbal orders may be issued to perform activities to comply with the city’s JRMP document, this chapter, or as directed by authorized enforcement staff where conditions warrant.

4.     Public Nuisance Abatement. Violations of this chapter are deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare; and constitute a public nuisance. If actions ordered under sections 13.10.120(A)(1), (2), and 3 are not performed, the authorized enforcement official may abate any public nuisance pursuant to chapter 1.16 of this code. City costs for pollution detection and abatement, if not paid in full by the discharger in addition to any other penalties, may be made a lien against the property in accordance with the abatement procedure.

5.     Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or other laws implemented through enforcement of this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the authorized enforcement official to proceed with the work.

6.     Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this chapter may be grounds for permit and/or other city license suspension or revocation in accordance with applicable sections of this code.

B.     Judicial Authorities.

1.     Civil Penalties and Remedies. The city attorney is hereby authorized to file criminal and civil actions to enforce this chapter and to seek civil penalties and/or other remedies as provided in this section and in section 13.10.140(D) of this chapter. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement procedures be pursued before such actions are filed.

2.     Injunctive Relief. The city may enforce compliance with this chapter by judicial action for injunctive relief.

3.     Arrest or Issue Citations. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators as provided in California Penal Code, or to issue a citation and notice to appear as prescribed by chapter 1.16 and by the Penal Code section 853.6. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement remedies be used before such actions are taken. The immunities prescribed in section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to authorized enforcement officials acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.130 Other acts and omissions that are violations.
        In addition to failing to comply with any of the other requirements of this chapter, the following acts and omissions are violations of this chapter, whether committed by a discharger or by another person or entity:

A.    Causing, Permitting, Aiding, or Abetting Non-compliance. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting non-compliance with any part of this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter.

B.     Concealment, Misrepresentation and False Statements. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the city concerning compliance with this chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this chapter in order to delay city enforcement action, is a violation of this chapter. Concealing a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.

C.     Failure to Promptly Correct Non-Compliance. Violations of this chapter must be corrected with the time period specified by an authorized enforcement official. Each day (or part thereof) in excess of that period during which action necessary to correct a violation is not initiated and diligently pursued is a separate violation of this chapter. Notwithstanding the granting of any period of time to the discharger to correct the damage, the discharger shall remain liable for some or all of any fines or penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter, or by the RWQCB.

D.    City Permits and SWPPPs. Any failure to conform to an applicable SWPPP prepared pursuant to this chapter; any failure to comply with storm water-related provisions of a city-issued grading permit or grading plan prepared to secure such a permit; and any failure to comply with storm water-related provisions in any other city permit or approval, is also a violation of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter a permit provision or condition of approval is “storm water-related” if compliance with the provision or condition would have the effect of preventing or reducing contamination of storm water or of moderating runoff flows rates or velocities, whether the provision or condition was initially imposed to promote those outcomes. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.140 Lot grading; responsibility of permittee; protection of adjacent property.
A.    For all public watercourses, the applicant shall grant or cause to be granted to the city, at the city engineer’s discretion, a drainage easement (riparian buffers and corridors) in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer prior to the issuance of a grading permit, or prior to the approval of a grading plan.

B.     For all private watercourses, including brow ditches, where the continuous functioning of the drainage way is essential to the protection and use of multiple properties, a covenant, a maintenance agreement and/or deed restriction, or any combination thereof, shall be recorded by the applicant, placing the responsibility for the maintenance of the drainage way(s) on the owners of record of each respective lot affected. Permanent off-site drainage or flowage easements, as required by the city engineer, shall be acquired by the applicant. Such easements shall be subject to approval by the city engineer and recorded prior to approval of the grading plan, or issuance of a grading permit.

C.     No man-made dams, ponds, diversions, flow decelerators or excessive vegetation shall be placed, allowed to be placed, or allowed to grow within the property subject to an approved grading plan, or a grading permit, without suitable provisions, as approved by the city engineer, for maintenance. Erosion or siltation as a result of these features shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.

D.    The permittee has the right to the proper discharge of natural drainage, within the provisions of this chapter, into natural drainage courses. The quantity of peak runoff shall be limited to the quantity of peak runoff of predevelopment conditions. This includes the right to discharge, within natural basins, runoff due to decrease of permeability of the property from grading operations, landscaping, and the construction of improvements and to discharge a reasonable silt load in this runoff comparable to the historic, predevelopment condition. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.150 Lot grading; safety precautions.
A.    If, at any stage of work for which an approved grading plan, or a grading permit, is required, the city engineer determines that authorized grading is likely to endanger any public or private property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the city engineer may specify and require reasonable safety precautions to avoid the danger. The permittee may be responsible for removing excess soil and debris deposited upon adjacent and downstream public or private property resulting from his or her grading operations. Soil and debris shall be removed and damage to adjacent and downstream property repaired as directed by the city engineer. Erosion and sediment control shall require temporary or permanent siltation basins, energy dissipaters, or other measures as field conditions warrant, whether or not such measures are a part of approved plans. Costs associated with any work outlined in this section shall be incurred by the permittee.

B.     No off-site work will be required when, in the opinion of the city engineer, the permittee has properly implemented and maintained erosion control measures and the deposition of soil and debris or erosion on adjacent properties is the direct or indirect result of actions of the downstream property owner. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.160 Erosion and sediment control plan requirements.
A.    As applicable, all applications for permits related to construction activities, regardless of the date of submittal and including but not limited to projects that require an approved grading plan or permit, shall include an erosion and sediment control plan designed to limit erosion of all disturbed portions of the property and to eliminate the transport of soil onto adjacent properties or into streets, storm drains, or drainage ways.

B.     Plans for an erosion and sediment control system shall be prepared and submitted for the review and approval of the city engineer as a part of any application for a construction permit. The erosion and sediment control plan shall comply with the requirements of the latest state general construction storm water permit (if applicable) and this chapter to satisfy the requirements for controlling erosion and eliminating the discharge of sediment and pollutants. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

1.     Name, address, and a 24-hour phone number of the owner or responsible party, and the person or contractor responsible for construction activities, installing and maintaining the site’s BMPs, and performing emergency BMP deployment work.

2.     The name, address and signature of the civil engineer or person who prepared the plan.

3.     Show the location of all proposed erosion and sediment control BMPs, non-stormwater control BMPs, and waste management control BMPs. Show the location and placement of BMPs such as gravel bags, diverters, check dams, slope planting, drains, and other BMPs required by the city’s JRMP document.

4.     All desilting basins; debris basins; silt traps; and other desilting, velocity retarding facilities necessary to adequately protect the site and downstream properties from erosion and its effects, preserve natural hydrologic features, and preserve riparian buffers and corridors.

5.     The streets, easements, drains, and other improvements.

C.     Erosion and sediment control system standards shall be as follows:

1.     BMPs in the erosion and sediment control plan shall be implemented as required by the city’s JRMP document.

2.     All removable protective devices shown on the plan shall be in place at the beginning of construction activities and at the end of each working day when there is a 50% chance (or greater) of rain within a 48-hour period. If the developer does not provide the required installation or maintenance of erosion and sediment control plan BMPs within 2-hours of notification at the 24-hour phone number on the plans, the city engineer may order city crews to do the work or may issue contracts for such work and charge the cost of this work along with reasonable overhead charges to the cash deposits or other instruments implemented for this work without further notification to the owner. No additional work on the project except sediment and erosion control work activities may be performed until the full amount drawn from the deposit is restored by the developer.

3.     No earth or organic material shall be deposited or placed where it may be directly carried into a stream or body of standing water.

4.     At any time of year, all inactive areas of a site shall be fully protected from erosion. An area of a site is considered inactive if construction activities have ceased for a period of 14 days or more consecutive days.

D.    Dust Control. All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated, transported or stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected or contained in such a manner as to reduce or minimize nuisance from dust or spillage upon adjoining property or streets. Equipment and materials on the site shall be used in such a manner as to avoid excessive dust.

E.     Maintenance of BMPs. All erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be functional at all times. Prior to the rainy season and after each major storm, all BMPs shall be inspected to assure the functionality. BMP maintenance shall be conducted throughout the life of the project.

F.     No grading work shall be allowed during the rainy season on any site when the city engineer determines that erosion, mudflow or sediment of silt discharge may adversely affect downstream properties, drainage courses, storm drains, streets, easements, or public or private facilities or improvements unless an approved erosion control system has been implemented on the site. If the city determines that it is necessary for the city to cause erosion control measures to be installed or cleanup to be done, the developer shall pay all of the city’s direct and indirect costs including extra inspection, supervision, and reasonable overhead charges. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.170 Irrigation system requirements.
A.    Except for agricultural grading plans, all slopes to be constructed, but only final slopes of any borrow pit, shall be provided with an irrigation system which shall be used by the permittee to promote the growth of plants to protect the slopes against erosion. The permittee shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of the irrigation system until the city engineer determines that the system has been properly installed and meets the minimum requirements of this section. When the city engineer finds that a slope less than 15 feet in height is located in an area as to make hand watering possible, conveniently located hose bibs may be accepted in lieu of the required irrigation system when a hose no longer than 50 feet would be required.

B.     Plans for the irrigation system shall be approved by the city engineer prior to installation. The irrigation system shall be located relative to existing and proposed property lines to insure that the irrigation system and the slopes sprinkled thereby will both be within the same property boundaries. The irrigation system shall be supplied or be readily converted so as to be supplied through the metered water service line serving each individual property. The irrigation system shall provide uniform coverage for the slope area at a rate of not less than 0.03 inches per hour, nor greater than 0.30 inches per hour. A functional test of the irrigation systems shall be performed to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to final approval of the grading. A check valve and balance cock shall be installed in the system where drainage from sprinkler heads will create an erosion problem. Adequate back flow protection devices shall be installed in each irrigation system. Such devices shall be protected against physical damage during construction operations. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

 

13.10.180 Waiver of planting and irrigation requirements.
A.    The city engineer may modify or waive the requirements for planting or irrigation systems if he or she finds that said requirements would be unreasonable or unnecessary for any of the following reasons: (a) the area is subject to periodic inundation, (b) water is unavailable to the area such that irrigation would be impractical or impossible, or (c) the area is naturally devoid of vegetation. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

 

13.10.190 Penalties.
A.    Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to this code. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in this code shall also be applicable to violations of this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein.

B.     Misdemeanor Penalties. Non-compliance with any part of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor and may be enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the State of California, and this code.

C.     Penalties for Infractions. Any violation of this chapter may be charged as an infraction at the discretion of the prosecutor. Infractions may be abated as a nuisance or enforced and punished as prescribed in this code, or the Penal Code, or the Government Code of the State of California.

D.    For Civil Actions. In addition to other penalties and remedies permitted in this chapter, a violation of this chapter may result in the filing of a civil action by the city. Except where a maximum monetary amount is specified, the following may also be awarded without monetary limitations in any civil action:

1.     Injunctive relief;

2.     Costs to investigate, inspect, monitor, survey, or litigate;

3.     Costs to place or remove soils or erosion and sediment control BMPs, costs to correct any violation, and costs to restore environmental damage or to end any other adverse effects of a violation;

4.     Compensatory damages for losses to the city or any other plaintiff caused by violations; and/or restitution to third parties for losses caused by violations;

5.     Civil Penalties;

6.     Reasonable attorney fees; and

7.     Fines assessed against the city by the RWQCB, SWRCB, or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

As part of a civil action filed by the city to enforce provisions of this chapter, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty in accordance with the general penalty clause as set forth in the El Cajon city charter, in section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city, but in any case to be assessed per violation of this chapter for each day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, permitted or maintained by such person(s).

In determining the amount of any civil liability to be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation or violations, whether any discharge caused the violation is susceptible to cleanup or abatement, and, with respect to the violator, the ability to pay, the effect on ability to continue in business, any voluntary cleanup efforts undertaken, any prior history of violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any resulting from the violation, and such other matters as justice may require.

E.     Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this section may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies. (Ord. 5026 § 3, 2015.)

Chapter 13.12 WELL CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
13.12.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to provide for the construction, repair and reconstruction of wells so that the groundwater of the city will not be polluted or contaminated, and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city, and for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances so that such wells will not cause pollution or contamination of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city. (Ord. 2868 § 3, 1975.)

 

13.12.020 San Diego County Ordinance No. 4286 (New Series) adopted by reference.
        There is adopted by reference San Diego County Ordinance No. 4286 (New Series), three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, relating to the construction, repair, reconstruction or destruction of wells, and incorporating by reference Water Well Standards: State of California (Chapter II of Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74), and Cathodic Standards: State of California (Chapter II of Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1). The provisions of said ordinance shall be made a part hereof as though fully set out in this chapter, with the exception of such portions as are hereinafter deleted or amended. (Ord. 2868 § 4, 1975: prior code § 29B-1.)

 

13.12.030 Modifications to San Diego Ordinance No. 4286 (New Series).
        Section 67.404 is deleted. Sections 67.431, 67.432, 67.441 H., and 67.446.3 are amended by substituting the words “city council” in these sections wherever the words “Board of Supervisors” appear. Paragraph B. of Section 67.441 is amended to read: “Each application shall be accompanied by a fee set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.” (Ord. 3714 § 12, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 13, 1982; Ord. 2868 § 4, 1975: prior code § 29B-2.)

 

13.12.040 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3647 § 11, 1983; Ord. 2868 § 4, 1975.)

Chapter 13.16 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—IN GENERAL
13.16.010 Compliance.
        No person shall cause, suffer or permit the disposal of sewage, human excrement or other liquid wastes in any place or manner except through or by means of an approved plumbing and drainage system and an approved sewage disposal system installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the California Plumbing Code and Chapters 13.16 through 13.40.

        No person shall allow sewage to escape or flow from a building, building drain, building sewer, soil line, or sewer lateral. An escape of sewage from a building, building drain, building sewer, soil line, or sewer lateral shall be considered a threat to the public health and welfare and shall be deemed a nuisance.

        It shall be the responsibility of all residents, business owners, employees of local businesses, and citizens of El Cajon to notify the city of any discharge of unsanitary waste from a building sewer, lateral, cleanout plug or sewer main by stoppage or other means and take all measures to prevent further discharge, contain, or clean up such a discharge until a professional plumbing company or local authority has responded to the incident. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.011 Delegations of power.
        Whenever a power is granted to or imposed upon the director of public works under this title, such power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy or an authorized person unless expressly provided otherwise. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.012 Restrictions on allowance of variances from title.
        Whenever the director of public works is permitted by this title to grant an exception to any of the requirements of this title, such exceptions shall be granted by him only if he finds that literal compliance is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions, in no way the fault of the person requesting such exceptions, and that the purpose of this title may be accomplished and public health and safety secured by alternative construction or procedure, in which case the director of public works may permit such alternative construction or procedure. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.013 Conformation of facilities to title—New facilities.
        All new public sewers, house connection sewers, and industrial liquid wastes pre-treatment plants shall conform to the requirements of this title unless specifically excepted. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.014 Conformance—Remodeling.
        All remodeling of existing public sewers, building sewers, and industrial liquid wastes pretreatment plants shall conform to the requirements of this title, unless specifically excepted. All new buildings or building remodels that include an increase of plumbing fixture units are subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.015 Records.
        The director of public works shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued and all plans requiring approval under the provisions of this title. The director of public works shall establish and maintain accurate records indicating all sewers constructed with public funds and accurate records of all main line sewers constructed hereafter with private funds, and the person or properties originally benefiting from and responsible for the financing of such sewers. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.016 Who may do work under title—Work to be subject to inspection and approval.
        All work permitted under the provisions of this title shall be constructed by a licensed contractor and shall be subject to inspection by and shall meet the approval of the director of public works. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.017 Notice to remedy house connection sewer deficiency.
        In the event that a building sewer or lower lateral fails to pass inspection and is subsequently placed in service, the permittee shall be given notice in writing of such failure to pass inspection and shall within ten days from the date of such notice make the construction conform to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.020 Certain sanitary facilities required for all buildings.
        Every building shall have sinks, water closets, and other sanitary fixtures and facilities. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

 

13.16.030 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4930 § 2, 2009.)

Chapter 13.20 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY
13.20.010 Definitions.
        For purposes of Chapters 13.20 through 13.28, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “B.O.D.” This term, denoting biochemical oxygen demand, means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in parts per million by weight.

B.     “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning two feet outside the inner face of the building wall.

C.     “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain, beginning two feet from the outside of the building, to the public sewer or other place of disposal including the lower lateral.

D.    “Cleanout” means a sewer line fitting placed on a sewer to facilitate inspection, cleaning or maintenance of the sewer.

 

E.     “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.

F.     “Double cleanout” means the horizontal piping or pipe fittings that facilitate(s) the proper cleaning, inspection and physical access to the building sewer or lower lateral in either direction, upstream or downstream from the same entry point.

G.    “Garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage of food waste or the sale of produce.

H.    “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage.

I.      “Licensed contractor” means a contractor having a valid license issued pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code which license includes the activities listed on the permit applied for.

J.      “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land bounded and defined or shown upon a plot or deed recorded in the office of the county recorder, as a separate or individual parcel, except that in any event any building or structure covers more than a lot, the word “lot” shall include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which such building or structure is wholly or partly located.

K.    “Lower sewer lateral” means horizontal pipe and fittings forming a connection to the sewer main line for the purposes of connecting a building sewer. The lower lateral extends from the public sewer main to the edge of the public right-of-way and terminates at a double cleanout.

L.     “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.

M.    “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

N.    “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation and/or cooking of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

O.    “Public sewer” means any main line sewer constructed in any street, highway, alley, place, or right-of-way dedicated for public use. Such term shall not include building drain, building sewer, or lower lateral.

P.     “Director of public works” means any official agent, branch or function of the city responsible for the design, construction, maintenance and operation of sanitary sewers in the city. It shall include all officers, agents and employees engaged in sewer services.

Q.    “Sanitary sewer” means a pipeline that carries wastewater and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

R.     “Sewage” means a combination of wastewater, carried waters from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present.

S.     “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for wastewater treatment.

T.     “Sewer” or “sewer line” means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.

U.    “Sewerage works” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.

V.    “Storm sewer or storm drain” means a pipeline that carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.

W.    “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

X.    “Upper sewer lateral,” also known as the “building sewer,” means horizontal pipe and fittings forming a connection to the sewer main line for the purposes of connecting a building drain. The upper sewer lateral extends from the

        edge of public right-of-way and located by a double cleanout plug to the building drain.

Y.    “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

Z.     “Building sewer inspection” means an inspection of a building sewer lateral that consists of the retention of a pre-qualified contractor by the owner in order to visually examine and inspect a building sewer lateral in the manner deemed appropriate by the director of public works. Such an inspection shall, at a minimum, include the use of a closed-circuit television inspection device for the purposes of determining whether the building sewer lateral complies with the requirements of this chapter.

AA.  “Commercial property” means any real property not used for residential purposes and not a common interest development.

BB.  “Common interest development” means a development characterized by apartments, individual ownership of a condominium housing unit, or a residential parcel coupled with the shared ownership of (or right to use) common areas and facilities, including, but not limited to, condominium projects, community apartment projects, stock cooperatives and planned unit developments, which contains two or more dwelling units and which has a building sewer lateral shared by two more dwelling units.

CC.  “Notice to repair” means the notice and order issued by the director of public works to the owner advising that the owner appears to be in violation of the city of El Cajon Municipal Code with respect to the owner’s building sewer lateral, or in violation of the code in the manner of the building sewer lateral’s connection to the city sewer system, which notice and order directs the abatement of the identified apparent violation in a timely manner or, in the alternative, proof that the conditions identified in the notice and order do not exist.

DD.  “Owner” means any person, partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary having legal title (or any partial interest) in any real property situated within the city.

(Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.020 Deposit of matter that will clog or obstruct flow of sewage.
        No person shall place, throw or deposit or cause or permit to be placed, thrown or deposited in any public sewer, drain, catch basin, water closet, privy vault or cesspool, any dead animal, offal or garbage, fish, fruit or vegetable waste, pharmaceuticals, sand, liquid waste of any kind containing chemicals, greases, oil, tar or gasoline or any other objectionable materials or matter which will clog, obstruct, fill or prevent the effective use of or necessitate the frequent repair, clean out or flushing of such sewer, drain or catch basin. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.030 Review and approval by director of public works prior to discharge of certain wastes into public sewers—Preliminary treatment facilities.
        The admission into the public sewers of any waters or waste having a five-day B.O.D. greater than five hundred  parts per million by weight, or containing more than five hundred parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 13.20.050, or having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of public works. Where necessary, in the opinion of the director of public works, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the B.O.D. to five hundred parts per million and the suspended solids to five hundred parts per million by weight, or reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 13.20.050, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the director of public works, and no construction until such approval is obtained in writing.

        Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.040 Discharge of storm water or surface water.
        No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer.

        Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the director of public works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the director of public works, to a storm sewer, sanitary sewer or natural outlet. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.050 Discharge of certain wastes into public sewer prohibited.
        Except as otherwise provided in Chapters 13.20 through 13.28, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:

A.    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit;

B.     Any water or waste, which may contain more than one hundred parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease;

C.     Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;

D.    Any garbage of any kind that has not been property shredded;

E.     Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;

F.     Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;

G.    Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;

H.    Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; and

I.      Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.

(Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.060 Cleanout.
        Where a building sewer is constructed, modified, remodeled or replaced, and is connected or reconnected to the lower sewer lateral or double cleanout shall be installed at the outside edge of the public right-of-way to facilitate the proper cleaning and inspection of the pipeline in either direction, upstream or downstream.

        The above requirements also apply to all building sewers subject to a notice to repair. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.070 Repealed.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4930: prior code § 24-9.)

 

13.20.080 Repealed.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4930: prior code § 24-10.)

 

 

13.20.090 Sewers carrying industrial wastes—Construction and maintenance of manholes.
        When required by the director of public works, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director of public works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.100 Analyses of wastes.
        All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in Sections 13.20.030 and 13.20.050 shall be determined in accordance with “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage,” and shall be sampled at the control manhole provided for in Section 13.20.090, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.110 Repealed.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4832; Ord. 3633 § 2, 1982: prior code § 24.13.)

 

13.20.115 Repealed.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4832; Ord. 3633 § 3, 1982.)

 

13.20.120 Repealed.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4832: Prior code § 24-14.)

 

13.20.130 Service to areas outside city—Unauthorized use.
        The use of the sewage disposal system of the city by persons without the authorization of the city council for the disposition of sewage from any area not within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.140 Applicability of chapter to agreements for treatment of industrial wastes.
        No statement contained in Chapters 13.20 through 13.28 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be affected by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

 

13.20.150 Public sewer fees.
        Public sewer fees shall be established from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 4930 § 4, 2009.)

Chapter 13.24 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PUBLIC SEWER LATERALS
13.24.010 Soil line connection.
        Where the plumbing soil line or building sewer joins a lower sewer lateral, stub or wye, such joint shall be made with a mechanical joint or clamp with a double cleanout according to current industry standards, or any other method approved by the director of public works. Minimum ground cover at such joint or at the property line shall be forty-two inches unless otherwise specified by the engineering department of the city. The city’s wastewater department shall not be obliged to connect to a soil line that is installed at less than the required minimum depth. (Ord. 4930 § 6, 2009.)

 

13.24.020 Mains and laterals as part of same construction—Installation requirements.
        Where laterals are being installed by a general contractor as an integral part of the construction of a complete system of sewer mains, laterals and services under supervision of an inspection by the director of public works or his agents, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 4930 § 6, 2009.)

 

13.24.030 Connections to existing city sewer main.
        Wherever an existing sewer main is to serve several lots in a private contract for improvements in a subdivision, the specific job of boring into the main and affixing a hub shall be performed by the city’s wastewater department. The contractor shall pay the city a cash fee according to the current schedule of fees established by resolution by the city council for each entry into the main in advance of performance of the work. The contractor shall excavate to the sewer main at the site of the proposed lateral, exposing the sewer main pipe for the prescribed work by the city sanitation department. When the work by the city sanitation department is complete, the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to the main as a result of excavation, and shall have the same responsibility for any lateral installed as prescribed above as he has for any lateral built entirely for himself. (Ord. 4930 § 6, 2009.)

Chapter 13.28 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTIONS
13.28.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms in a building occupied or designed for occupation by one family for living or sleeping purposes.

B.     “Auto court” means any area, place or tract of land where two or more single-family dwellings, or a building containing two or more apartments designated, used or intended wholly or in part for the accommodation of automobile transients are located and offered for hire, rent or lease. The term shall also include any motel.

C.     “Building or house” means a tent, penthouse, restroom or single- or multiple-family dwelling. These terms include all architectural structures.

D.    “Bungalow court” means a group of four or more separate buildings, nor more than one story in height, each being erected or located on a parcel of ground under a separate roof, as a family domicile or residence and facing a common court.

E.     “Family” means a person living alone or a group of two or more persons occupying an apartment.

F.     “Motel” means a building of not more than one story, containing six or more guest rooms or apartments or combination thereof, each of which has a separate individual entrance leading directly from the outside of the building and is designed, used or intended wholly or in part for the accommodation of automobile transients.

G.    “Multiple dwelling” means a building used or designated to be used as a dwelling for three or more families living independently of each other.

H.    “Trailer court or auto and trailer camp” means an area or tract of land where space is rented or held out for rent to owners or users of trailer coaches or tent campers, furnishing their own camping equipment, or where free camping is permitted owners or users of trailer coaches or tent camp equipment for the purpose of securing their trade.

(Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.020 Unauthorized connections to public sewer prohibited.
        No person other than the city, its agents and employees, shall connect any pipe, drain or sewer with any public sewer, or open or penetrate any public sewer in the city, or injure, break or remove or open any portion of any manhole, flush tank, inspection pipe or any other part of or appurtenance to any public sewer. Except where otherwise specifically provided in Chapters 13.20 through 13.28, the city shall install all connections to any existing public sewers. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.030 Connection permits required.
        No person shall connect to the sewage disposal lines of the city or discharge sewage into the sewer lines of the city or sewage disposal plant of the city without first obtaining a connection permit from the city. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.031 Connection to public sewer—Required when sewer available.
        All plumbing that receives the waste discharge from any building, structure or place of business, shall be connected to a public sewer.

        All plumbing receiving water discharge that is connected to a private disposal system shall be connected to a public sewer within one year after a public sewer becomes available. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.032 When sewer not available.
        The connection to a public sewer required by Section 13.28.032 may be dispensed with when no public sewer is available and when, in the opinion of the health officer of the county, a private sewage disposal system would be adequate and safe and would not constitute a menace to public health. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.033 When connection to approved private sewage disposal system required.
        All plumbing receiving waste discharge, which is not connected to a public sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system approved by the director of public works and health officer of the county. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.034 Connections letting roof or surface water into sewers.
        No person shall make or maintain any connection by pipes or otherwise with any public sewer by which roof or surface water my run into any such sewer. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.035 Entering, disturbing or cleaning public sewers, structures or appurtenances.
        No person shall, without authorization from the director of public works, open, enter, disturb or clean any public sewer, structure or appurtenance thereto. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.036 Maintenance generally not to obstruct public sewer flow.
        No person shall do, or cause to be done, any maintenance that would damage or obstruct the flow of any public sewer. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.037 Maintenance of private systems.
        It shall be the responsibility of each property owner whose property is connected to the city sewer system to maintain continuously and satisfactorily in operation at his own expense, any house connection sewer, building sewer, private sewage disposal system, or industrial liquid waste pretreatment facility. Failure to maintain such a private sewer system shall be sufficient grounds for immediate revocation of private sewer operating permit or industrial liquid waste permit of the person so failing and disconnection of his premises from the public sewer. Such a private sewer system is subject to required repairs as set out in a notice to repair issued pursuant to Section 13.20.010(DD). Users of private sewer disposal systems shall keep all cleanout caps and other access ports in place and properly sealed. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.038 Septic tank or cesspool to be abandoned when main line connection obtained.
        When a house connection sewer is constructed connecting a main line sewer, a house sewer which previously drained to a septic tank or cesspool, the septic tank or cesspool shall be abandoned and no portion of the house sewer shall then pass through or connect to such septic tank or cesspool. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.039 Procedure to effect abandonment of septic tank or cesspool.
        When any septic tank or cesspool is abandoned, the top of such septic tank or cesspool shall be removed and the tank or cesspool shall be drained and filled with fine earth or sand and compacted and any pipes connecting to such tank or cesspool shall be cut directly outside of the tank or cesspool and shall be plugged with concrete. The abandonment of the septic tank or cesspool shall be complete before the house connection constructed shall be considered to have completely passed inspection. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.040 Connection fees.
        Before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewage disposal system of the city, a connection fee and an inspection fee shall be paid to the city. Such fees shall be set from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council. Inspection fees shall be paid pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of this code. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.080 Additional connection fee.
        In addition to all other fees required by this title, a fee of two hundred dollars per connection shall be paid to this city before a permit shall be granted to connect to any sewer main of this city where such sewer main was constructed by the city or state or a component of the federal government.

        In addition to all other fees required by this title, except the fees set forth in the above paragraph, an additional fee per connection shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to any sewer line of the city where such sewer main or line was constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city to serve property other than that for which permission to connect is sought. Such a fee shall be set forth in such agreement. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.090 Connections to mains constructed by Cajon Valley Union School District.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of two hundred dollars shall be paid the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewer main located in Second Street from Dawnridge to Pepper Drive, and in Pepper Drive from Second Street to Peerless Drive, such sewer main having been constructed by the Cajon Valley Union School District.

        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of two hundred dollars shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewer main located in Anza Street from a manhole which lies five hundred sixty feet south of the centerline of Washington Avenue to a manhole approximately four hundred fifty feet south of the westerly prolongation of the north line of the Anza Street school site as set forth on Record of Survey No. 5028, such sewer main having been constructed by the Cajon Valley Union School District. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.100 Connections to Bradley-Johnson sewer.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of five hundred dollars shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewer lines located as follows:

A.    The sewer line extending easterly from the sewer outfall line along the future Bradley Avenue and southerly along Johnson Avenue to Vernon Way;

B.     The sewer line extended to provide future service to unincorporated areas of the city as of October 1, 1967, on Steele Avenue and Vernon Way within the North Johnson Avenue 1913 Act Improvement District boundaries. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.110 Connections to Pioneer Way-Cypress Lane sewer main.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of eight hundred dollars shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewer lines located as follows:

        The sewer line in Pioneer Way extending northerly from the existing city boundary a distance of four hundred nine feet to Cypress Lane, and westerly in Cypress Lane to Johnson Avenue.

        Said sewer line was constructed in connection with the Pioneer Way 1913 Act Improvement District, and the above fee shall be charged for each lateral to serve parcels not assessed for sewer mains. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.120 Connections to Avocado South of Chase to DeWitt Court sewer main.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of six hundred dollars shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewer lines located as follows:

        The sewer line extending southerly along Avocado from nine hundred fifty feet south of the centerline of Chase Avenue to DeWitt Court.

        Said sewer line was constructed by the city in connection with the improvement of Avocado south of Chase to south of DeWitt Court. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.130 Connections to Fanita Drive sewer main.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of two hundred dollars for each dwelling unit or its equivalent shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the trunk line sewer in Fanita Drive to be constructed by the city, or to any other sewer line which in turn uses the capacity of the Fanita Drive trunk sewer. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.135 Connections to Bermuda Place sewer main.
        In addition to all other fees required by this division, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of one thousand nine hundred ninety three dollars and six cents shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect assessor’s Parcel No. 507-250-17 to the sewer main located in Bermuda Place. Said sewer line was constructed by the city in connection with the Bermuda Lane, et al. 1911 Act Improvement District (Assessment Section 75). (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.150 Connections to Melody Lane sewer main—Gull Place to Granite Hills Drive.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth is Section 13.28.080, a fee of nine dollars and twenty-two cents per front foot shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the sewer line located on the southerly side of Melody Lane from the easterly subdivision boundary of Rancho Milagros, easterly to Granite Hills Drive. Said sewer line was constructed by the developers of Rancho Milagros subdivision. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.155 Connections to Bradley Avenue sewer main—Johnson Avenue to Magnolia Avenue.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of thirty-six dollars per front foot shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect the sewer line located in Bradley Avenue from Johnson Avenue to Magnolia Avenue. Said sewer line was constructed in connection with the Bradley-Cypress 1911 Act Improvement District. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.160 Connections to Tilling Way sewer main.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, except the fee set forth in Section 13.28.080, a fee of three thousand seven hundred twenty-four dollars and fourteen cents shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect Assessor’s Parcel No. 492-580-17 to the sewer line located in Tilling Way; and a fee of one thousand nine hundred forty-two dollars and one cent shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect assessor’s Parcel No. 492-580-18 to the sewer line located in Tilling Way. Said sewer line was constructed by the city in connection with the Tilling Way 1911 Act Improvement District. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

 

13.28.165 Connection to Chase Avenue sewer main.
        In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, a fee of one thousand four hundred twenty dollars shall be paid to the city before a permit shall be granted to connect to the fifty-eight foot sewer lateral on the south side of Chase Avenue, one hundred seventy feet east of Mollison Avenue. The sewer lateral was constructed by the city in connection with street improvements as shown on drawing No. 11606 on file in the engineering division. (Ord. 4930 § 8, 2009.)

Chapter 13.32 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS GENERAL
13.32.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter and Chapter 13.36, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Approved” or “Approval.” The approval of the health officer, or approval means meeting the approval of the health officer as the result of investigation or tests conducted by the health officer or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations, or a research laboratory of recognized authority.

B.     “Building” includes all structures.

C.     “Drainage system” or “drainage piping” means all the piping within public or private premises which conveys sewage or other liquid wastes to a legal point of disposal, but such terms shall not include the mains or laterals of a public sewer system.

D.    “Plumbing” means all drainage systems, both direct and indirect, and all vent piping, water piping and other piping in any building or within the boundaries of any property through which sewage, water, waste water or any other substance or liquid is conveyed.

(Prior code § 24-34.)

 

13.32.020 New structures on property abutting public sewer to be connected to public sewer.
        The plumbing and drainage system of every building hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall be connected to a public sewer if the property on which such building is located abuts a public sewer. (Prior code § 24-35.)

 

13.32.030 Premises adjacent to public sewer—Subsurface sewage system prohibited.
        No person shall maintain a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system on any premises adjacent to a public sewer. (Prior code § 24-36.)

 

13.32.040 Sewage disposal where public sewer unavailable.
        When a public sewer is not available for use, the plumbing and drainage system of a building shall be connected to an approved private subsurface sewage disposal system. (Prior code § 24-37.)

 

13.32.050 Temporary facilities—Permits and agreements.
        Where the health officer determines it is probable that a public sanitary sewer will become available to property within twenty-four months, he may issue a permit to the owner of such property authorizing the construction of a temporary sewage disposal facility; provided, that the permittee executes and records in the office of the county recorder an agreement with the health officer, providing the following:

A.    That the permittee will connect the property to the sanitary sewer within thirty days after it becomes available to the property;

B.     That if the sanitary sewer does not become available to the property within a period of time specified by the health officer, the permittee will apply for a permit for and construct a septic tank and sewage disposal system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 13.36;

C.     That the permittee will pump and remove all sewage from the temporary sewage disposal facility and fill the facility with soil or other material in a manner approved by the health officer at the time the property is connected to the sanitary sewer or a septic tank and sewage disposal system specified in subsection B;

D.    That in the event the property is sold or transferred before the connection of the property to the sanitary sewer is made, the agreement with the health officer shall be made a part of the contract to sell or transfer the property;

E.     That the property will not be occupied until a sewage disposal facility has been installed and approved by the health officer;

F.     That the agreement with the health officer shall be binding upon the owner, his heirs, administrators, executors, successors and assigns. No person bound by the terms of such agreement shall violate any provision of such agreement.

(Prior code § 24-38.)

 

13.32.060 Private system—Determining type.
        The type of sewage disposal system required shall be determined on the basis of location, area, soil porosity, the ground water level and the density of population in the area. The system shall be designed to receive and dispose of all sewage and liquid waste from the property served. (Prior code § 24-39.)

 

13.32.070 Private system—Use after installation of public system.
        Where a public sewer is installed adjacent to premises upon which there is located an existing building served by a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system, the health officer may approve the continued use of such subsurface disposal system until such time as he deems that the public health and sanitation require the connection of such building to the public sewer and the discontinuance of the use or maintenance of such subsurface disposal system. (Prior code § 24-40.)

 

13.32.080 Private systems—Lot size.
        No septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal system or unit shall be installed or constructed on a lot or parcel containing an area of less than six thousand square feet. (Prior code § 24-41.)

 

13.32.090 Temporary occupancy—Sanitary toilets.
        For the temporary occupancy of buildings in isolated areas remote from any public highway, the health officer may authorize the construction and use of an approved type sanitary toilet in lieu of connection to a public sewer or to a subsurface disposal unit or system installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 13.36. (Prior code § 24-42.)

 

13.32.100 Violation of temporary occupancy permits deemed violation of chapter.
        The violation of any of the provisions or conditions of any temporary occupancy permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and Chapter 13.36. (Prior code § 24-43.)

 

13.32.110 Sewage collection tanks—Installation permitted—Where.
        Where percolation tests have shown that subsurface drainage is not practical, or where the leaching from subsurface disposal systems may drain into a water supply or cause a nuisance, the health officer, with the approval of the board of health of the county, may permit the installation of sewage collection tanks. (Prior code § 24-44.)

 

13.32.120 Sewage collection tanks—Applications for installation permits.
        Application for a permit to install a sewage collection tank shall be made in writing to the health officer, and shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the location and special design features of the proposed installation. The health officer shall refer the application to the next succeeding meeting of the board of health for approval or disapproval. (Prior code § 24-45.)

 

13.32.130 Sewage collection tanks—Specifications.
        Any sewage collection tank for which a permit is issued shall be constructed of watertight concrete, shall have a capacity of not less than one thousand five hundred gallons and may, in the discretion of the health officer, be required to have a greater capacity. It shall be emptied before it is filled to three-fourths of its capacity, or in accordance with a schedule prescribed by the health officer. The drain through which the tank is emptied shall be located at least six inches above the water level of the lowest fixture which it serves. (Prior code § 24-46.)

 

13.32.140 Disposal systems—Determining distance from water supply.
        Any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system or part thereof constructed or installed in the city shall be so situated that it will be a safe distance from any source of water supply as determined by the health officer.

        In determining what is a safe distance, the health officer shall consider the following factors:

A.    The source of possible pollution;

B.     The type of soil, surface and subsurface;

C.     The type and source of water supply;

D.    The geological formation of the ground, the direction of surface drainage and the depth and direction of groundwater flow.

(Prior code § 24-47.)

 

13.32.150 Minimum distance between systems and water supplies.
        Under no circumstances shall any part of a subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, except the house sewer line, be located closer than fifty feet from any water supply. (Prior code § 24-48.)

 

13.32.160 Minimum distance between systems and buildings or property lines.
        No part of any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, except the house sewer line, shall be located less than five feet from every building or structure, or less than five feet from every property line. (Prior code § 24-49.)

 

13.32.170 House sewers within less than fifty feet of water supply—Construction specifications.
        Any house sewer line, or part thereof, constructed or installed in the city shall be constructed of bell and spigot cast iron pipe with leaded joints, when located less than fifty feet from any well used as a domestic water supply. (Prior code § 24-50.)

 

13.32.180 Subsurface sewage disposal system—Construction requirements generally.
        Any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system constructed or installed in the city shall consist of a septic tank, with effluent discharging into a distribution box connected to a subsurface tile system consisting of at least two lateral absorption lines, each of which lines shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five feet in length; or, with the approval of the health officer, such distribution box may be connected to a cesspool or cesspools each having at least a three-foot inside diameter. (Prior code § 24-51.)

 

13.32.190 Specifications for construction of septic tanks.
        Any septic tank constructed or installed in the city shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A.    The tank shall have an inside depth of at least five feet, with a liquid depth of at least four feet.

B.     The length of the tank shall not exceed three times the width, and shall have a liquid capacity of not less than nine hundred sixty gallons.

C.     The tank shall have at least two compartments, and a manhole of adequate size shall be installed in each compartment.

D.    The inlet and outlet of the tank shall have a vertical four-inch tee extending two feet below and six inches above the liquid level of the tank.

E.     The tank shall be watertight, and shall be constructed of concrete, concrete block, brick or tile.

F.     The top of the tank shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, at least four inches thick.

G.    When the tank is constructed of concrete, the walls and bottom shall be at least six inches thick and shall be adequately reinforced with steel or other approved material.

H.    The concrete used for the tanks shall contain one part cement, two parts sharp sand and four parts crushed rock or gravel.

I.      Where brick, concrete block or tile is used in the construction of the tank, the inside shall be plastered with portland cement mortar, composed of one part cement and three parts sand.

J.      The side walls of the tank shall be adequately reinforced with steel or other approved material so as to withstand any inside or outside pressure.

(Prior code § 24-52.)

 

13.32.200 Line from septic tank to distribution box.
        The line from a septic tank to a distribution box shall be constructed of watertight bell and spigot pipe. (Prior code § 24-53.)

 

13.32.210 Specifications for construction of distribution boxes.
        Any distribution box constructed or installed in the city shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A.    The distribution box shall be watertight and shall be constructed of the same materials authorized for the construction of a septic tank.

B.     All outlets from a distribution box shall have exactly the same elevation.

C.     The inlet to the distribution box shall be one inch above the elevation of the outlets.

D.    The distribution box shall be connected to a subsurface tile system consisting of at least two lateral absorption lines.

(Prior code § 24-54.)

 

13.32.220 Substitution of cesspools for lateral absorption lines.
        One or more cesspools may be substituted for or used in conjunction with lateral absorption lines when approved by the health officer. (Prior code § 24-55.)

 

13.32.230 Lines to lateral absorption lines—Watertight joints required.
        All lines leading from the distribution box to the lateral absorption lines or to cesspools shall be constructed with watertight joints. (Prior code § 24-56.)

 

13.32.240 Subsurface tile system used in effluent disposal—Construction specifications.
        Any subsurface tile system constructed or installed in the city for the purpose of disposing of the effluent from a septic tank shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A.    The tile system shall consist of at least two lateral absorption lines, totaling at least two hundred feet in length. No such line shall exceed one hundred twenty-five feet in length. Where it is practical, each such line shall be one hundred twenty-five feet in length.

B.     Lateral absorption lines shall be constructed of tile pipe spaced one-quarter inch apart so as to provide open joints. The upper one-half of each such open joint shall be covered with tar paper or copper screen.

C.     Each lateral absorption line shall be placed in a trench at least eighteen inches wide, which trench shall contain at least thirteen inches of rock or gravel grading not less than one inch, with at least four inches of such rock or gravel beneath the bottom of the line and four inches of such rock or gravel over the top of the line.

D.    Lateral absorption lines shall have a grade of two inches per one hundred feet, with not more than fifty percent variation either way.

E.     Lateral absorption lines shall not be more than thirty inches below the surface of the ground.

F.     Every absorption line shall be at least ten feet from every other lateral absorption line.

        Where it is necessary to use ells or wyes on any lateral absorption line, at least ten feet of closed-joint tile shall be inserted at each such fitting so as to space the absorption lines at least ten feet apart. (Prior code § 24-57.)

 

13.32.250 Use of cesspools in lieu of or in conjunction with subsurface tile systems.
        A cesspool or series of cesspools may be substituted for or used in conjunction with a subsurface tile system, when such substitution or use is approved by the health officer.

        No cesspool shall be permitted where the health officer determines that its use might contaminate or pollute an underground water supply. (Prior code § 24-58.)

 

13.32.260 Specifications for construction of cesspools.
        Any cesspool constructed or installed in the city shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A.    The cesspool shall be not less than three feet in inside diameter and shall be constructed to a depth where the side wall area will have sufficient porosity to provide adequate drainage, as determined by the health officer.

B.     The cesspool shall be either rectangular or round.

C.     In the case of a rectangular shape, such cesspool shall be constructed of brick, concrete block or two-inch redwood plank, securely braced, with four-inch by four-inch redwood timber.

D.    In the case of a round shape, the cesspool shall be constructed of brick, concrete block, or one-inch redwood boards of full thickness, with supporting two-inch by three-inch redwood timbers, placed every five feet, so as to form a securely braced octagonal shape.

E.     The top of each cesspool shall be covered with a concrete slab or cover constructed of concrete reinforced with steel or other approved material. Such slab or cover shall extend not less than eighteen inches beyond the outside of the side walls of the cesspool.

(Prior code § 24-59.)

 

13.32.270 Chapter deemed minimum standards—When.
        The minimum standards for septic tanks, distribution boxes, tile lines and cesspools, as set forth in this chapter and Chapter 13.36, are the minimum standards for a subsurface sewage disposal system or unit serving a one family or two family residence or small institution or industry having sanitary facilities used by not more than ten persons. (Prior code § 24-60.)

 

13.32.280 Permits for systems serving large residences and industries.
        Every applicant for a permit to install or construct a subsurface sewage disposal system or unit to serve residences, institutions or industries, other than a one family or two family residence or a small institution or industry having sanitary facilities used by more than ten persons shall submit to the health officer for approval the detailed plans and specifications of the proposed subsurface sewage disposal system.

        Upon the filing of the required application accompanied by such detailed plans and specifications, the payment of the application fee therefor prescribed and the approval of such plans and specifications by the health officer, the health officer shall issue a permit for the construction of such subsurface sewage disposal system. (Prior code § 24-61.)

 

13.32.290 Imposition of more stringent requirements than those provided in provisions.
        Nothing contained in this chapter and Chapter 13.36 shall be construed to prevent the health officer from requiring compliance with higher or more stringent requirements or specifications than those contained herein where compliance with such higher or more stringent requirements or specifications is necessary to maintain a sanitary condition. (Prior code § 24-62.)

 

13.32.300 Permitting noncompliance with literal requirements.
        Anything contained in this chapter and Chapter 13.36 to the contrary notwithstanding, the health officer may relax the literal requirements and specifications herein where subsurface sewage disposal systems may be maintained in a sanitary condition with safety to the public health. (Prior code § 24-63.)

 

13.32.310 Notices of defective conditions and required alterations.
        When any building or premises has been inspected or caused to be inspected by the health officer, and the plumbing or sewage disposal unit or system of such building or premises is found to be defective or insanitary, notice to that effect shall be served upon the tenant occupying the premises, if there be a tenant, or the owner or his agent. Such notice shall specify the character of repairs and alterations to be made in order to eliminate the defective or insanitary condition. (Prior code § 24-64.)

 

13.32.320 Condemned buildings—Failure to make required repairs.
        If repairs and alterations, as specified in the notice provided in Section 13.32.310 are not commenced in good faith within five days from the date of the service of such notice, and completed within the time specified therein, the health officer may condemn the building or premises as being insanitary and unfit for human habitation, and its occupancy thereafter is prohibited. (Prior code § 24-65.)

 

13.32.330 Condemned buildings—Vacating required.
        When any building or premises have been condemned by the health officer for defective conditions, the occupants shall immediately vacate the premises until such time as all repairs and alterations required by the health officer shall have been made. (Prior code § 24-66.)

 

13.32.340 Condemned buildings—Posting notices.
        When a building or premises has been condemned for any cause under this chapter and Chapter 13.36, the health officer shall place or cause to be placed thereon a placard reading as follows:

 

“Warning

 

        This building has been condemned as being insanitary and unfit for human habitation, and it is unlawful for any person to reside in or occupy the same.

 

        _______________

        Health Officer

 

        _______________

        (Sanitarian Inspector)”

 

(Prior code § 24-67.)

 

13.32.350 Interconnections with drinking water supply—Prohibited—Inspection by health officer.
        No person shall install or permit to be installed an interconnection between a drinking water supply and any equipment or connection of any kind, class or description which may contain water or any liquid or substance unfit for human or domestic consumption.

        The health officer shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine if such conditions exist. If such interconnections are discovered, the health officer shall require the purveyor of water to discontinue water service unless the condition is abated within a reasonable period of time fixed by the health officer. (Prior code § 24-68.)

 

13.32.360 Interconnections with drinking water supply—Sale of devices therefor.
        No device shall be sold in the city which provides an interconnection between a drinking water supply and any equipment or connection which may contain substances unfit for human consumption as a means of operation unless the water supply is adequately protected. (Prior code § 24-69.)

 

13.32.370 Openings for purpose of receiving surface drainage prohibited.
        No opening shall be provided in any drainage system or in any septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system for the purpose of receiving the surface drainage from any yard or building. (Prior code § 24-70.)

 

13.32.380 Approval of systems by health officer prerequisite to covering cesspools or septic tanks.
        No person shall cover or cause to be covered any septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal system prior to its approval by the health officer as provided in this chapter and Chapter 13.36. (Prior code § 24-71.)

 

13.32.390 Connection of house sewer—Approval by health officer required.
        No person shall connect any house sewer line or other plumbing to a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system installed, constructed or reconstructed, unless such septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system has been approved by the health officer as provided in this chapter and Chapter 13.36. (Prior code § 24-72.)

 

13.32.400 Applicability.
        The provisions of this chapter and Chapter 13.36 requiring connection to a public sewer or to a subsurface disposal unit or system shall not be applied to a trailer, temporary building or an accessory building for which a temporary occupancy permit has been issued. (Prior code § 24-73.)

 

13.32.410 Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the city health officer to see that there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 13.36. (Prior code § 24-74.)

 

13.32.420 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Chapter 13.36 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMITS
13.36.010 Required.
        No septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system shall be installed, constructed or reconstructed in the city unless there is in effect a valid permit therefor issued by the health officer. (Prior code § 24-75.)

 

13.36.015 Health officer defined.
        As used in this title, “health officer” and “city health officer” means the director of public health and any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the department of public health. (Ord. 3637 § 14, 1982.)

 

13.36.020 Applications—Generally.
        Any person desiring to install, construct, reconstruct, repair or add to a septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, or any part thereof, shall file with the health officer a written application for a permit for such installation, construction, reconstruction, repair or addition.

        A separate application and permit for each installation shall be required. (Ord. 3637 § 15, 1982: prior code § 24-76.)

 

13.36.030 Application—Form—Fee.
        The application for a permit to install a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished by the health officer and shall be accompanied by the inspection fee set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 3714 § 13, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 16, 1982; Ord. 3524 § 1, 1981; Ord. 2935 § 1, 1976: prior code § 24-77.)

 

13.36.040 Application—Contents.
        Every application for a permit to install a subsurface sewage disposal system shall contain the following information:

A.    The street name and number of the premises where the installation is to be made;

B.     The name and address of the owner;

C.     The name and address of the contractor who is to perform the work;

D.    The size and type of the septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system to be installed and the number of people it is to serve;

E.     Such other information as the health officer may require.

        The application shall include or be accompanied by a plan or diagram showing the character and kind of installation to be made and the manner and location in which the work is to be done. (Prior code § 24-78.)

 

13.36.042 Application for permits requiring no field investigation—Fee.
        The permit fee for land development applications that are processed without field investigation shall be set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 3714 § 14, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 17, 1982.)

 

13.36.044 Special project review—Fee.
        Whenever the health officer is requested to review and comment on any special project designated by the department of planning and land use, such as a major or minor use permit or a special use permit, or any other special project or land development application, the applicant shall complete a written application furnished by the health officer requesting the review. This application shall be accompanied by a fee as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, and any further documents required by the health officer to accomplish said review. The health officer shall have an investigation made to determine whether the special project complies with the rules and regulations of the health department and to the codes of the state of California and any regulations issued pursuant thereto pertaining to particular activities subject to regulation therein, and whether the activity will result in a violation of such codes and regulations. The health officer shall notify the applicant of his reasons for approval or denial in writing. (Ord. 3714 § 15, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 18, 1982.)

 

13.36.050 Supplemental permits authorizing changes in location of work—Generally.
        A permittee to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter for an installation to be made at a particular location may apply for a supplemental permit authorizing such work to be performed at a different location; provided, that no work has been commenced at the location specified in the original permit. (Prior code § 24-79.)

 

13.36.060 Supplemental permit—Application—Form.
        The application for a supplemental permit shall be made on a form prescribed and furnished by the health officer. (Prior code § 24-80.)

 

13.36.070 Supplemental permit—Application—Investigation.
        Upon receipt of an application for a supplemental permit, the health officer shall make or cause to be made such investigation as he deems necessary. (Prior code § 24-81.)

 

13.36.080 Supplemental permit—Issuance.
        Upon receipt of an application for a supplemental permit and a fee as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, the health officer may issue a supplemental permit authorizing the performance of work at a substituted location. (Ord. 3714 § 16, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 19, 1982; Ord. 3524 § 2, 1981: prior code § 24-82.)

 

13.36.090 Requiring applicants to furnish percolation tests.
        The health officer may require the applicant for a permit under this chapter to furnish him the report of an engineer registered in the state, showing that soil percolation tests have been made by such engineer on the site of the proposed subsurface sewage disposal system or unit, and the results of such tests. (Prior code § 24-83.)

 

13.36.095 Fees required for percolation tests and septic system layout review.
        If pursuant to Section 13.36.090 a percolation test or septic tank system layout is performed by the county, there shall be paid to the department a fee for the layout examination, reexamination, or percolation test performed, the amount of which shall be set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 3714 § 17, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 20, 1982.)

 

13.36.100 Denial of permit.
        If the health officer determines that the location, area, soil porosity, ground water level, density of population in the area, the number of persons to be served, or other conditions would cause the operation of the subsurface sewage disposal unit or system described in the application for a permit under this chapter to create an unsanitary condition endangering public health, he shall not issue the permit for which application was made. (Ord. 3637 § 21, 1982: prior code § 24-84.)

 

13.36.110 Expiration dates.
        Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be void at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance. (Prior code § 24-85.)

 

13.36.120 Duty of health officer to make inspections.
        The health officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected in a thorough manner all septic tanks, settling tanks, cesspools and other subsurface sewage disposal units or systems installed, constructed or reconstructed in the city. (Prior code § 24-86.)

 

13.36.130 Notifying health officer after installation of systems.
        As soon as any septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system is installed and ready to receive its cover, the person to whom the permit for such unit or system was issued shall notify the department of public health that such unit or system is ready for inspection. (Prior code § 24-87.)

 

13.36.140 Health officer to inspect as soon as practical after notification.
        As soon as practical after notification that a subsurface sewage disposal unit or system is ready for inspection, the health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the work. (Prior code § 24-88.)

 

13.36.150 Inspection certificates generally.
        If a subsurface sewage disposal unit or system is approved by the health officer, an inspection certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property where the unit or system is located which inspection certificate shall note the date and approval and the signature of the health officer or the person making the inspection on his behalf. (Prior code § 24-89.)

 

13.36.160 Posting notices of necessary changes.
        When an inspection has been ordered under this chapter and the work is found not ready for inspection and approval, the health officer shall cause an official notice to be posted on the job, stating the changes necessary in order that the work comply with the requirements of Chapters 13.32 through 13.36. As soon thereafter as practicable, the owner or contractor shall cause the changes to be made and upon completion thereof shall notify the department of public health that the unit or system is ready for reinspection. As soon thereafter as practicable, the health officer shall make or cause a reinspection to be made. (Prior code § 24-90.)

 

13.36.170 Issuance of inspection certificates after reinspections.
        If, upon reinspection under this chapter, the work is approved, a certificate to that effect shall be posted as specified in Section 13.36.150. (Prior code § 24-91.)

 

13.36.180 Fees for reinspections.
        The fee for each reinspection under this chapter shall be set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, and shall be paid to the health officer. (Ord. 3714 § 18, 1983; Ord. 3524 § 3, 1981; Ord. 2935 § 1(part), 1976: prior code § 24-92.)

Chapter 13.37 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—INSPECTIONS
13.37.020 Maintenance of private building sewer.
A.    Maintenance of Building Sewer. Each owner shall maintain his building sewer lateral(s) free of displaced joints, open joints, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the line, cracks, leaks, inflow, or infiltration of extraneous water, root intrusion, grease and sediment deposits, or any other similar conditions, defects, or obstructions likely to cause leakage or increase the chance for blockage of the building sewer.

B.     Maintenance of Septic Tank. Each owner shall maintain his septic tank free of deterioration, corrosion, damage, disposal failure or any other similar deficiencies or defects likely to increase failure of the septic tank.

C.     General Maintenance Requirements. The maintenance obligation imposed by this section shall be in addition to and supplemental of the general private sewer system maintenance obligations imposed in this title.

(Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

 

13.37.030 Building sewer inspections—Access to premises.
        The director of public works, or the building official, (or any designated representative or either the director of public works or the building official) is hereby authorized to inspect any building sewer in use within the city and connected to the city sewer system for the following purposes:

A.    To determine the size, depth, and location of any sewer connection;

B.     To determine the end outlet of any sewer connection by depositing harmless testing materials in any plumbing fixture attached thereto and flushing the same, if necessary;

C.     To determine, by measurements and samples, the quantity and nature of the sewage or wastewater being discharged into any sewer;

D.    To determine the location of the roof, swimming pool, floor and surface drains, and whether or not they physically connect to a building sewer;

E.     To evaluate and determine defects in a sewer lateral following an overflow incident.

 

        Nothing herein shall be deemed to provide the director of public works, the building official or their respective designees with any right or authority to enter a building or other apparently private or interior area of a real property, except to the extent such entry is expressly authorized by state law. (Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

 

13.37.040 Mandatory building sewer inspections.
A.    Health and safety basis for requiring a building sewer lateral inspection.

 

        An owner shall have the building sewer of his real property video-inspected in accordance with the requirements of this chapter (as directed and within the time period indicated by the director of public works) upon the occurrence of any of the following events:

1.     Overflow or Malfunction. Whenever the director of public works has sufficient evidence (as determined by the director) that the building sewer has recently overflowed or has recently malfunctioned;

2.     Building Sewer Failure or Lack of Maintenance. Whenever, based on sewer system testing conducted by the city (of either the building sewer lateral or the city’s public sewer system), the director of public works finds that there is sufficient evidence to conclude that the building sewer lateral has failed, is likely to fail, or has not been properly maintained; and

3.     Public Health Threat. Upon any other reasonable cause to believe that there is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare due to the condition of a building sewer lateral or any other conditions causing a nuisance.

B.     Events Requiring a Building Sewer Lateral Inspection Serving Residential Properties.

 

        An owner shall have the building sewer lateral of his residential property inspected in accordance with the requirements of this chapter upon the occurrence of any of the following events or any other events in paragraph (A) above:

1.     Home Additions or Remodels. Prior to the issuance of a city building permit for a residential building addition, remodel, or new improvements on the real property in excess of four hundred square feet of habitable space as that phrase is defined in the most recently adopted California Building Code.

2.     New Plumbing Fixtures. Prior to the issuance of a city building permit for all new plumbing fixtures attached to the building sewer lateral upon the residential property. (For the purposes of this section, the phrase “new plumbing fixtures” shall refer only to an increase in the number of plumbing fixtures in use on the real property prior to the application for a building permit for the “new” plumbing fixtures.)

C.     Schedule for Lateral Inspections—Non-residential, Multi-family and Common Interest Development Real Properties.

1.     Non-residential Properties. An owner or owners of non-residential property within the city shall have that property’s building sewer lateral(s) inspected in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or on occurrence of any conditions in paragraphs (A) or (B) above, or once every ten years beginning on the first date of notification following the adoption of the ordinance first enacting this chapter. Within each subsequent ten-year period of time, such lateral inspections shall be performed. (For the purposes of this section, a property that has a mixture of allowed residential and non-residential uses shall be considered a non-residential property with respect to its compliance with the sewer lateral inspection requirements of this section.)

2.     Common Interest Development, Condominium, or Multi-family Properties. The owner or owners of a common interest development, condominium, or multi-family property shall have that property’s building sewer lateral(s) inspected in accordance with the requirement of this chapter or on occurrence of any conditions in paragraphs (A) or (B) above, or once every ten years beginning on the first date of notification following the enactment of the ordinance first enacting this chapter. Within each ten-year period of time, such lateral inspections shall occur.

D.    Exception to Inspection for Recent Prior Inspections and Repairs. The following are exceptions to the inspection requirements of subparagraphs (B) and (C) above:

1.     Prior Replacement of Sewer Lateral. An owner otherwise required to perform a building sewer lateral inspection under (B) or (C) hereof shall not be required to perform such an inspection if the owner (or the owner’s predecessor-in-interest) has originally installed or has replaced his property’s building sewer lateral within the ten years prior to the date of the application for a building permit.

2.     Prior Inspection or Repair of a Building Sewer Lateral. An owner otherwise required to perform an inspection under (B) or (C) shall not be required to perform such an inspection if the owner has either completed a remedial inspection (conducted in accordance with the inspection requirements of this chapter) or completed a permitted repair of the building sewer lateral within the three years prior to the date the inspection would have otherwise been required, or has a valid compliance certificate.

(Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

 

13.37.050 Requirements for a proper building sewer lateral inspection report.
A.    Inspection Report Standards. The building sewer inspection reports required by this chapter shall be prepared in accordance with the following requirements and specifications:

1.     The inspection report shall be prepared by a pre-qualified contractor or any other professional otherwise registered by the city of El Cajon;

2.     The inspection report shall identify all of the following:

a.     Any of the following conditions: displaced joints, open joints, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the line, sags or depressions, cracks, leaks, inflow or infiltration of extraneous water, root intrusion, grease and sediment deposits or other conditions likely to increase the chance for blockage of the building sewer,

b.     Whether any connection, by pipes or otherwise, allows rainwater or groundwater to enter the building sewer or public sewer,

c.     Whether the building sewer has an installed backwater device where any outlet or trap of the building sewer is below the level of the nearest manhole. If a backwater device is already installed, the report shall indicate whether the backwater device is functioning properly,

d.     Where the building sewer includes a septic tank, the report shall identify the extent to which the septic tank is deteriorated, corroded, damaged, whether the disposal field has failed or any other relevant deficiency;

3.     The inspection report shall contain an express certification from the certified inspector that the property has been inspected for any outdoor drain connection to the city sewer system and that no such unpermitted connection is present. It shall also contain either a videotape or DVD of the video inspection of the building sewer lateral in a format acceptable to the city, as established by the city regulations, policies or procedures;

4.     The inspection report shall be submitted to the city for review and analysis accompanied with a review fee in addition to any other fee required by this chapter.

B.     Compliance with Regulations. The inspection report shall, in all other aspects, comply with the requirements and specifications described in the director of public works’ specifications for a building sewer lateral inspection report as established by the regulations authorized under this title.

(Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

 

13.37.060 Required building sewer lateral repairs.
A.    Notice to Repair or Replace. Upon receipt of the building sewer inspection report pursuant to this chapter, the director of public works (or his designee) will determine whether it indicates any deficiencies in the operation of the building sewer lateral and, thereafter, shall provide the owner(s) with a notice to repair or replace as may be deemed appropriate by the director. The notice to repair or replace shall specifically identify the deficiencies to be corrected and shall establish a deadline within which the owner(s) shall complete the required corrective actions. The corrective action may include a requirement that the lateral be replaced altogether and also may include the installation of cleanout, grease removal devices, and backwater valves if those devices are otherwise required by this code or any uniform code adopted by the city.

B.     Obligations of the Owner. The owner shall repair his building sewer lateral to the satisfaction of the director of public works, and, if a building permit is required for the repairs, the owner shall obtain a final permit inspection and approval of the city building official.

C.     Repairs Upon Other Properties Not Required. If a building sewer lateral traverses private property, without easements, other than the owner’s property, the owner shall only be responsible for the repairs to that portion of the building sewer lateral that are upon the owner’s property and also to that portion of the building sewer within a public right-of-way.

(Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

 

13.37.070 Common interest developments.
        The homeowners association of a common interest development shall, along with the owner, be jointly and severally liable for the duties and obligations imposed by this chapter in relation to any building sewer lateral located within a common area of the development. If no homeowners association exists, then the individual unit owners, both jointly and individually, shall be liable for the duties and obligations with respect to building sewer laterals established by this chapter. (Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

 

13.37.080 Administrative guidelines for inspections.
        Within ninety days of the adoption of the ordinance enacting this chapter, the director of public works shall prepare and promulgate the public administrative guidelines that shall, among other things, establish the following:

A.    A certification program for pre-qualified contractors or other professionals who will be accepted by the city to perform inspections and the basis for obtaining and maintaining such a certification or for a decertification;

B.     Develop a standard inspection report form and specification for building sewer inspection reports;

C.     Establish a notice format and standard enforcement timelines for the notice to repair and for repair and inspection service of that notice in a manner consistent with the requirements of due process. Such administrative guidelines shall be approved by a resolution of the city council; and

D.    Administrative procedures for accepting, tracking, and inspecting permits for building sewers, grease interceptors, and inspection of food serving establishments.

(Ord. 4930 § 9, 2009.)

Chapter 13.38 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL—FATS, OILS AND GREASE
13.38.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:

A.    “Administrative authority” shall mean the director of public works, the building official, or any other official(s) as designated by the city manager.

B.     “Authorized inspector” shall mean an inspector so designated by the administrative authority.

C.     “Director” shall mean the director of public works or other official as designated by the city manager.

D.    “Food grinder” shall mean any device installed for the purpose of disposing food waste in the public sewer system.

E.     “FSE” “Food service establishment” shall mean any food preparation establishment, restaurant, cafeteria, or any other establishment preparing food for consumption. Domestic homes are not considered food service establishments under this definition.

F.     “Grease” shall mean grease, or fatty or oily substances and other insoluble waste that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions.

G.    “Grease interceptor” shall mean an underground multi-compartment device installed outside a food service establishment of a size and design in compliance with the California Plumbing Code and approved by the city.

H.    “Grease removal facility” shall mean any grease interceptor, trap, drain, screen, or similar device that is designed or installed to reduce the amount of grease entering the wastewater system.

(Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.030 Grease/sand interceptors.
A.    Grease/sand interceptors that are properly sized and constructed shall be required for all buildings that include an increase in plumbing fixture units, and prior to commencing business for all new food service establishments determined by the director to generate grease in quantities greater than that commonly found in domestic sewage. Where grease/sand interceptors are impossible or impractical to install, a grease trap shall be installed.

B.     Grease/sand interceptors are required for all existing establishments where one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.     A notice to repair has been issued for repair of the building sewer;

2.     The establishment is unable to pass annual inspection without repeated violations;

3.     The establishment is unable to complete implementation of best management practices as noted in the annual inspection report;

4.     The establishment has violated any waste disposal requirements contained in the Municipal Code and where evidence of substantial grease is observed downstream of the establishment.

(Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.032 Grease storage facilities.
A.    All new construction or remodels subject to a new conditional use permit for an FSE shall be required to either store waste grease on the inside of the building or outside in a secured enclosure that is covered, locked, and inside a secondary containment area or device large enough to store the same volume as the primary container. All storage containers shall be designed to prevent tipping and to provide a secure closing lid that shall remain closed at all times that the container is not being accessed. All containers that are used to transfer waste grease shall have a secured lid that prevents accidental spills during transfer.

B.     All existing FSEs are required to either store waste grease on the inside of the building or outside in an area secure from vehicular driveways and parking in storage containers that are designed to prevent tipping and to provide a secure closing lid that shall remain closed at all times that the container is not being accessed. All containers that are used to transfer waste grease shall have a secured lid that prevents accidental spills during transfer.

C.     All FSEs shall maintain the storage area using good housekeeping techniques to prevent the accumulation of waste grease deposits on the outside of grease containers and shall have an approved emergency spill kit available in close proximity to the storage facilities.

(Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.040 Food grinders prohibited.
A.    Food grinders shall be removed from all existing food service establishments by January 1, 2010.

B.     After August 1, 2009, food grinders shall be prohibited in all new food service establishments. (Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.050 Grease interceptor design and maintenance requirements.
A.    General Provisions.

1.     The installation of a proper interceptor shall be the responsibility of the user who applies for a permit connection and the user whose operations cause or contribute to the necessity for an interceptor.

2.     Interceptors shall be installed, utilized, and properly maintained for continuous and efficient operation at all times and at the expense of the user.

3.     Interceptors shall be inspected periodically to ensure compliance with these regulations.

4.     The administration authority shall approve the type, capacity, and construction of all interceptors shared by multiple businesses can be utilized if specifically authorized by the director and upon evidence of legal operating and maintenance agreements between the involved property owners or users. Provisions shall provide for independent, unilateral operation by one or more parties of the agreement in the case where default by one party has occurred.

5.     Interceptors no longer in use shall be abandoned in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

B.     Design.

1.     Interceptors for food service establishments shall be sized and designed in compliance with the California Plumbing Code, unless otherwise specified herein.

2.     Other factors that may influence the design include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

a.     The type of facility (such as a restaurant, bakery, food processing factory, etc.);

b.     The volume of the user’s business or operation (such as number of meals served, number of seats, hours of operation, etc.);

c.     The peak flow of processed wastewater discharged to the collection system;

d.     Size and nature of facilities (including kitchen facilities) based on size, type, number of fixtures, and type of processing or cooking equipment used;

e.     The type of service provided or operation undertaken (such as dine-in meal service versus carry-out meal service);

f.      The type of foods or other materials used in cooking, processing or manufacturing operations conducted within the facility;

g.     The overall potential for grease-laden discharges;

h.     The existence of devices, procedures or processes designed to minimize the amount of fats, oil or grease from entering the collection system;

i.      The location of the facility, if it is located in a known problem area; and

j.      Any prior problems with the facility, such as blockages, violations, etc.

3.     All interceptors shall be certified by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officers, or another listing agency approved by the director, and be plumbed according to the California Plumbing Code.

4.     All grease interceptors shall include an effluent sample box of a type and size approved by the administrative authority.

5.     Inspection by the administrative authority, or an authorized inspector, of installed interceptors and piping prior to backfilling is required. Piping shall meet the requirements of the California Plumbing Code.

6.     Interceptors shall have a sanitary tee located inside the sample box on the discharge side of the sample box.

7.     Interceptors shall have a cleanout installed after the sample box on the private lateral and at intervals required by the California Plumbing Code.

8.     All manholes and sample boxes are to be installed a minimum of one-half inch above the finished grade with a concrete collar a minimum of eighteen inches around the manhole and sample box lids.

C.     Interceptor Maintenance.

1.     Any user who is required by the director or the ordinance codified in this chapter to install or operate an interceptor shall be required to adequately maintain the interceptor at the user’s expense, so that the interceptor is in proper working order at all times. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, sludge and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or into any other interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited.

2.     Grease interceptors shall be cleaned out completely by a permitted waste hauler as necessary to assure that the interceptor will operate as designed at all times or as otherwise specified by the administrative authority.

3.     The use of additives, directly or indirectly to the plumbing or sewer system, to emulsify grease and/or oil is specifically prohibited.

4.     The use of biological additives as a supplement to interceptor maintenance, including the addition of microorganisms, may be authorized by the director and approval shall be obtained in writing prior to the use of such activities.

5.     A maintenance log indicating each pumping of an interceptor for the previous twelve months and any other pertinent information shall be maintained by each establishment. This log shall include, but not be limited to, date, time, amount pumped, hauler, and disposal site, and the log shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection by the administrative authority or an authorized inspector during normal business hours.

6.     All users must sign a waste manifest form before having a waste load transported by a permitted hauler. The user shall also keep copies of the manifest form for a period of three years, and make all manifest records available for inspection by the administrative authority during normal business hours.

7.     All waste removed from an interceptor must be disposed at a facility permitted by the county of San Diego or applicable regulatory agencies to receive such waste. The pumpage shall not be returned to the public sewer system or manhole, any private wastewater system or storm drains.

8.     All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning, inspection and removal of intercepted waste.

9.     Any fixture connected to a grease interceptor shall have a nonremovable, secured food strainer of such integrity to withstand daily operational usage.

D.    Required Connections to Interceptors. All three-compartment sinks, scullery (preparation) sinks, floor drains, and mop sinks along a cook line, pre-wash sinks at dishwashing stations, and all other fixtures that contribute grease into the wastewater system shall be connected to an interceptor.

E.     Prohibited Connections or Additives to Interceptors.

1.     Final rinse discharge from automatic dishwasher shall not be connected to the interceptor.

2.     The use of any additive, such as enzymes, surfactants or chemicals shall not be connected to any type of interceptor. Chemical additives, such as chlorinated solvents, or any other additives that causes the emulsification of grease, are strictly prohibited from use in any type of interceptor.

F.     Plan Review.

1.     Applicants or users shall be required to submit copies of detailed facility proposed interceptors, pretreatment facilities, spill containment facilities, and operating procedures, to the community development department. Facility plans shall also include site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all wastewater plumbing, spill containment, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the user of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or discharge, and to meet the requirements of this chapter or any requirements of other regulatory agencies.

2.     All submitted drawings shall be prepared by a licensed and registered professional engineer. Any false information or misleading calculations submitted shall be the responsibility of the user.

3.     The design, location and procedures for operation and maintenance of a required interceptor shall be approved by the administrative authority. Such approval shall be obtained prior to the user’s connection of the facility to the public wastewater system.

4.     No food service establishment or other identified user shall be constructed except according to plans and specifications approved by the administrative authority.

5.     Approved plans and specifications shall not be changed or altered without written approval by the administrative authority.

(Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.060 Best management practices.
        Best management practices (each, a “BMP,” in any combination, “BMPs”) as listed below shall be utilized by the FSE and shall be subject to periodic verification and approval by the administrative authority. If at any time the FSE is found to be in noncompliance with this requirement with regard to all of the BMPs below, such noncompliance shall be deemed a violation.

A.    Drain Screens.

1.     Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas for existing food service establishments by January 1, 2010.

2.     After August 1, 2009, drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas for all new food service establishments deemed by the director to generate grease.

B.     Waste Cooking Oil.

1.     All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling bins, barrels or drums.

2.     Such recycling bins, barrels or drums shall be maintained appropriately to ensure they do not leak.

3.     Licensed haulers or an approved recycling facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil. A log of such activities will be completed and maintained in plain visible site for inspection by the administrative authority. All manifests for disposal of waste products will be complete and inserted into the log.

C.     Food Waste. All food waste shall be placed in enclosed plastic bags and disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks.

D.    Employee Training.

1.     Employees of the food service establishment shall be trained by March 1, 2009, and twice each calendar year thereafter, on the following subjects:

a.     How to “dry wipe” pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease;

b.     How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors;

c.     The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped, and how to use absorption products to clean if spills occur; and

d.     How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into grease bins, barrels or drums without spilling.

2.     Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices.

3.     Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the authorized inspector.

E.     Kitchen exhaust filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition, but in no event less than one time per month.

F.     All best management practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times.

(Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.062 Right of inspection.
        Food service establishments shall be open and available for inspection by an authorized inspector at all times during normal business hours to ensure that the operation and maintenance of the food service establishment complies with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

 

13.38.070 Violations for penalties—Enforcement.
A.    Violations of this chapter may result in fines and/or penalties.

B.     Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter may result in one or more of the following:

1.     Notices of noncompliance may be issued with a specified period of correction;

2.     Administrative citations may be issued for violations in the amounts and manner set forth in Chapter 1.14 of this code;

3.     A criminal complaint may be filed in accordance with Chapter 1.24 of this code;

4.     Sewer service may be determined a public nuisance as described in Section 13.16.030, and disconnected from the city’s sewerage works upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

C.     Appeals of Fines, Penalties or Requirements to Install Grease Interceptors.

1.     Unless otherwise provided in this code, appeals of civil or administrative fines, penalties, or other corrective actions shall be submitted to the city manager within thirty days after the food service establishment has been notified of the penalty and/or corrective actions. The decision of the city manager shall be in writing.

2.     The decision of the city manager can be appealed to the city council by submitting a written request to the city clerk within fifteen days of the issuance of the city manager’s decision, and payment of the appropriate fee, as set by resolution of the city council.

3.     Upon appeal, the appellant shall, upon written request to the city manager, be provided within fifteen days of said request, at reasonable cost to the appellant, copies of all reports, data or other documentary evidence upon which the citation is based.

(Ord. 4930 § 10, 2009.)

Chapter 13.40 SEPTIC TANK CLEANERS
13.40.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Cesspool,” “septic tank” and “seepage pit” mean all manner of sewage disposals other than regular sewage disposal plants and systems operated by a political subdivision and holding a valid permit from the State Department of Public Health.

B.     “Health officer” means the health officer or any sanitary inspector regularly employed by the city health department.

(Prior code § 24-93.)

 

13.40.020 Examinations—Conducted by county health officer.
        The examination for cesspool or septic tank cleaners shall be conducted by the county health officer as provided in Section 25004 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. (Prior code § 24-94.)

 

13.40.030 Examination—Fee—Penalties for late payment.
        Whenever any person not previously registered applies for examination as a septic tank or cesspool cleaner, he shall pay to the health officer or his duly authorized representative, an examination fee as set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. In the event the applicant is unsuccessful in such examination, no part of such examination fee shall be returned to the applicant.

        In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of thirty days after the time required, to apply for the examination and pay the examination fee required by this section, there shall be added to and collected with the examination fee a penalty equal to ten percent of the fee; and for each additional month or fraction of a month after the expiration of such thirty-day period that the applicant fails to make such application and pay said fee, there shall be added to and collected with the examination fee an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the fee; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the examination fee pursuant to this section be more than sixty percent of the examination fee. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed for violation of this code. (Ord. 3714 § 19, 1983; prior code § 24-95.)

 

13.40.040 Annual registration fees—Penalties for delinquent fees.
        In addition to the examination fee provided in Section 13.40.030, and set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of this code, there is imposed an annual registration fee, also set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of this code, upon each person registered as a septic tank or cesspool cleaner under the provisions of Chapter 6, Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. Said registration fee shall be paid to the health officer, or his duly authorized representative.

        A registration issued pursuant to this section shall expire on the last day of the month of the one year anniversary month in which the registration was issued, and shall be renewed annually. The annual registration fee, if unpaid, is delinquent on the first day of the second month after the month in which the registration expires, and thereafter a penalty equal to ten percent of the annual fee shall be added thereto and shall be collected at the time application for renewal is made.

        If the annual fee and penalty is not paid the first month after it is due there shall be added to and collected with the annual fee an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month during which the annual fee or any penalty continues to remain unpaid; provided, however, that in no event shall the total penalty added to the annual fee pursuant to this section be more than sixty percent of the annual fee. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code, or any ordinance, or prosecution for violation of this code, or any ordinance. (Ord. 3714 § 20, 1983; Ord. 3637 § 23, 1982: prior code § 24-96.)

 

13.40.050 Inspection of equipment—Registration fee for sewage pumping vehicle.
        The health officer shall examine all equipment used in processing septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits owned or under the control of each person registered under the provisions of this chapter at regular intervals not to exceed ninety days after a permit is granted.

        There is hereby imposed an annual registration fee, set pursuant to Section 8.36.070 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, for each sewage pumping vehicle. Said fee shall be paid to the health officer or his duly authorized representative. Renewals and penalties for delinquency shall be made as set forth in Section 13.40.040 of this code. (Ord. 3714 § 21, 1983, Ord. 3637 § 24, 1982: prior code § 24-97.)

 

13.40.060 Cleaning cesspools and septic tanks—Report to health officer.
        Whenever a person cleans a septic tank or cesspool, he shall notify the health officer or his duly authorized representative upon the regulation form adopted by the health officer. Such report shall be transmitted to the department of public health at the close of each day. (Prior code § 24-98.)

 

13.40.070 Cleaning cesspools and septic tanks—Report contents.
        The form for the report to the health officer, of septic tanks and cesspools cleaned, shall contain information such as the location of septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits, location of the disposal field where sewage effluent or other material has been finally disposed of, or any other information which the health officer may, by regulation, require. (Prior code § 24-99.)

Chapter 13.41 SEPTIC TANK WASTE DISPOSAL
13.41.010 City septic tank waste disposal site.
        The septic tank waste disposal site located at 1050 Vernon Way in the city is designated as the authorized site for disposal of septic tank waste material into the city sewer system. (Ord. 3191 Sec. 1, 1978.)

 

13.41.020 Unauthorized disposal prohibited.
        No person shall discharge septic tank waste into the city sewer system at any location within the city other than at the disposal site specified in Section 13.41.010, and no person shall discharge septic tank waste at said site without having first obtained the permit and paid the fees prescribed by Section 13.41.030. (Ord. 3191 § 1, 1978.)

 

13.41.030 Rates generally.
        Septic tank waste disposal charges are set forth in Section 13.20.150 of this code. (Ord. 4276 § 3, 1991; Ord. 4254 § 4, 1990; Ord. 4167 § 1, 1989; Ord. 3437 § 1, 1980; Ord. 3191 § 1, 1978.)

 

13.41.040 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Chapter 13.44 SEWER SERVICE CHARGE
13.44.010 Sanitation fund—Established.
        There is established a fund to be designated “sanitation fund.” All revenue derived from the service charges designated in this chapter shall be deposited into the said “sanitation fund.” (Prior code § 24A-1.)

 

13.44.020 Service—Payment required.
        In addition to other fees, assessments or charges provided by the code of the city and the laws of the state of California, all persons using the sanitary sewer system of the city shall pay for such service at the rates and times as set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 24A-2.)

 

13.44.030 Rates generally.
        Sewer service charges are set forth in Chapter 13.20 of this code. User fees for single-family service for periods less than a full billing cycle shall be prorated unless actual usage exceeds the minimum cost, in which case the actual cost shall be charged. (Ord. 4527, 1996; Ord. 4276 § 5, 1991; Ord. 4254 § 5, 1990; Ord. 3466 § 1, 1980.)

 

13.44.040 Rate exceptions—Generally.
        The city manager shall have the power to grant exceptions and to establish policies for the granting of such exceptions from the established sewer service charges. Such exceptions shall only be granted when one or more of the following situations exist:

A.    Where a substantial portion of the water is used for industrial, recreational, horticultural or agricultural purposes of such nature that less than twenty percent of the water supplied to such premises is discharged into the sewer system;

B.     Where a fire service connection to the water system is installed;

C.     Where the premises are not connected to the sewer system of the city and it is not physically possible or reasonably feasible to connect such premises with the city sewer system;

D.    When water is supplied to premises through a separate water meter and such water is used entirely for irrigation purposes;

E.     When water is supplied to premises by more than one water meter and one or more of such additional meters does not provide water which can be discharged into the sewer system;

F.     Where the city has entered into a separate service agreement.

G.    Evidence of abnormal winter water consumption in the prior year;

H.    In the case of new customers with no established winter month’s consumption history; or

I.      Where there is a change and assignment of proper Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes to commercial properties based on sewer strengths of the businesses occupying the properties.

(Ord. 4989 § 2, 2013.)

 

13.44.050 Appeal upon denial or conditional approval or application for rate exception.
        The owner, or owner’s agent, of any premises subject to the sewer service charge may apply in writing to the city manager for an exception as provided in Section 13.44.040 of this chapter. Except as may otherwise be provided by law, no rebate of fees upon such exception shall be allowed for any period preceding the filing of such application. The applicant shall furnish necessary factual data to support such application. Upon denial or conditional approval by the city manager, any applicant dissatisfied with such decision may appeal same to the city council. Such appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within fifteen days after notice of such decision. (Ord. 4364 § 1, 1992; Ord. 4276 § 6, 1991.)

 

13.44.060 Additional surcharge for sewage of different volume or type.
        Where the sewage from any plant, building, or premises of an industrial or commercial character shall be substantially different in volume or type from the average sewage entering the sewer system of the city, the city council shall impose an appropriate surcharge in addition to the fees imposed in Section 13.44.020. For the purpose of this section, “average sewage” shall be: in volume, seventy gallons for each one hundred gallons of water consumed on any plant, building or premises of an industrial or commercial character; or in type, three hundred parts per million of suspended solids and three hundred parts per million of biochemical oxygen demand. (Ord. 4276 § 6, 1991.)

 

13.44.070 Payment—Generally.
A.    All sewer service charges imposed under these provisions shall be payable upon the billing of such charges to the owner or the owner’s agent.

B.     Sewer service charges may be collected either through the tax roll of the County of San Diego, or by any method authorized by state law, including by direct payment or billing by the city or combined with other utility bills and separately designated.

C.     If the sewer service charge is not paid before the close of business of the final date for payment, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of said sewer service charge shall be added thereto; provide, however, that when the final day for payment falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, payment may be made without penalty on the next regular business day.

(Ord. 4989 § 4, 2013.)

 

13.44.080 Notice of delinquency—Hearing and lien.
        When the full amount for said sewer service charge is not paid within thirty days after the final date of payment as set forth in Section 13.44.070, the city clerk shall set said delinquent account for hearing by the city council at a regular or adjourned regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after such thirty-day period has expired. The owner of the property shall be mailed notice of the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall also inform the property owner that failure to pay said delinquent account will result in a lien upon the property. The city clerk shall post a copy of such delinquent account, and a notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the council chambers in the city hall. (Ord. 4527, 1996; prior code §§ 24A-8, 24A-9.)

 

13.44.090 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4527, 1996; prior code § 24A-9.)

 

13.44.100 Delinquent accounts—Hearing and assessment.
        The city council shall consider said delinquent accounts at the time set for hearing together with any objections or protests by interested parties. Any owner of land or person affected by the charges may present a written or oral protest or objection to said account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the account as submitted or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision of the city council on the charges and on all protests or objections shall be final and conclusive. The amounts so approved shall reflect the entire amount due, including all penalties, interest and administrative fees that have accrued against the account as of the date of the hearing. The amount shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall confirm such assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll and, thereafter, such assessment shall constitute a special assessment and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. (Ord. 4527, 1996; prior code § 24A-10.)

 

13.44.110 Interest on delinquent accounts.
        All delinquent sewer service charges shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month from the date upon which the account became delinquent to the date the account is assessed and placed on the property tax roll pursuant to Section 13.44.100. All interest accrued during that time shall be added to the amount assessed against the property. (Ord. 4527, 1996; prior code § 24A-11.)

 

13.44.120 Delinquent accounts—Administrative fee.
        All delinquent accounts approved by the city council pursuant to Section 13.44.100 shall be charged an administrative processing fee to offset the costs incurred by the City in administering the provisions of this chapter. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and the administrative processing fee shall be in such amount as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. This fee shall be added to the amount assessed against the property.

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.08 DWELLING UNIT LICENSE TAX
Chapter 15.10 SCHOOL FACILITIES LAND DEDICATION AND FEES
Chapter 15.12 ADEQUATE SCHOOL FACILITIES REQUIREMENT
Chapter 15.13 TRANSPORTATION UNIFORM MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM
Chapter 15.14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 15.16 UNSAFE BUILDINGS, SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY OR DANGEROUS CONDITIONS
Chapter 15.18 BUILDING, ZONING AND LAND USE VIOLATIONS
Chapter 15.20 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 15.24 ELECTRICAL PERMITS
Chapter 15.28 INSPECTION AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS
Chapter 15.32 MOBILE HOME PARK ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
Chapter 15.40 PENALTIES—CHAPTERS 15.20 THROUGH 15.32
Chapter 15.44 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
Chapter 15.48 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 15.52 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 15.54 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 15.56 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.60 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.64 LOT GRADING
Chapter 15.68 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES
Chapter 15.70 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
Chapter 15.72 REGULATIONS FOR RETROFITTING OR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS UTILIZING OUTDATED MATERIALS OR METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.80 MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.82 AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA
Chapter 15.84 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.86 FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES
Chapter 15.88 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.90 POST DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT
Chapter 15.92 EXPEDITED PROCESSING OF PERMITTING FOR SMALL ROOFTOP SOLAR, ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS, AND ADVANCED ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS
TITLE 15 ENDNOTES

Chapter 15.04 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
15.04.010 California Building Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Building Code, 2019 Edition, composed of two volumes, excluding sections 103 and 116, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the building code of the city (the “building code”), for regulating the construction, erection, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all non-residential buildings and structures in the city, providing for the issuance of permits therefore, and each and all such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Building Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added, deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The California Building Code is referred to in this chapter as the “CBC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.020 Requirements generally.
A.    All materials and assemblies of materials, appliances and installation of appliances, arrangements of occupancies, and segregation of occupancies, all exits, aisles, stairs, doors and appurtenances thereto in buildings or structures in the city shall be so arranged, assembled and of such size and so protected as to be reasonably free from hazards related to fire, seismic activity, obstructed exiting, and health hazards.

B.     The quality of all materials, method of connecting or assembling such materials, stresses allowed, and live and dead loads assumed in the design and construction of all buildings or structures in the city, shall be in accord with nationally recognized standards of quality and with generally recognized and well-established methods of structural design and construction.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.030 Permits—Fee collection.
        The following permits and tax receipts shall be issued by the Building and Fire Safety Division, and the fees therefor shall be collected by the finance department:

A.    Building permits;

B.     Electrical permits;

C.     Plumbing permits;

D.    Mechanical permits;

E.     Housing permits;

F.     Compliance permits;

G.    Demolition permits;

H.    Relocation permits;

I.      Fire Permits;

J.      Vapor recovery permits;

K.    Dwelling unit construction license tax;

L.     Strong motion instrumentation tax;

M.    Fire Permits;

N.    Mobile home permits;

O.    Mobile home park annual operating permits;

P.     Sewer connection permits;

Q.    Fire alarm permits;

R.     Permit history survey; and

S.     Any other permits or receipts as assigned to the Building and Fire Safety Division.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.040 Section 105.2 amended—Work exempt from permits.
A.    Item 1 of Section 105.2 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet (11.2m2) and when erected as accessory to an R-3 occupancy on the same property. The structure shall be at least six (6) feet from any other building on the property, maintain setbacks from property lines as outlined in the zoning code, and not exceed lot coverage limitations as specified by the zoning code.

 

B.     A new item 14 is added to Section 105.2 of the CBC to read as follows:

 

14.   Satellite dishes three (3) feet in diameter or less when utilizing only low voltage wiring.

 

C.     A new Section 105.2.4 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

105.2.4 Compliance with code. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.050 Section 105.5 amended—Expiration.
        Section 105.5 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within one (1) year of the date of permit issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year or more after the time the work is commenced. The maximum life of any permit is three (3) years. If a final inspection is not obtained within the three-year time period the permit will become invalid and a new permit will be required. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. If code violations exist relating to the building or work authorized by the permit, the building official may establish a permit expiration date of less than one hundred eighty (180) days.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.060 Section 113.1 amended, Section 113.3 deleted—Board of Appeals.
A.    Sections 113.1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of order, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created an appeals board and housing appeals board. The appeals board and housing appeals board shall be appointed by the local governing body, or comprised of the local governing body, and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business.

B.     Section 113.3 deleted—Qualifications. (Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.070 Section 501.2 amended—Address identification.
        Section 501.2 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 501.2 Address Identification. Approved numbers and/or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings and at appropriate additional locations as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or roadway fronting the property from either direction of approach. Said numbers shall contrast with their background, and shall meet the following minimum standards as to size: minimum three inches (3″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for individual suites and apartments, minimum four inches (4″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for residential buildings, minimum eight inches (8″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for commercial, multi-residential buildings, and industrial buildings. Additional numbers shall be required where deemed necessary by the building official or fire code official, such as rear access doors, building corners, and entrances to commercial centers. The building official or fire code official may require larger address numbers based on visibility and the needs of emergency response personnel.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.080 Section 1505.1.5 of Chapter 15 added—Wood Shake or Shingle Roofs Prohibited.
        Section 1505.1.5 is added to read as follows:

 

1505.1.5 Wood shake and shingle roofs are not permitted except for minor repairs no larger than one roofing square in area.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.090 Section 3202.5 added —Special Provisions for SP 182.
        Section 3202.5 of the CBC is added to read as follows:

 

3202.5      Special Provisions for SP 182. No part of any structure or any appendage thereto, except signs, shall project beyond the property line of the building site, except as specific in this chapter. Structures or appendages regulated by this code shall be constructed of materials as specified in Section 705. The projection of any structure or appendage shall be the distance measured horizontally from the property line to the outermost point of the projection.

        Nothing in this code shall prohibit the construction and use of a structure between buildings and over or under a public way, provided the structure complies with all requirements of this code.

        Nothing in this code shall prohibit the construction and use of a structure over a public way, provided that the structure is located in the area known as special development area No. 9, regulated by specific plan 182, and is located on Main Street between Ballantyne Street/Avocado Avenue on the east and Chambers Street on the west, and further, where the structure constructed over a public way is the second story of the structure, extends not more than twelve feet, maintains a minimum eight-foot headroom clearance over the public way, except for support elements, which may bear and reside on public property; further provided that the overhanging portion of the structure shall (1) incorporate sprinkler protection of the public way and be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9 of this code and the applicable sections of NFPA 13, and (2) incorporate engineering standards consistent with the provisions for essential services as categorized by Section 1604A.5 and Table 1604A.5 of this code; further, provided that any such structure constructed over a public way is first approved by way of conditional use permit granted by the city council of the city of El Cajon, and meets all other requirements under the El Cajon Municipal Code, including this code.

        No provisions of this chapter shall be construed to permit the violation of other laws or ordinances regulating the use and occupancy of public property.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.100 Section 3302 amended—Construction Safeguards and Dust Control.
A.    Section 3302 is re-titled-Construction Safeguards and Dust Control.

B.     Section 3302 is amended by adding Section 3302.4 to read as follows:

 

3302.4      Dust Control. Dust shall be controlled on construction sites by approved methods so as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.

(Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.105 Appendix O “Emergency Housing” added.
        Appendix O of the CBC, “Emergency Housing,” including sections O101 through O110 and each and every subsection contained therein, is hereby included in the building code for the city and is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 5102 § 3, 2020.)

 

15.04.110 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the California Building Code as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.04.120 Violation—Penalty.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 5089 § 4, 2019.)

Chapter 15.08 DWELLING UNIT LICENSE TAX
15.08.020 Required tax—Generally.
        No person shall construct any new dwelling unit in the city unless he shall have obtained, prior to issuance of a building permit, a license for construction of such unit and paid the tax as provided in Section 5.08.130 of the code. (Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-24.)

 

15.08.030 Tax payable—When—Refund.
        Such tax shall be due and payable upon issuance of a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit, provided, however, that there shall be a refund of tax in the event the building is not constructed and applicant shall request refund in writing. (Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-25.)

 

15.08.040 Definitions.
A.    “Person” includes every person, firm or corporation constructing a new dwelling unit itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor.

B.     “Dwelling unit” includes each single family dwelling unit, each separate habitation unit of an apartment, duplex or multi-dwelling structure designated as a separate habitation for one or more persons, although a part of the same building or structure, and each mobile home space.

        A dwelling unit is new whether being initially constructed in whole or constructed in whole as an addition to existing dwelling unit or units.

(Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-26.)

 

15.08.050 Findings of council.
        The continued increase in the development of dwelling units in the city with the attendant increase to the population of the city has created an urgency in that there are insufficient funds available for the increased demand upon park and recreational facilities required to serve the increasing population of the city. In accordance with the 1970 census of population and housing for the city, the city council finds that the development of dwelling units in the city and the increase to the population of the city correspond as follows:

A.    Single family dwelling units contain 3.7 persons per dwelling unit;

B.     Duplexes contain 2.5 persons per dwelling unit;

C.     Multiple family dwelling units contain 2.0 persons per dwelling unit;

D.    Mobile homes contain 1.8 persons per dwelling unit.

(Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-27.)

 

15.08.060 Tax imposed for revenue purposes.
        The city council declares that the tax required to be paid is assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city and solely for the purpose of producing revenue. The amount of tax to be paid as provided in Section 5.08.130 of the code is based upon the findings of the city council as set forth in Section 15.08.050 hereof. (Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-28.)

 

15.08.070 Disposition of revenue.
        All of the sums collected pursuant to Sections 15.08.020 through 15.08.060, inclusive, shall be deposited in the parks and recreation fund, and shall be expended solely for recreation purposes. (Ord. 3045 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-29.)

 

15.08.080 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 3930 § 2, 1986.)

Chapter 15.10 SCHOOL FACILITIES LAND DEDICATION AND FEES
15.10.010 Purpose and intent.
        It is the intention of the city council to implement the provisions of Section 65974 of the Government Code of the state of California to provide interim school facilities through the dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof, as may be required by the Cajon Valley Union School District, the Grossmont Union High School District, or the La Mesa-Spring Valley School District. It is the purpose of the council to provide procedures and authority whereby the city, the affected school districts, and applicants for land development approvals may undertake such reasonable steps as would alleviate the overcrowding of school facilities. Said procedures shall be established and administered so as to provide both an equitable and flexible approach. Procedures will reflect that students will often be assigned to school facilities outside of the attendance areas, and any additional students introduced into the district may impact the district’s ability to satisfy educational needs. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.020 Dedication of land and payment of fees for school facilities.
        Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 65970, et seq., of the Government Code of the state of California, every subdivider, developer or person seeking rezonings, plan approval, conditional use permits, planned unit developments or building permits for any residential development shall, for the purpose of providing interim school facilities reasonably benefiting and serving the residents of the development, dedicate a portion of the land or, in lieu thereof, pay a fee for each dwelling unit in the subdivision or development, or do both as required by this chapter. The dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof shall be applicable to all residential developments of any type allowed under the residential zones of the city. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.030 Findings and declarations.
        The city council finds and declares as follows:

A.    Adequate school facilities should be available for children residing in new residential developments.

B.     Public and private residential developments may require the expansion of existing public schools or the construction of new school facilities.

C.     In many areas of the city, the funds for the construction of new classroom facilities are not available when new development occurs, resulting in the overcrowding of existing schools.

D.    New housing developments frequently cause conditions of overcrowding in existing school facilities which cannot be alleviated under existing law within a reasonable period of time.

E.     That, for these reasons, new and improved methods of financing for interim school facilities necessitated by new development are needed in the city.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.040 Definitions.
A.    “Conditions of overcrowding” means that the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the district.

B.     “Dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof, or a mobilehome, designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two or more persons living together as a domestic unit.

C.     “Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding” may include, but are not limited to, agreements between a subdivider or other developer of residential developments and the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used.

D.    “Residential development” means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobilehomes, of one or more units or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units. Residential development includes, but is not limited to:

1.     A preliminary or final development plan, a subdivision tentative or final map, a parcel map, conditional use permit, a building permit, and any other discretionary permit for residential use;

2.     A privately proposed amendment to the general plan which would allow an increase in authorized residential density and where no further discretionary action for residential development need be taken by a decision-making body prior to application for a building permit; or

3.     Any privately proposed specific plan or amendment to a specific plan which would allow an increase in authorized residential density.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.050 General plan.
        The general plan of the city requires the provision of adequate school facilities in order to satisfy the educational needs for newly developed areas in accordance with the level of educational services as established by standards and criteria adopted by the school districts operating within the city. Further, the general plan establishes requirements for the regulation of rezoning, subdivision approval, and the granting of building permits to insure the adequacy of public facilities, including public schools. The general plan map indicates locations for elementary, junior high and high schools. Those interim school facilities to be constructed from fees paid or dedications exacted for school facilities as required by this chapter shall be consistent with the general plan of the city. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.060 Overcrowded attendance areas—School district findings.
        If the governing body of a school district which operates an elementary, junior high or high school in the city makes a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that:

1.     Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs including the reason for such conditions existing; and

2.     All reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exist;

        Then the governing body of the school district shall annually notify the city council. The notice of findings sent to the city shall specify the mitigation measures considered by the school district. After the receipt of any notice of findings complying with this section, the council shall determine whether it concurs in such school district findings. The council may schedule and hold a public hearing on the matter of its proposed concurrence prior to making its determination. If the city council concurs in such findings, the provisions of Section 15.10.090 shall be applicable to actions taken on residential development by such council. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.070 Requirements of notice of findings.
        Annual notice of findings sent by a school district to the city shall specify:

A.    Annual findings listed in Section 15.10.060;

B.     The reasonable mitigation measures and methods that have been considered, including, but not limited to, those as defined in this chapter, considered by the school district, and any determination made concerning them by the district;

C.     The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas which will be impacted by proposed student assignments from the residential development;

D.    How it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. This report shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. Findings required by this subsection are in addition to the report required by Section 15.10.200;

E.     Such other information as may be required by city regulation.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.080 Notification to school districts.
        The city shall notify each of the school districts of a request for approval of any residential developments, at the time any tentative map, rezoning, or discretionary permit is submitted or requested. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.090 Approval of residential developments—City council findings.
        The city council shall not approve an ordinance rezoning property to a residential use, grant a discretionary permit for residential use (which includes a building permit in accordance with the general plan of the city) or approve a tentative subdivision map for residential purposes for any residential developments which have been determined pursuant to Section 15.10.060 to create conditions of overcrowding impacting one or more attendance areas within the district, unless the city council makes one of the following findings:

A.    That action will be taken pursuant to this chapter to provide dedications of land and/or fees to mitigate conditions of overcrowding; or

B.     That there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social, or environmental factors which in the judgment of the city council would benefit the city, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter. An agreement between the applicant for a residential development and the school district to mitigate the conditions of overcrowding within that attendance area may be considered by council as such an overriding factor.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.100 Requirement of fees and/or dedications.
        For the purpose of establishing an interim method of providing classroom facilities where overcrowding conditions exist as determined necessary pursuant to Section 15.10.060, the city may require the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or combination of both, as determined by the planning commission or the city council during the hearings for specific residential development projects as a condition for approval. Prior to imposition of the fees or dedications of land, it shall be necessary for the city council or the planning commission to make the following findings:

A.    The general plan provides for the location of public schools.

B.     The land or fees, or both, transferred to a school district shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary, junior high or high school classrooms and related facilities.

C.     The location and amount of land to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary, junior high or high school facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development.

D.    The facilities to be constructed, purchased, leased or rented from such fees or the land to be dedicated, or both, are consistent with the general plan.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.110 Standards for land and fees.
A.    The standards for the amount of dedicated land or fees to be required shall be established by the governing board of each school district where a determination has been made pursuant to Section 15.10.060 that conditions of overcrowding exist. Such standards and facts supporting them shall be transmitted to the city council. If the city council by resolution concurs in such standards and fees, they shall, until revised, be used by decision-making bodies in situations where dedications of land and/or fees are required as a condition to the approval of a residential development.

B.     Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from establishing by resolution and using standards other than those established by the school district in the event the city council is unable to concur in those transmitted by the district. The amount of land or fees to be required may be modified from that general standard approved by resolution of the city council upon a showing that the overcrowded conditions are either more or less severe than those conditions upon which the general standard has been formulated.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.120 Payment of fees in small subdivisions.
        Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing fifty parcels or less. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.130 Application filing.
        At the time of filing an application for the approval of a proposed residential development (rezoning, tentative subdivision map or discretionary permit) located in an attendance area where the findings required by Section 15.10.060 have been made, the applicant shall as part of such filing, indicate whether the applicant prefers to dedicate land for interim school facilities, or to pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination thereof. If the applicant prefers to dedicate land, the applicant shall suggest the specific land. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.140 Decision factors.
        At the time of initial residential development approval, the city council shall determine whether to require a dedication of land within the development, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination thereof. In making this determination, the council shall consider the following factors:

A.    Whether land offered for dedication will be consistent with the general plan;

B.     The topography, soils, soil stability, drainage, access, location and general utility of land in the development available for dedication;

C.     Whether the location and amount of lands proposed to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, will bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary, junior high or high school facilities and will be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development;

D.    If only subdivision is proposed, whether it will contain fifty parcels or less.

(Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.150 Land dedication.
        When land is dedicated, it shall be offered to the school districts to be held in fee for school purposes subject to reversion in accordance with the trust provisions of Section 15.10.180 in substantially the same manner as prescribed in the subdivision ordinance for streets and public easements; provided, however, such dedicated land which subsequently is determined by the school district to be unsuitable for school purposes may be sold at the option of the school district. The funds derived therefrom must be used in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.160 Fee payment.
        If the payment of a fee is required, such payment shall be made to the school district prior to the time the building permit is approved and issued and the district shall promptly notify the city of such payment; provided, however, the school district may notify the city that appropriate agreements or surety arrangements have been made which defer said payment until such time as the city issues a certificate of completion for the residential development. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.170 Use of land and fees.
        All land or fees, or both, collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary, junior high or high school classrooms and related facilities located within the city limits of the city, or located outside the city limits if the proposed residential development is located in the attendance area of such facility located outside the city limits. Following the action by the city council to require the dedication of land or payment of fees, or both, the city clerk shall notify each school district affected thereby. Annual reports on the school district’s use of land or fees, or both, is required by Section 15.10.070D and 15.10.200. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.180 Trust land and fees and refunds thereof.
        Land and fees shall be held in trust by the school district until utilized for the purposes set forth in this chapter and as provided in Section 15.10.170 for the resolution of conditions of overcrowding in one or more attendance areas within the school district. If the development plan is vacated or voided, and building permits have not been issued, and if the applicant so requests and the respective school districts have not made use of the land or fees as provided in this chapter, the governing board of the respective school district shall order the return of the land or fees. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.190 Agreement for fee distribution.
        Where two or more separate school districts operate schools in an attendance area where the city council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for those school districts, the city council will enter into an agreement with the governing body of each school district for the purpose of determining the amount and distribution of the fees levied pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.200 Fee fund records and reports.
        Any school district receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and shall file an annual report with the city council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed and the dedication of land, during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Any school district collecting fees pursuant to this chapter which receives funds from sale or lease of excess property shall report to the city the impact of such receipts upon the district’s financial ability to mitigate overcrowded conditions. Such report shall be filed by October 15th of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the city council. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

 

15.10.210 Termination of dedication requirements.
        When it is determined that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in an attendance area, the city shall cease levying any fee or requiring the dedication of any land pursuant to this chapter for the area. Action under this section shall not affect the validity of conditions already imposed for levy of fees and declarations of land, and such conditions shall remain binding. (Ord. 3849 § 1, 1985.)

Chapter 15.12 ADEQUATE SCHOOL FACILITIES REQUIREMENT
15.12.010 Purpose.
        It is the intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to provide permanent school facilities, through the payment of fees, as may be required by the school district, pursuant to the general police powers given to the city by the California Constitution, Article IX, Section 7. It is the purpose of the council to provide procedures and authority whereby the city, the affected school district, and applicants for land use approvals, may undertake reasonable steps to mitigate the inadequacy of school facilities within the city. Furthermore, it is the intent of the council, in enacting this chapter, to establish requirements which must be met before the council will find that the community facilities element of the general plan has been satisfied. (Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3647 § 13, 1983, Ord. 2898 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2847 § 4, 1975: prior code § 7-34.)

 

15.12.020 General plan.
        The general plan of the city provides that the city may set conditions for approval of development and land use. Where approval of any land use will cause increased enrollment beyond a school’s design capacity, the city may assist the school districts in the collecting of fees to accommodate enrollment growth as a result of new development proposal. The general plan map indicates the locations of existing and proposed elementary, junior high and high schools. Those school facilities to be constructed from fees paid shall be consistent with the general plan of the city where the facilities are constructed within the city. (Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

 

15.12.030 School district certification—Land use approvals.
        In the process and review of any application for land use approval, including but not limited to zoning variances and conditional use permits, which increase residential density, tentative subdivision maps and tentative parcel maps, each application shall include a written certification from each school district having jurisdiction in the area covered by the proposed development, stating whether or not that district will be able to provide adequate facilities to the development concurrently with need. If a school district determines that it will not be able to provide such facilities, it shall include an explanation of its reasons for that determination, and a description of measures either undertaken or planned which are deemed necessary in order to provide adequate school facilities.

        Any such application shall not be deemed complete without the required written certification. (Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

 

15.12.040 School district certification—Adequate school facilities.
        After a school district has issued certification that it will be able to provide adequate school facilities concurrently with need, no further inquiry shall be made by the city council on that development application regarding the availability of adequate school facilities. (Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

 

15.12.050 School district certification—Inadequate school facilities.
A.    If a school district has determined that it will not be able to provide adequate school facilities concurrently with need, the city council shall not approve an application until the developer submits a subsequent, written certification from the school district satisfactory to the city council that adequate school facilities, as defined by the school district governing board, will be provided concurrently with need.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the city council may approve an application despite a determination by a school district that it will be unable to provide adequate school facilities concurrently with need, if:

1.     It finds that there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which, in the judgment of the city council, would benefit the city; or

2.     The application is for a condominium project converting an existing apartment building into a condominium where no new dwelling units are created.

(Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

 

15.12.060 Payment and amounts of fees.
A.    The school district may require, as a condition to the issuance of certification as provided in Sections 15.12.050 and 15.12.060 of this chapter, that the developer enter into an agreement with the school district requiring the developer to pay a fee to assure that school facilities will be provided concurrently with need.

B.     The amounts of the fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be requested by the school district, but city council shall make the final decision as to the amount. Such amount shall be subject to review by the city council at least once each year for each ensuing year.

C.     Any land use approval for which fees have been required shall include the amount of such fees, a specific finding that such amount is reasonable, and a specific statement of planned mitigation measures to address the inadequacy of school facilities.

D.    The amount of fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the need of the community for school facilities caused by the development.

E.     Nothing contained in this chapter shall

        prevent the city council from independently determining and approving a reasonable amount of fees to be paid. In each case where the city council has approved a general standard for fee amounts, the amount of fees to be required may be modified from that general standard, if approved by resolution of the council upon a showing that the inadequacy of school facilities is either more or less severe than those conditions upon which the general standard has been formulated.

(Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

 

15.12.070 Collection and distribution.
        All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable to the school district prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

 

15.12.080 School district reports.
        Any school district receiving funds shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid, and shall file a report with the city council stating the balance in the account at the end of each fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased or constructed during the previous fiscal year. The report shall also specify the areas of the city where inadequate school facilities exist and where they no longer exist. The report shall also include a recommendation as to whether or not fees are needed in order to assure that adequate school facilities are provided in the city. If fees are recommended, the report shall also contain financial information which substantiates the school district’s need for fees and specific recommendations as to the amounts of said fees. Such report shall be filed by August 1st of each year, but shall be filed more frequently at the request of the city council. (Ord. 3929 § 1, 1986.)

Chapter 15.13 TRANSPORTATION UNIFORM MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM
15.13.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “San Diego County Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Program Ordinance of 2008.” (Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

 

15.13.020 Findings.
        In adopting this chapter, the city council of the city of El Cajon finds and determines that:

A.    The city is a member agency of the San Diego Association of Governments (“SANDAG”), a joint powers agency consisting of the city, the county of San Diego, and the seventeen other cities situated in San Diego County. Acting in concert, the member agencies of SANDAG, acting in their capacity as the San Diego County regional transportation commission, developed a plan whereby the shortfall in funds needed to enlarge the capacity of the regional system of highways and arterials in San Diego County (the “regional arterial system”) could be made up in part by a transportation uniform mitigation fee on future residential development. As a member agency of SANDAG, the city participated in the preparation of a certain “RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study,” dated September 5, 2006 (the “Nexus Study”) prepared pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., the Mitigation Fee Act.

B.     The city council has been informed and advised, and finds, that future development within San Diego County and the cities therein will result in traffic volumes exceeding the capacity of the regional arterial system as it presently exists.

C.     The city council has been further informed and advised, and finds, that if the capacity of the regional arterial system is not enlarged, the result will be substantial traffic congestion in all parts of San Diego County and the city, with unacceptable levels of service throughout San Diego County by 2030.

D.    The city council has been further advised, and so finds that funding, in addition to those fees adopted pursuant to the Nexus Study, will be inadequate to fund construction of the regional arterial system. Absent implementation of a regional transportation improvement plan (“RTIP”) fee based on the Nexus Study, existing and known future funding sources will be inadequate to provide necessary improvements to the regional arterial system, resulting in an unacceptably high level of traffic congestion within and around San Diego County and the city.

E.     The city council has reviewed the Nexus Study, and finds that future development within the county and city will substantially adversely affect the regional arterial system, and that unless such development contributes to the cost of improving the regional arterial system, the regional arterial system will operate at unacceptable levels of service.

F.     The city council finds and determines that the failure to mitigate growing traffic impacts on the regional arterial system within San Diego County and the city will substantially impair the ability of public safety services (police and fire) to respond. The failure to mitigate impacts on the regional arterial system will adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.

G.    The city council further finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the use of the RTIP fee and the type of development projects on which the fees are imposed because the fees will be used to construct the transportation improvements that are necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the residential and nonresidential users of the development projects on which the RTIP fee will be levied.

H.    The city council finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the need for the improvements to the regional arterial system and the type of development projects on which the RTIP fee is imposed because it will be necessary for the residential users of such projects to have access to the regional arterial system. Such development will benefit from the regional arterial system improvements and the burden of such development will be mitigated in part by the payment of the RTIP fee.

I.      The city council further finds and determines that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the regional arterial system improvements, and that the amount of the RTIP fee expected to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share cost to such development.

J.      The city council further finds that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for the facilities that comprise the regional arterial system, and that RTIP fee program revenues to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share of these costs.

K.    The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to help pay for the construction and acquisition of the regional arterial system improvements identified in the Nexus Study. The need for the improvements is related to new development because such development results in additional traffic, thus creating the demand for the improvements.

 

L.     The city council finds that the Nexus Study proposes a fair and equitable method for distributing a portion of the unfunded costs of improvements to the regional arterial system.

M.    The city council adopts the Nexus Study and incorporates it in this chapter as though set forth in full.

(Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

 

15.13.030 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

        “Commission” means the San Diego County regional transportation commission, formed pursuant to the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission Act (California Public Utilities Code Section 132000, et seq.), which is governed by the board of directors of SANDAG.

        “Development project” or “project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of residential development, or development that includes, as a component, residential development, such as “mixed use” development, including the issuance of a permit for construction.

        “Low income residential housing” means new moderate, low, very low, and extremely low income residential units as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 50079.5, 50093, 50105, 50106, and by reference in Government Code Section 65585.1.

        “Multifamily residential property” means property, which, under the current city land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as R-2, R-2-R, R-3, R-3-R, R-4, R-5, PRD low, PRD low-medium, PRD medium, or PRD high, with or without any overlay, or equivalent.

        “Nexus Study” means the RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., which Nexus Study is on file in the city clerk’s office.

        “Residential dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which is designed primarily for residential occupancy including single-family and multifamily dwellings. “Residential dwelling unit” shall not include hotels or motels.

        “RTIP administrative plan” means the TransNet Extension Ordinance and Extension Plan adopted by the San Diego County regional transportation commission Ordinance No. 04-01 on May 28, 2004, containing the detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter the RTIP program, as may be amended from time to time, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk’s office.

        “SANDAG” means the San Diego Association of Governments, a joint powers agency consisting of the city, the county of San Diego, and the eighteen cities situated in San Diego County.

        “Single-family residential unit” means each residential dwelling unit in a development on property, which, under the current city land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as O-S, R-1-6, R-S-9, R-S-14, R-E-20, R-E-40, PRD low-low, or C-2 (mixed use), with or without any overlay, or equivalent. (Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

 

15.13.040 Establishment of the transportation uniform mitigation fee.
A.    Adoption. The schedule of fees shall be adopted by resolution approved by the city council (“resolution”).

B.     Fee Calculation. The fees shall be calculated according to the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, as may be amended from time to time

C.     Fee Adjustment. The fee schedule may be periodically reviewed and the amounts adjusted by the San Diego County regional transportation commission. By amendment to the resolution, the fees may be increased or decreased to reflect changes in actual and estimated costs of the regional arterial system including, but not limited to, debt service, lease payments and construction costs. The adjustment of the fees may also reflect changes in the facilities required to be constructed, in estimated revenues received pursuant to this chapter, as well as the availability or lack thereof of other funds with which to construct the regional arterial system. SANDAG shall review the RTIP fee program no less than every ten years after July 1, 2009.

D.    Purpose. The purpose of the RTIP fee is to fund those certain improvements to the regional arterial system identified in the Nexus Study.

E.     Applicability. The RTIP shall apply to all new development projects within the city, which include the development of one or more residential dwelling units, unless otherwise exempted by the provision of this chapter.

F.     Exemptions. The following new development shall be exempt from the TUMF:

1.     Low income residential housing;

2.     Government/public buildings, public schools and public facilities;

3.     The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal, residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing residential dwelling unit;

4.     All new, rehabilitated, and/or reconstructed nonresidential structures.

5.     Development projects which are the subject of a public facilities development agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq., prior to the effective date of this chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited; provided however that, if the term of such a development agreement is extended by amendment or by any other manner after July 1, 2008, the RTIP fee shall be imposed;

6.     Guest dwellings, as defined in Title 17 of the El Cajon Municipal Code;

7.     Additional residential units located on the same parcel pursuant to the provisions of any agricultural zoning classifications set forth in Title 17 of the El Cajon Municipal Code;

8.     Kennels and catteries established in connection with an existing residential unit and as defined in Title 17 of the El Cajon Municipal Code;

9.     The sanctuary building of a church, mosque, synagogue, or other house of worship, eligible for a property tax exemption;

10.   Residential units that have been issued a building permit prior to July 1, 2008; and

11.   Condominium conversions.

G.    Credit. Regional system improvements may be credited toward the RTIP fee in accordance with the RTIP administrative plan and the following:

1.     Regional Tier.

a.     Arterial Credits. If a developer funds or constructs arterial improvements identified on SANDAG’s regional arterial system and/or that arise out of SANDAG’s congestion management program, the developer shall receive credit for all costs associated with the arterial improvements, offsetting the revenue requirements of the RTIP administrative plan.

b.     Other Credits. In special circumstances, when a developer constructs off-site improvements such as an interchange, bridge, or railroad grade separation, credits shall be determined by the city in consultation with the developer.

c.     The amount of the development fee credit shall not exceed the revenue requirements of the city’s most current funding program (determined by the most current unit cost assumptions) for its share of the regional system or actual costs, whichever is less.

2.     Local Tier.

a.     The city shall compare facilities in local fee programs against the regional system and eliminate any overlap in its local fee program except where there is a recognized financing district has been established.

b.     If there is a recognized financing district established, the city may credit that portion of the facility identified in both programs against the RTIP fee in accordance with the RTIP administrative plan.

(Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

 

15.13.050 Reimbursements.
        Should a developer construct regional arterial system improvements in excess of the RTIP fee obligation, the developer may be reimbursed based on actual costs or the approved unit cost assumptions, whichever is less. Reimbursements shall be enacted through a three party agreement including the developer, SANDAG and the city, contingent on funds being available. In all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must coincide with construction of the transportation improvements as scheduled in the five-year capital improvements program adopted annually by SANDAG. (Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

 

15.13.060 Procedures for the levy, collection, and disposition of fees.
A.    Authority of the Community Development Department. The director of community development, or his/her designee, is authorized to levy and collect the RTIP fee and make all determinations required by this chapter, except as otherwise provided in Section 15.13.070.

B.     Payment. Payment of the fees shall be as follows:

1.     The fees shall be paid at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development project or upon final inspection, whichever comes first (the “payment date”). However, this section should not be construed to prevent payment of the fees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or final inspection. Fees may be paid at the time application is made for a building permit and the fee payment shall be calculated based on the fee in effect at that time, provided the developer tenders the full amount of his/her RTIP fee obligation. If the developer makes only a partial payment prior to the payment date, the amount of the fee due shall be based on the RTIP fee schedule in place on the payment date. The fees shall be calculated according to fee schedule set forth in the resolution and the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, in effect on the payment date.

2.     The fees required to be paid shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time of payment is due under this chapter, not the date the ordinance approving this chapter is initially adopted. The city shall not enter into a development agreement, which freezes future adjustments of the RTIP fee.

3.     If all or part of any development project is sold prior to payment of the fee, the property shall continue to be subject to the requirement for payment of the fee, accordingly, the fees shall run with the land.

4.     Fees shall not be waived.

C.     Disposition of Fees. All fees collected hereunder shall be transmitted to a fund established and designated by the city for deposit, investment, accounting and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act.

D.    Appeals. Appeals shall be filed with the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.36 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. Appealable issues shall be the application of the fee, application of credits, application of reimbursement, application of the legal action stay and application of exemption.

E.     Reports to SANDAG. The director of community development, or his/her designee, shall prepare and deliver to the executive director of SANDAG, periodic reports as will be established under Section 15.13.070 of this chapter.

(Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

 

15.13.070 RTIP fee administrator.
A.    The director of public works is appointed as the administrator of the transportation uniform mitigation fee program. He or she is authorized to receive all fees generated from the RTIP fee within the city, and to invest, account for and expend such fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act. The detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter shall be contained in the RTIP administrative plan developed by the RTIP administrator. Furthermore, the RTIP administrator shall use the Nexus Study for the purpose of calculating a developer’s RTIP fee obligation. In addition to detailing the methodology for calculating all RTIP fee obligations of different categories of new development, the purpose of the Nexus Study is to clarify for the RTIP administrator, where necessary, the definition and calculation methodology for uses not clearly defined in this chapter.

B.     The city shall expend only that amount of the funds generated from the RTIP fee for staff support, audit, administrative expenses, and contract services that are necessary and reasonable to carry out its responsibilities and in no case shall the funds expended for salaries and benefits exceed the annual net amount of revenue raised by the RTIP fee. The RTIP administrative plan further outlines the fiscal responsibilities and limitations of the administrator.

(Ord. 4912 § 2, 2008)

Chapter 15.14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Note
*       Prior ordinance history; Ord. 3126.

 

15.14.005 Statutory authorization.
        The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units’ authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of El Cajon does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 4802 § 1, 2005; Ord. 4795 § 1, 2004.)

 

15.14.010 Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A     Protect human life and health;

B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who develop in special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions.

(Ord. 4550, 1997; Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.020 Methods of reducing flood losses.
        In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

(Ord. 4550, 1997; Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.030 Definitions.
        Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

1.     “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

2.     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

3.     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

4.     “Area of special flood hazard”—see “Special flood hazard area.”

5.     “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

6.     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade—i.e., below ground level—on all sides.

7.     “Building”—see “Structure.”

8.     “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

9.     “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a flood plain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

10.   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

11.   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

12.   “Flood, flooding or floodwater”“ means:

a.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;

b.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion—see “Flood-related erosion”.

13.   “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

14.   “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

15.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

16.   “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

17.   “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source—see “Flooding”.

18.   “Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

19.   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

20.   “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning chapters, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose chapters (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

21.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

22.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway”.

23.   “Floodway encroachment lines” means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal state and local floodplain maps.

24.   “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

25.   “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

26.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

27.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

a.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

b.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

c.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

d.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

28.   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

29.   “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

30.   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement.

An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see “Basement”) is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including but not limited to:

a.     the wet floodproofing standard in Section 15.14.060.A.3.c.

b.     the anchoring standards in Section 15.14.060.A.1.

c.     the construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.14.060.A.2.

d.     the standards for utilities in Section 15.14.060.B.

For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

31.   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.

32.   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

33.   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

34.   “New construction”, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

35.   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

36.   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization bridge, conduit culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or is likely to be carried downstream.

37.   “One hundred year flood” or “100-year flood”—see “Base flood”.

38.   “Principal structure” means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use.

39.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

a.     Built on a single chassis;

b.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

c.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

d.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

40.   “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

40.5 “Remedy a violation” means to bring a structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include: protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deferring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

41.   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

42.   “Sheet flow area”—see “Area of shallow flooding”.

43.   “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.

44.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

45.   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

46.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

47.   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

a.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b.     Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

48.   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

48.5 “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development with the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

49.   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

(Ord. 4550, 1997; Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.040 General provisions.
A.    Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of El Cajon.

B.     Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the preliminary Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated October 31, 1994 and accompanying preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated October 31, 1994, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the City of El Cajon Departments of Community Development and Public Works, 200 E. Main Street, El Cajon, CA 92020.

C.     Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

D.    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

E.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

1.     Considered as minimum requirements;

2.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

3.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

F.     Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of El Cajon, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

G.    Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any portion thereof, other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

(Ord. 4550, 1997; Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.050 Administration.
A.    Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.14.040(B) of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

1.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or

2.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.14.060(A)(3); and

3.     All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.14.050(C)(6); and

4.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

B.     Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The director of community development is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.

C.     Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

a.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

b.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

c.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

d.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

2.     Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.14.040(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source in order to administer Section 15.14.060. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

3.     Notification of Other Agencies—Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse:

a.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

b.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

c.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

4.     Notification of Other Agencies—Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations:

a.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).

b.     All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

5.     Notification of Other Agencies—Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

6.     Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

a.     Certification required by Section 15.14.060(A)(3)(a) (floor elevations);

b.     Certification required by Section 15.14.060(A)(3)(b) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

c.     Certification required by Sections 15.14.060(A)(3)(c) (wet floodproofing standard);

d.     Certification of elevation required by Section 15.14.060(C)(2) (subdivision standards);

e.     Certification required by Section 15.14.060(F)(1) (floodway encroachments).

8.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.14.040(C).

D.    Appeals. The planning commission of the city of El Cajon shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council within ten days of the decision of the planning commission.

(Ord. 4920 § 2, 2008.)

 

15.14.060 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
A.    Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

1.     Anchoring.

a.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

b.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.14.060(D).

2.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

a.     With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

b.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

c.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

d.     If within Zone AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

3.     Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.14.030 definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

a.     Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

(1)    In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

(2)    In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community.

(3)    In all other zones, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

b.     Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.14.060(3)(a) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

(1)    Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.14.060(3)(a) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(2)    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

(3)    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection (A)(3)(b)) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

c.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basement) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

(1)    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

(2)    Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

d.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in subsection D of this section.

B.     Standards for Utilities.

1.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

a.     Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and

b.     Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

2.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.

C.     Standards for Subdivisions.

1.     All preliminary subdivision proposals of greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

2.     All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad (s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

3.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

4.     All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

5.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

D.    Standards for Manufactured Homes.

1.     All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30 on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

a.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,

b.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,

c.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or

d.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

2.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30 on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.14.060(D)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse, and elevated so that either the:

a.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or

b.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade.

E.     Standards for Recreational Vehicles.

1.     All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

a.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; and be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

b.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.14.050 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.14.060(D)(1).

F.     Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.14.040(B) are designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

1.     Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in [the base] flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

2.     If Section 15.14.060(F)(1) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.14.060.

(Ord. 4550, 1997; Ord. 4534, 1997.)

 

15.14.070 Variance procedure.
A.    Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

        It is the duty of the planning commission to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare.

B.     Procedure.

1.     In passing upon requests or variances, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:

a.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

b.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

c.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

d.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

e.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

f.      Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

g.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

h.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

i.      Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

j.      Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

2.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice from the floodplain administrator that:

a.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

b.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.

c.     A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

3.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

4.     Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the city council in the manner provided in Chapter 17.70 of this code.

C.     Conditions for Variances.

1.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.14.050 and 15.14.060 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

2.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 15.14.030 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

3.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if it would cause any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.

4.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the planning commission need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the planning commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local chapter.

5.     Variances shall only be issued upon:

a.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

b.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Section 15.14.030 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

c.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; create a nuisance, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters.

6.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.1.070(C)(1) through 15.14.070(C)(5) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods and minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

7.     Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.14.070(B) and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(Ord. 4550, 1997; Ord. 4534, 1997.)

 

15.14.080 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997.)

 

15.14.090 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.100 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.110 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.120 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.130 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.140 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.150 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.14.160 Repealed.
(Repealed by Ord. 4534, 1997; Ord. 4085 § 1, 1988.)

Chapter 15.16 UNSAFE BUILDINGS, SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY OR DANGEROUS CONDITIONS
15.16.010 Short title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “unsafe buildings ordinance” of the city. (Ord. 4639 § 3, 2000.)

 

15.16.020 General definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein, certain words, phrases and terms, and their derivatives, shall be construed as specified in this chapter. Words, phrases and terms used in this chapter, but not specifically defined herein, shall have the meanings stated in the currently adopted regulatory codes of the city, including the California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the California Plumbing Code, the California Mechanical Code, the California Electrical Code, and the Uniform Fire Code. Where not defined in this chapter or in the foregoing codes, such words, phrases and terms shall have the meanings stated in Webster’s New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, Second Edition. For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

A.    Notice of Violation. A written notification to the owner and/or other person responsible for a violation of the code, which provides a reasonable time period to correct the violation, prior to the city commencing enforcement action.

B.     Stop Work Notice. A notice issued by the Building Official, or his or her designee, ordering that work commenced in violation of a permit, or without the required permit, immediately cease until the appropriate permit has been obtained.

C.     Administrative Citation. A written notice of violation of a provision of the El Cajon Municipal Code, which includes the imposition of an administrative fine.

D.    Notice and Order to Abate. A notice of and order to eliminate a substandard, nuisance, or dangerous condition, which does not pose an immediate threat to health or safety. This notice sets the time and date for a public hearing before the city council.

E.     Notice and Order to Demolish. A notice issued by the city manager, city attorney, fire chief, or building official ordering that a building or structure be demolished and removed.

F.     Notice and Order to Vacate the Premises. A notice issued by the city manager, city attorney, fire chief, or building official ordering the occupants and/or tenants of a building, or structure to vacate the premises.

G.    Summary Abatement and Notice and Order to Eliminate Dangerous Conditions. Authorization by the city manager, or his or her designee, to commence immediate action to abate conditions that are an immediate threat to health and safety.

H.    Notice of Response to a Dangerous Condition. A notice that describes the nature of an action that has been taken in response to an unsafe or dangerous condition, which has been summarily abated.

(Ord. 4639 § 4, 2000.)

 

15.16.030 Substandard conditions designated.
        For the purposes of this chapter, any building, structure or portion thereof, which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described, shall be deemed to be an unsafe building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:

A.    Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;

B.     Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property;

C.     Whenever the building, structure or any portion thereof, because of:

1.     Dilapidation, deterioration or decay,

2.     Faulty construction,

3.     The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building,

4.     The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation,

5.     Water damage to structural members or wall/ceiling construction, or

6.     Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse;

D.    Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or portion thereof, is unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;

E.     Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to:

1.     Become an attractive nuisance to children,

2.     Become a harbor for trespassers,

3.     Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts;

F.     Whenever any building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this city, as specified in any of the adopted regulatory codes of the city, or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;

G.    Whenever any building, structure or portion thereof which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has been reduced in:

1.     Strength,

2.     Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or

3.     Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics;

H.    Whenever a building, structure or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer or building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;

I.      Whenever any building, structure, or portion thereof, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal or building official to be a fire hazard;

J.      Whenever any building structure or portion thereof is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence;

K.    Whenever any portion of a building, structure or portion thereof remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

        For the purpose of this chapter, a “dangerous condition” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions which risk the immediate safety of persons or property within this city as determined by the city council, or by the city manager in his or her sole discretion.

(Ord. 4639 § 5, 2000.)

 

15.16.040 Sanitation—Structural hazards designated.
        For the purpose of this chapter, any building, structure or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public, or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and is declared to be a substandard building:

A.    Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation includes, but is not limited to the following:

1.     Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit,

2.     Lack of or improper kitchen sink,

3.     Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit,

4.     Lack of improper operation of necessary ventilating equipment,

5.     Lack of reasonable amounts of natural light and ventilation,

6.     Room and space dimensions less than required by this code,

7.     Lack of necessary electrical lighting,

8.     Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents,

9.     Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system;

B.     Structural Hazards. Structural hazards includes but is not limited to the following:

1.     Whenever the building, structure or any portion thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse because of:

a.     Dilapidation, deterioration or decay,

b.     Faulty construction,

c.     The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building,

d.     The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation, or

e.     Any other cause.

2.     Whenever any building, structure or portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

3.     Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows twenty-five percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or thirty-three percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members or coverings.

C.     Hazardous Wiring. All wiring except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner;

D.    Hazardous Plumbing. All plumbing except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross-connections and siphonage between fixtures;

E.     Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation, and which has been maintained in good and safe condition;

F.     Inadequate Exits. All buildings, structures or portions thereof, not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this chapter, except those buildings, structures or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupancy load, alteration or addition or any change in occupancy;

        When an unsafe condition exists through lack of, or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed;

G.    Inadequate Fire Protection or Fire Fighting Equipment. All buildings, structures or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy;

H.    Improper Occupancy. All buildings, structures or portions thereof occupied for any purpose other than that for which they were approved, including all buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies;

I.      Abandoned or Partial Buildings. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months, so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public;

J.      Mold and mildew in such quantity as to constitute a health hazard to the tenants or occupants as determined by the building official.

(Ord. 4639 § 6, 2000.)

 

15.16.050 Additional substandard conditions designated.
        For the purposes of this chapter, any building, structure or portion thereof, which has any one or more of the following conditions constitutes substandard property:

A.    Substandard buildings;

B.     Unpainted buildings or buildings with dry rot, warping and/or termite infestation;

C.     Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief;

D.    Inoperable or abandoned motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats and other mobile equipment stored for unreasonable periods on the premises;

E.     Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the form of unattended, abandoned, broken equipment and neglected machinery;

F.     Clotheslines in front yard areas;

G.    Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities;

H.    Trash and garbage containers stored in front or side yards and visible from public streets, except when placed in areas of collection at times permitted in compliance with this code;

I.      Maintenance of premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance;

J.      Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties;

K.    All premises on which any abandoned underground storage tanks, cesspools, wells, pits, shafts or other dangerous excavations may exist.

(Ord. 4639 § 7, 2000.)

 

15.16.060 Additional dangerous conditions designated.
        Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the discretion of the city manager in his or her determination that a “dangerous condition” exists. The determination by the city manager that a condition poses imminent danger shall be final. (Ord. 4639 § 8, 2000.)

 

15.16.070 Authority to enforce chapter.
        The building official and the fire chief are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager may delegate authority for the enforcement of the provisions on “dangerous conditions.” (Ord. 4639 § 9, 2000.)

 

15.16.080 Right of inspection.
        The building official, the city manager and the fire chief are authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4639 § 10, 2000.)

 

15.16.090 Public nuisances to be abated.
        All buildings, structures, properties or portions thereof which are determined by the building official or the fire chief to be unsafe or substandard are declared to be public nuisances, and may be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or clearing in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. (Ord. 4639 § 11, 2000.)

 

15.16.100 Dangerous conditions to be eliminated.
        All conditions which are determined by the city manager to risk the immediate safety of persons or property within this city are declared to be dangerous conditions, and may be eliminated in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter, or other applicable sections of the El Cajon Municipal Code, or other applicable laws. (Ord. 4639 § 12, 2000.)

 

15.16.110 Availability of administrative resolution.
        Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the building official from informally notifying a property owner or other responsible person that his or her property is in violation of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 4639 § 13, 2000.)

 

15.16.120 Standards in ordering repairs, demolition, or summary abatement.
        Whenever the city manager, fire chief, or building official has inspected, or caused to be inspected any building, structure, property, or portion thereof, and has determined it to be unsafe, substandard, dangerous, or a public nuisance, proceedings shall commence to enforce repair, rehabilitation, demolition, elimination, vacation, removal or clearing by any method or combination of the following:

A.    Notice of Violation. A notice of violation may be issued informing the owner and/or other responsible person of the nature of the code violation and providing a reasonable period of time for corrective action.

B.     Stop Work Notice. A stop work notice may be issued if an owner and/or other responsible person has caused the construction, enlargement, erection, alteration, repair, improvement, conversion, demolition of a building, structure or portion thereof, in violation of a permit, or without the required permit.

C.     Administrative Citation. An administrative citation may be issued, in accordance with chapter 1.14, imposing an administrative fine for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Notice and Order to Abate (Substandard Conditions, Public Nuisance, Dangerous/Unsafe Conditions). If a building, structure, property, or portion thereof, is in substandard or unsafe condition, but it is not immediately dangerous, a notice to abate may be issued. The notice shall order such building, structure, property, or portion thereof, be repaired or cleared.

E.     Notice and Order to Vacate Premises. If a building, structure, or property has been declared to be substandard or unsafe by the city council, or in the case where a building, structure, or property has been determined to be an immediate danger to the occupants or tenants, a notice and order to vacate premises shall be issued requiring the tenants and/or occupants to vacate the premises. No new occupants or tenants shall be permitted to occupy the space until such time as the unsafe, dangerous, or substandard condition has been corrected or removed, and the building official has confirmed such correction by re-inspecting the property. The city shall bear no cost for any relocation of any occupant or tenant.

F.     Notice and Order to Demolish. If a building or structure has been declared by the city council to be in a substandard or unsafe condition, a notice and order to demolish the building may be issued. A notice and order to demolish shall not indicate an alternative permission to repair; however, an order requiring repair may be satisfied by demolition and removal. The city shall bear no costs for demolition and removal of the property.

G.    Summary Abatement and Notice and Order to Eliminate Dangerous Conditions. Whenever a building, structure, or property has been declared to be an immediate danger to life, property, health, or limb, a summary abatement action may be authorized at the sole discretion of the city manager. Such action may be of any nature that is appropriate to remove the dangerous condition, and may include an order to demolish the premises. All costs associated with such action shall be charged to the property owner(s).

H.    Notice of Response to Dangerous Condition. After summary abatement has occurred, a notice of response to dangerous condition shall be issued indicating the nature of the action taken.

(Ord. 4639 § 14, 2000.)

 

15.16.130 Standards of maintenance and repair.
        Repairs and/or maintenance conducted pursuant to any action taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be accomplished in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, and in accordance with industry standards.

A.    Patching of wall, floor, ceiling, door, and similar surfaces shall mean patching with approved materials, texture and paint to match existing surfaces.

B.     Fencing, where installed, shall be maintained in good condition. Any repair and/or maintenance of fencing shall require use of like materials in good condition, painted and/or surfaced to match the existing fencing.

C.     Surfaces of walkways and building components shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition.

D.    Landscaped areas shall be maintained in an approved manner.

E.     Cracked and broken driveways, sidewalks, and walkways must be repaired and/or replaced, or resurfaced.

F.     Where accumulation of trash and debris constitutes a recurring problem, a trash enclosure shall be required, at the discretion of the building official, to be installed.

G.    Buildings shall be painted a minimum of at least once in every ten year period, or more frequently if deemed appropriate by the building official, based upon the condition of the building.

H.    Insect screening, where installed, shall be kept in good repair and free from rips, tears and broken frames.

        Maintenance standards may be enforced through any provision of the Municipal Code. The building official may, at his or her discretion, require that a licensed contractor conduct repairs that are commenced as a result of an enforcement action brought under the provisions of this code. (Ord. 4639 § 15, 2000.)

 

15.16.135 Standards for temporary boarding of structures.
        The building official may, at his/her discretion, require that an unsafe, substandard or dangerous structure be boarded up in order to abate a nuisance and protect against the intrusion of transients. Boarding of the structure shall be accomplished in accordance with the standard for boarding of structures on file with the building division. (Ord. 4711 § 1, 2002.)

 

15.16.140 Commencement of proceedings to compel repairs or demolition.
A.    Whenever the building official or the fire chief has inspected or caused to be inspected any building, structure, property or portion thereof, and has found and determined it to be unsafe or substandard, he or she shall commence proceedings to cause repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or clearing as follows:

1.     In the case of an inspection, finding and determination by the building official, he or she shall obtain the written report of the fire chief before proceeding;

2.     In the case of an inspection, finding and determination by the fire chief, he or she shall send to the building official a letter which lists violations of this code and declares his or her recommendations.

B.     Whenever the city manager in his or her sole discretion has determined an existing condition to be a dangerous condition requiring the application of this chapter, he or she shall commence proceeding to eliminate the dangerous condition as follows:

1.     In the case of a dangerous condition which requires immediate action, he or she shall take such action or designate another to take action as he or she believes to be necessary, and send a letter to the building official advising him or her of the action taken and the circumstances surrounding such actions.

2.     In the case of a dangerous condition which does not require immediate action, but must, in his or her opinion, be eliminated quickly, he or she shall send to the building official a letter describing the dangerous condition and declaring what action he or she has determined necessary for the property owner to take.

(Ord. 4639 § 16, 2000.)

 

15.16.150 Building official to determine ownership and request hearing date.
        After the inspection of any building, structure, property or portion thereof pursuant to subsection A of Section 15.16.140, or upon a determination of a dangerous condition pursuant to subsection B of Section 15.16.140, the building official shall:

A.    Obtain the names and addresses of all persons having a recorded interest in the property, through a current title search; and

B.     Request the city clerk to set a date for a hearing by the city council to determine whether the declaration of substandard or unsafe building, structure or property, or the declaration of dangerous condition, is warranted.

(Ord. 4639 § 17, 2000.)

 

15.16.160 Content of notices.
        Notices shall contain all of the following:

A.    A description of the building, structure and/or property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify it;

B.     The conditions which have been determined to be defective or dangerous with sufficient particularity to enable repair if appropriate;

C.     The date which the city clerk has set for hearing by the city council, if appropriate;

D.    The work which is required to be done, either repaired or rehabilitated in the case of a notice of violation, stop work notice; demolished and removed, or repaired or demolished and removed, in the case of a notice and order to demolish; or either instructions to eliminate as provided by the city manager in the case of a notice and order to eliminate a dangerous condition, or a description of the work which was done in the case of a notice of response to dangerous condition;

E.     The date upon or before which the order must be complied with, if appropriate.

        The notice shall be dated and served in the manner provided in Section 15.16.170 at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or in the case of a notice and order to eliminate a dangerous condition, it shall be dated and served within twenty-four hours of the hearing. Copies mailed or served personally shall state the name of the owner to whom they are addressed. (Ord. 4639 § 18, 2000.)

 

15.16.170 Copies of notice—Service—Posting.
        A copy of a stop work notice, or notice of violation may be served by either certified postage prepaid, return receipt requested United States mail, or by personal service to the property owner and/or the responsible person.

        A copy of the notice and order to abate, the notice and order to vacate premises, the notice and order to demolish, summary abatement, and notice and order to abate dangerous conditions, and the notice of response to dangerous condition, shall be served upon each owner of the subject property, as provided in this section. Copies of said notice shall also be sent to the building official, fire chief, city attorney, and city clerk, and where the notice has been initiated at the discretion of the city manager, a copy shall also be sent to the city manager. Copies shall also be posted as provided in this section.

        Said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) in one of the following manners:

A.    By personal service on the owner(s);

B.     By certified or registered United States mail, addressed to each owner at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known.

        In addition to service as in subsections A or B of this section, copies of said notice shall be posted at conspicuous places on the property, or at, or upon each exit of the building or structure. (Ord. 4639 § 19, 2000.)

 

15.16.180 Hearing by city council.
        On the date set by the city clerk, unless the owner(s) of the subject property have before that date remedied the listed defects or dangerous conditions to the satisfaction of the fire chief and the building official, or where appropriate the city manager, the city council shall hold a hearing on the matter to determine whether the declaration of substandard or unsafe building, structure or property, or dangerous condition is warranted, and its decision shall be final.

        The building official or his or her representative shall attend such hearing and shall present the reasons for the determination of the fire chief or the building official. In cases where the city manager has determined a dangerous condition to exist, the city manager or his or her representative shall attend such hearing and shall present the reasons for his determination. Any owner(s) of the subject property may attend said hearing and shall be afforded an opportunity to present reasons why such declaration is not warranted and/or why repair, clearing, demolition and removal, or elimination of a dangerous condition should not be required.

        After hearing such testimony as may be offered, the city council shall decide whether the declaration is warranted. If the city council decides such declaration is not warranted, then the proceedings shall be terminated and any notices that have been posted shall be removed by the building official. (Ord. 4639 § 20, 2000.)

 

15.16.190 Concurrence by city council—Duty to comply—Time for compliance.
        If the city council concurs in the determination of the building official, the fire chief, or the city manager, and finds that the declaration of substandard or unsafe building, structure or property or dangerous condition is warranted, then the city council shall order the owner(s) of the subject property to comply with the requirements of the notice. Said compliance shall be made on or before a date determined by the city council to be reasonable under the circumstances. When appropriate, the city council may direct staff to record a notice of noncompliance pursuant to § 15.16.200. (Ord. 4639 § 21, 2000.)

 

15.16.200 Notice and appeal—Housing violations—Notification to State Franchise Tax Board.
A.    The city manager and the city attorney are authorized to determine whether any rental housing within the city is in violation of state or local law. Following such determination, the property owner shall be notified by the building official and/or the city attorney that failure to correct substandard conditions on the property within six months will result in notification to the State Franchise Tax Board.

B.     If the conditions are not brought into compliance within six months, the building official shall be directed to prepare and mail by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, a notice of noncompliance to the affected property owner. Such notice shall reflect that substandard housing conditions have not been cured within the time prescribed by law and shall advise the property owner of a right to appeal.

1.     The affected property owner may appeal the city manager or city attorney’s determination by filing a written request with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of noncompliance. The filing of such appeal shall stay notification to the State Franchise Tax Board until the city council has acted on the appeal.

2.     If no appeal is filed within ten days, the building official shall forward a copy of the notice of noncompliance to the State Franchise Tax Board. The city council may also be requested by staff to approve any actions already taken with respect to such notification, including forwarding such notice to the State Franchise Tax Board.

C.     The city council shall review evidence submitted on appeal, and affirm, modify or reverse the determination with respect to the existence of state law or municipal code violations on the property.

1.     If the city council determines that a violation exists on the property, the building official shall be directed to forward a copy of the notice of noncompliance to the State Franchise Tax Board.

D.    Upon appeal, the city council shall make written findings on the evidence and a copy of such findings shall be mailed by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the affected property owner. Action by the city council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive.

(Ord. 4639 § 22, 2000.)

 

15.16.210 Concurrence with notice—Notice of intent to lien.
        Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the owner(s) of the subject property to comply with the requirements of the notice on or before the date specified for the performance of said work, or upon the determination of the city attorney that due to the nature of the violation an intent to lien should be filed earlier, the building official or the city attorney shall cause to be recorded with the county recorder a “Notice of Intent to Lien.”

        After having caused the notice of intent to lien to be recorded, the building official shall cause the work to be done if not already completed. When the work is completed, the building official shall file with the city clerk a report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of the work.

        A determination by the city attorney that a notice of intent to lien is to be filed without demonstrated noncompliance with a notice to correct or abate may be appealed to the city council by written notice to the city clerk within ten days of such determination. A request for appeal shall stay any recording of such notice until the city council has reviewed the determination. The decision of the city council shall be final. If the city council concurs with the determination of the city attorney, the notice of intent to lien may be recorded. (Ord. 4639 § 23, 2000.)

 

15.16.220 Lien—Notice and service.
        The notice of intent to lien issued pursuant to this chapter shall give notice to the owner that a lien for the costs of work performed, and civil penalties where appropriate, may be claimed. Service of the notice shall be made upon all persons identified in the notice either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified United States mail, return receipt requested. If the address of any such person cannot reasonably be ascertained, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to such person at the address of the location where such work was required. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by certified United States mail in the manner provided in this section shall be effective on the date of postmark. The notice shall be posted on the subject property. (Ord. 4639 § 24, 2000.)

 

15.16.230 Lien and personal obligation.
        The city shall have a lien for the cost of any work performed, and civil penalties pursuant to this code against the real property on which such work was rendered and against any other real property within the jurisdiction of the city which is owned by the person responsible for causing the need for such work.

        The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it shall be on a parity.

        The costs of such work are also joint and separate personal obligations of the person who caused the need for such work. The city attorney may collect the costs by use of all appropriate legal remedies.

        The lien provided by this section may be foreclosed and enforced by a civil action in a court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 4639 § 25, 2000.)

 

15.16.240 Recording.
        The San Diego County recorder’s office shall record and index the notices of intent to lien described in this chapter. No lien created by this chapter binds the property subject to the lien for a period longer than three years after the notice of intent to lien has been filed, unless an action is commenced in the proper court within that time to enforce the lien. (Ord. 4639 § 26, 2000.)

 

15.16.250 Cost of work charged to owner of property—Billing of owner.
        When the city has completed the work ordered to be done, or has undertaken immediate elimination of a dangerous condition, the actual cost thereof shall be charged to the owner of such property, and the owner, or his agent, shall be billed therefor by mail, if not paid prior thereto. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill will result in a lien against the subject property and a joint and separate personal obligation. (Ord. 4639 § 27, 2000.)

 

15.16.260 Failure of owner to pay—Hearing—Notice.
        Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty days after the date of billing, the city clerk shall set the report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after such thirty-day period has expired. The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and account, and a notice of the time and place of the hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the city council chambers. (Ord. 4639 § 28, 2000.)

 

15.16.270 Hearing—Council confirmation or modification.
        The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by interested parties. Any owner of land or person affected by the proposed charge may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision of the city council on the report and the charge and on all protests or objections shall be final and conclusive. The amounts so approved shall be charged to the property owner on the next regular tax bill and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall confirm such assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. (Ord. 4639 § 29, 2000.)

 

15.16.280 Time for accepting payment.
        The city finance department may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council hearing called for in Section 15.16.230. (Ord. 4639 § 30, 2000.)

 

15.16.290 Certain assessments paid in installments.
        The city council, in its discretion, may determine that assessments in amounts of five hundred dollars or more shall be payable in not to exceed five equal annual installments. The city council’s determination to allow payment of such assessments in installments, the number of installments, whether they shall bear interest and the rate thereof shall be by a resolution adopted prior to the confirmation of the assessment. (Ord. 4639 § 31, 2000.)

 

15.16.300 Interest on unpaid assessments.
        All assessments remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of confirmation of the assessments by the city council shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from and after such date. (Ord. 4639 § 32, 2000.)

 

15.16.310 Administrative fees.
        The person who is determined to be the responsible party for the maintenance of the property as a public nuisance or dangerous condition shall be charged an administrative fee to cover the administrative costs incurred by the city in bringing this case to public hearing, in addition to recovery of costs associated with actual staff time involved with enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 4899 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.16.320 Enforcement.
        If, after a hearing by the city council pursuant to Section 8.10.110, the person charged with payment of costs for work performed fails, neglects or refuses to pay such costs, the building official may:

A.    Refer the matter to the city attorney for prosecution under the provisions of this chapter; and/or

B.     Institute any appropriate action to collect the costs of work performed under this chapter; and/or

C.     Pursue any other appropriate remedy at law or equity.

(Ord. 4639 § 34, 2000.)

 

15.16.330 Alternative recovery rights.
        In addition to its rights to cost recovery under this section, the city shall retain the alternative rights to recover its costs by way of the city’s nuisance abatement procedure (El Cajon Municipal Code Chapter 1.16), or by civil action. (Ord. 4639 § 35, 2000.)

 

15.16.340 Compliance with chapter—Penalty for violation.
        No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. All violations of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative citation, in accordance with Chapter 1.14, and civil penalties in accordance with Chapters 1.24 and 15.18 of this code. (Ord. 4639 § 36, 2000.)

Chapter 15.18 BUILDING, ZONING AND LAND USE VIOLATIONS
15.18.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this title, the words and phrases designated in this section shall be defined as follows:

A.    Commercial Venture. “Commercial venture” means any development, management, sale, rental or use of property other than the sole purpose of residential occupancy by the property owner or his or her immediate family members.

B.     Director. “Director” means the director of building and planning, and shall include any duly authorized representative of such director.

C.     Land Use Ordinance. “Land use ordinance” means any existing or future ordinances of the city, or rules or regulations adopted thereunder, which regulate the use and development of land, including but not limited to the city’s zoning ordinances, El Cajon Municipal Code Title 15, relating to building and construction, the State Subdivision Map Act, Uniform Fire Code, Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, and National Electrical Code.

D.    Permit. “Permit” means any form of certificate, approval, registration, license or other written permission given to any person to engage in any activity as required by law, ordinance or regulation.

E.     Person. “Person” includes any natural person, organization, corporation or partnership and their agents, representatives or assigns.

(Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.020 Enforcement of land use ordinance violations.
A.    Whenever the director of community development has reason to believe that a use or condition exists in violation of any land use ordinance as defined in this title, or rules and regulations adopted thereunder, he or she is authorized to issue an administrative citation in accordance with Chapter 1.14, or initiate enforcement under Chapter 1.24, abatement pursuant to Chapter 15.16, and/or may commence an administrative proceeding under this chapter to cause the assessment of a civil penalty pursuant to Section 1.24.020.

B.     Pending commencement and completion of the administrative procedure provided for in this chapter, the director of community development may cause an order to cease violation to be posted on the subject property or served on persons engaged in any work or activity in violation of a land use ordinance. The effect of such an order shall be to require the immediate cessation of such work or activity until authorized by the director of community development to proceed.

(Ord. 4640 § 1, 2000; Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.030 Notices and orders to correct and/or abate.
A.    Whenever the director has reason to believe that violation of a land use ordinance will be most promptly and equitably terminated by an administrative proceeding, a written Notice and Order to Correct or Abate shall be issued, directed either to the owner or operator of the source of the violation, the person in possession of the property where the violation originates, or the person otherwise causing or responsible for the violation.

B.     The Notice and Order to Correct or Abate shall contain:

1.     The street address, when available, assessor’s parcel number and/or description of personal property sufficient for identification of where the violation occurred or is located;

2.     A statement that the director has foundthe person to be in violation of a land use ordinance with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to be in violation;

3.     A statement of the corrective action required to be taken. If the director has determined that corrective work is required, the order shall require that all required permits be secured, that work physically be commenced, and that the work be completed within such times as the director determines are reasonable under the circumstances;

4.     A statement specifying the amount of any civil penalty assessed to date on account of the violation, and, if applicable, the conditions on which assessment of such civil penalty is contingent;

5.     Statements advising that:

a.     If any required work is not commenced or completed within the times specified, the director will proceed to cause abatement of the violation and cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof as a lien against the property and as a joint and separate personal obligation of any person in violation, and

b.     The civil penalties will accrue until the violations are corrected, and if any assessed civil penalty is not paid, the amount of the penalty will be charged as a lien against the property and as a joint and separate personal obligation of any person in violation;

6.     A statement advising that the order shall become final, unless, no later than ten days after the notice and order are served, any person aggrieved by the order requests an appeal in writing.

C.     Service of the Notice and Order shall be made upon all persons identified in the Notice and Order either personally or by mailing a copy of such Notice and Order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and to the occupant of the address of the location of the violation. The failure of any such person to receive such Notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section shall be effective on the date of postmark. The Notice and Order shall be posted on the subject property.

(Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.040 Appeals.
A.    Review, modification, or waiver of the amount of penalties assessed may be made by the joint decision of the city manager, the director of building and planning, and the city attorney. Such a request must be made in writing. Denial of the request does not preclude appeal to the city council.

B.     It is the function of the city council to review evidence submitted on appeal, to make written findings on the evidence, and to affirm, modify or reverse any order issued by the director.

C.     Following review of any evidence submitted, the city council shall make written findings and conclusions, and shall affirm or modify the order previously issued if it finds that a violation has occurred, or reverse the order if it finds that no violation occurred. The written decision of the city council shall be mailed by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to all parties of interest. Action by the city council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive.

(Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.050 Enforcement.
A.    If, after any Order duly issued has become final, the person to whom such Order is directed fails, neglects or refuses to obey such Order, including refusal to pay a civil penalty assessed under such Order, the director may:

1.     Refer the matter to the city attorney for prosecution under the provisions of this title; and/or

2.     Institute any appropriate action to collect a civil penalty assessed under this title; and/or

3.     Abate the land use violation using the procedures of this title; and/or

4.     Pursue any other appropriate remedy at law or equity.

B.     Enforcement of any Notice and Order issued pursuant to this title shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal under this title, except when the director determines that the violation, if continued, will cause immediate and irreparable harm.

(Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.060 Lien and personal obligation.
        The city shall have a lien for any civil penalty imposed or for the cost of any abatement work done pursuant to this title, or both, against the real property on which the civil penalty was imposed or any of the abatement work was performed.

        The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it shall be on a parity.

        The civil penalty and the cost of abatement are also joint and separate personal obligations of any person in violation. The city attorney may collect the civil penalty and the abatement work costs by use of all appropriate legal remedies.

        The lien provided by this title may be foreclosed and enforced by a civil action in a court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.070 Lien—Notice and service.
        The Notice and Order of the director pursuant to this title shall give notice to the owner that a lien for the civil penalty or the cost of abatement, or both, may be claimed. Service of the Notice and Order shall be made upon all persons identified in the Notice and Order either personally or by mailing a copy of such Notice and Order by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the address of any such person cannot reasonably be ascertained, a copy of the Notice and Order shall be mailed to such person at the address of the location of the violation. The failure of any such person to receive such Notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section shall be effective on the date of postmark. The Notice and Order shall be posted on the subject property. (Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.080 Notice of intent to lien.
A.    The director shall cause a Notice of Intent to Lien to be recorded within ninety days from the date the civil penalty is due or within 90 days from the date of completion of the abatement work performed pursuant to this title.

B.     The Notice of Intent to Lien shall contain the following:

1.     The authority for imposing a civil penalty or proceeding to abate the violation, or both;

2.     A brief description of the civil penalty imposed, the violations charged and the duration thereof, or a brief description of the abatement work done, the dates of commencement and completion of the work, and the name of the persons or organizations performing the work;

3.     A legal description of the property to be charged with the lien;

4.     The name of the known or reputed owner, and, if not known, the fact shall be alleged; and

5.     The amount, including lawful and reasonable costs, for which the lien is claimed.

C.     The director shall sign and verify a declaration by oath to the effect that the affiant believes the lien claimed is just.

(Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.090 Recording.
        The San Diego County recorder’s office shall record and index the Notices of Intent to Lien described in this chapter. No lien created by this title binds the property subject to the lien for a period longer than three years after the Notice of Intent to Lien has been filed, unless an action is commenced in the proper court within that time to enforce the lien. (Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

 

15.18.100 Severability.
        Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 4056 § 3, 1987.)

Chapter 15.20 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
15.20.010 California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the electrical code of the city (the “electrical code”), except as hereinafter modified, amended, repealed or deleted, and is by this reference made a part hereof as though fully set out herein.

        The requirements of the electrical code shall apply to all residential, commercial and industrial electrical installations. All electrical installations that are under the jurisdiction of the California Division of Industrial Safety shall also comply with the requirements of the electrical safety orders of the Department of Industrial Relations of the state of California. (Ord. 5090 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.20.020 General requirements for materials, appliances and installations.
        All electrical materials, devices, appliances and equipment installed or used in the City shall be in conformity with the provisions of the electrical code, and with approved standards for safety to life and property.  Listing or labeling as conforming to the Standards of the Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., the United States Bureau of Standards, the United States Bureau of Mines, or other similar institutions of recognized standing, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with the approved standards for safety to life and property.  The maker’s name, trademark, or other identification symbol shall be placed on all electrical materials, devices, appliances and equipment used or installed under this code. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.030 Duties of the building official.
        It shall be the duty of the building official of the City to enforce the provisions of the electrical code.  The building official shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation or alteration of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment, and shall make inspection of all new electrical installations and reinspections of the same as provided in such code.  The building official shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections, and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of such code. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.040 Building official—Authority.
        The building official shall have the right during normal business hours, or at any time when extreme hazard to life or property exists, to enter any building in the discharge of official duties or for the purpose of making an inspection, reinspection, or test of the installation of electrical wiring devices, appliances and equipment contained therein.  The building official shall have the authority to cut or disconnect any wire in cases of emergencies where necessary to the safety of life or property, or where such wire may interfere with the work of the fire department.  The building official is authorized to disconnect or order discontinuance of electrical service to any electrical system, device, appliance or equipment found to be dangerous to life or property because they are defective or defectively installed, or where an electrical system, device, appliance or equipment is energized or connected to a power supply prior to inspection and approval by the building official. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.050 Interpretation.
        The language used in this chapter and in the California Electrical Code, which is made a part of this code by reference, is intended to convey the common and accepted meaning familiar to the electrical industry.  The building official is authorized to determine the intent and meaning of any provisions of this chapter, including the California Electrical Code. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.060 Liability unaffected by inspection.
        This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, electrical device or electrical materials for damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City or any officer or employee thereof enforcing this code be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized within the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.070 Appeals board.
        Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the electrical code adopted by the City, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.080 Schedule of Fees.
        The permit fees for all Building and Fire Safety Division transactions of the city of El Cajon shall be set by the city council by resolution, and may be amended from time to time, to be listed in the City of El Cajon Schedule of Miscellaneous Fees. (Ord. 5000 § 4, 2013.)

 

15.20.090 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the California Electrical Code as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.20.100 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 4955 § 4, 2010.)

Chapter 15.24 ELECTRICAL PERMITS
15.24.010 Required—Exceptions.
        No electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment without first securing a permit from the building department, except that:

A.    No permit shall be required for minor repair work such as repairing flush or snap switches, replacing fuses, repairing lamp sockets and receptacles when such work is done in accordance with the provisions of this code.

 

B.     No permit shall be required for the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable appliances to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed.

C.     No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed by or for a public service corporation for use of such a corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy, or for the use of such a corporation in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence.

(Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-9.)

 

15.24.020 Special owner’s permit.
        The building official may issue a permit to an individual owner of property after the owner of record has signed an affidavit attesting to ownership and conditions of affidavit. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-10.)

 

15.24.030 Temporary permits.
        If the building official finds that the safety of life and property will not be jeopardized, permits may be issued for temporary electrical installations for use during the construction of buildings, or for carnivals, conventions, festivals, fairs, the holding of religious services, temporary lighting of streets, etc. Permission to use such a temporary installation shall not be granted for a greater length of time than ninety days, except that a permit for a temporary installation to be used for the construction of a building may be issued for the period of construction. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-11.)

 

15.24.040 Expiration.
        If the work authorized by a permit is not commenced within a period of one hundred eighty days, or if construction or work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty days at any time after work has commenced, the permit shall become void. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 3397 § 6, 1979; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-12.)

 

15.24.050 Uncompleted installations.
        Should any person to whom a permit has been issued quit or abandon an installation for any reason, such person shall notify the building inspection division within forty-eight hours and request an inspection of the work installed. No person shall resume work on an uncompleted installation until such installation has been inspected by the building inspection division and the necessary permit obtained. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 3397 § 7, 1979; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-13.)

 

15.24.060 Permit fee schedule.
        Table No. 3-A—Electrical Permit Fees, as set out in the Uniform Administrative Code Provisions for the National Electrical Code 1993 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 3397 § 7, 1979; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-15.)

 

15.24.070 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

 

15.24.080 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city. (Ord. No. 4497, 1995.)

Chapter 15.28 INSPECTION AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS
15.28.010 Inspection of installations.
A.    Upon the completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of any permit, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation installing the same to notify the building inspection division within twenty-four hours, and inspection shall be made of installation within forty-eight hours thereafter (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays), or as soon thereafter as practicable.

B.     Where the building official finds installations to be in conformity with the provisions of this code, the building official shall authorize the use of the installation and connection to the source of supply, and shall send notice of such authorization to the electrical utility furnishing the electrical services.

C.     If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this code, the building official shall at once notify the person, firm or corporation making the installation of any such defects.

D.    All defects shall be corrected within ten days after inspection and notification, or within other reasonable time as permitted by the building official.

(Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-19.)

 

15.28.020 Temporary service connections.
        A preliminary approval may authorize the temporary service connection and use of specific portions of an incomplete installation. Such approval shall be revocable at the discretion of the building official. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-21.)

 

15.28.030 Concealing wiring.
        When any part of a wiring installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing the wiring shall notify the building inspection division, and such parts of the wiring installation shall not be concealed until they have been inspected and approved by the building inspection division, provided that on large installations where the concealment of parts of the wiring proceeds continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the wiring shall give the building inspection division due notice, and inspection shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. There shall be provided ways, means and access to all installations. The building inspector shall have the duty within his or her discretion to remove or require the removal of any obstruction that prevents proper inspection of any electrical equipment. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-22.)

 

15.28.040 Used materials.
        Previously used materials shall not be re-used in any work without the written approval obtained in advance from the building official. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 3397 § 8, 1979.)

 

15.28.050 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4497, 1995; Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

 

15.28.060 Violation-Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city. (Ord. No. 4497, 1995.)

Chapter 15.32 MOBILE HOME PARK ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
15.32.010 State standards adopted.
        The provisions of Electrical Standards in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 2, (Mobile Home Parks Act) are hereby referred to, and by such reference are incorporated into and made a part of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-46.)

15.40.010 Penalty.
        Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of Chapters 15.20, 15.24, 15.28, and 15.32 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code, the civil penalties as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code, or any other penalty prescribed by city ordinance. (Ord. 4278 § 7, 1991; Ord. 4032 § 5, 1987; Ord. 3874 § 5, 1985; Ord. 3647 § 14, 1983; Ord. 3604 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2901 § 5, 1975: prior code § 10-48.)

Chapter 15.44 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
15.44.010 Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, as copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted by reference as the housing code of the city, setting forth the minimum requirements for the protection of life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the general public, and of the owners and occupants of residential buildings in the city. The regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, are referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein, excepting such portions as are hereinafter deleted, added, modified or amended by this chapter. One copy of the Uniform Housing Code is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.020 Administration.
        Whenever the term “building official” is used in the Uniform Housing Code, it shall be construed to mean the official designated by the city manager. (Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.030 Section 203 amended—Appeals board.
        Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        “Section 203 -Appeals Board.

        The General Construction Appeals Board shall consider all appeals in accordance with the procedure set forth in Chapter 15.72 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.”

 

(Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.040 Section 302 amended—Building requirements and fees.
        Section 302 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        “Section 302. Buildings requiring construction permits shall conform to the requirements and the appropriate fee to be paid as required in the Building. Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes as adopted by the City of El Cajon.”

 

(Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.050 Section 304 added—Permits and fees.
        Section 304, is added to the Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:

 

        “Section 304, Permits.

        (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation, to own or operate a rental dwelling configuration, hotel, or motel without first obtaining a housing permit therefor.

        (b)    The annual housing permit fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The current fee schedule shall be on file with the city clerk, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution.

        (c)    The fee shall be due and payable to the city of El Cajon on the tenth day of May of each year, in advance. If said fee is not paid on or before the tenth day of June following the date when it became due, there shall be a penalty added in an amount equal to 25% of the fee. No permit shall be issued until such penalty has been paid.

        (d)    If any person, firm, partnership or corporation commences to own or operate a rental dwelling configuration, hotel or motel during the calendar year, the housing permit shall be prorated on a quarterly basis for the calendar year.

        (e)    A permit to operate and maintain a rental dwelling configuration, hotel or motel is not transferable.

        (f)    For the purpose of this section, a unit shall mean each apartment in an apartment house, each dwelling unit in a rental dwelling configuration, each sleeping room in a hotel, and each dwelling unit, apartment, motel and hotel sleeping room in a building containing dwelling unit, apartment, motel and hotel sleeping rooms.

        (g)    Separate rental dwelling unit buildings, separate apartment house buildings, and separate hotel buildings; or a combination thereof, located upon a single parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land, under the same ownership, shall be treated as one rental dwelling configuration, apartment house, motel, or hotel for the purpose of computing the fee prescribed by this section.”

 

(Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

 

15.44.060 Section 305 added—Caretaker or resident manager.
        Section 305 is added to the Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:

 

        Section 305. Caretaker or resident manager. A manager, janitor, housekeeper, or other responsible person shall reside upon the premises and shall have charge of every rental dwelling configuration in which there are sixteen (16) or more rental units, and of every hotel in which there are twelve (12) or more guest rooms, in the event that the owner of any such property does not reside upon said premises.

        If the owner does not reside upon the premises of any rental dwelling configuration in which there are more than two (2), but less than sixteen (16) rental units, a notice stating the owner’s name and address, or the name and address of the person in charge of the rental units, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The requirements for a caretaker shall apply to those units as defined in Section 401 under rental dwelling configuration.

(Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.070 Section 306 added—Public record to be kept.
        Section 306 is added to the Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:

 

        Section 306. The language used in this code is intended to convey the common and accepted meaning to the building industry. The building official or designee is hereby authorized to determine the intent and meaning of any provisions of this code.

(Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.080 Section 401 amended—Rental dwelling configuration definition.
        Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by adding the following definition:

 

        Rental Dwelling Configuration is an apartment house or a group of two or more rental dwelling units on a single parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land under the same ownership.

(Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.090 Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 deleted.
        Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 are deleted and replaced by the general provisions of Chapter 1.16, Nuisance, and Chapter 15.16 Unsafe Buildings, Substandard Buildings and Property or Dangerous Conditions. (Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.100 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code or any other penalty adopted by the city council. (Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

 

15.44.110 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the Uniform Housing Code as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4607 § 5, 1999.)

Chapter 15.48 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
15.48.010 California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C, and D, as published by the International Code Council, as the mechanical code of the city (the “mechanical code”), regulating the complete installation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, comfort cooling and refrigeration systems in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore. Each and all of such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted, and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter, excepting such portions as are deleted, modified, added or amended by this chapter. The mechanical code is hereinafter referred to as the “CMC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.020 Interpretation.
        The language used in this chapter and in the California Mechanical Code is intended to convey the common and accepted meaning familiar to the construction industry. The building official is authorized to determine the intent and meanings of any provisions of the mechanical code. (Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.030 Liability unaffected by chapter.
        The CMC shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any plumbing, piping, fixtures, appliances or materials for damage to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any officer or employee thereof enforcing this code be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized herein in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.040 Section 104.3.2 Amended—Plan Review Fees.
        The third and fourth paragraphs of Section 104.3.2 of the CMC are amended to read as follows:

 

The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from permit fees specified in the City of El Cajon Schedule of Miscellaneous Fees and are in addition to permit fees.

 

When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional review, a fee shall be charged at the rate as specified on the City’s fee schedule.

(Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.050 Section 104.5 Amended, Table 104.5 deleted—Fees.
        Section 104.5 of the CMC is amended to read as follows:

 

104.5 Fees. The permit fees for all Building and Fire Safety Division transactions of the City of El Cajon shall be set by the city council by resolution, and may be amended from time to time, to be listed in the City of El Cajon Schedule of Miscellaneous Fees.

 

        Table 104.5 of the CMC is deleted. (Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.060 Division II Section 107 Amended—Board of Appeals
        Division II Section 107.1 of the CMC is amended to read as follows:

 

107.1 Board of Appeals. Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the mechanical code as adopted by the city, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

(Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.070 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the California Mechanical Code as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.48.080 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city. (Ord. 5091 § 4, 2019.)

Chapter 15.52 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
15.52.010 California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition, including, Appendix A and Appendix B, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the plumbing code of the city (the “plumbing code”), establishing requirements, rules and standards for plumbing installations and materials, providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees. Each and all of such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted, and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter, excepting such portions as are deleted, modified, added or amended by this chapter. The California Plumbing Code is referred to in this chapter as the “CPC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.52.020 Interpretation.
        The language used in this chapter and in the CPC is intended to convey the common and accepted meaning familiar to the plumbing industry. The building official is authorized to determine the intent and meanings of any provisions of the plumbing code. (Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.52.030 Liability unaffected by chapter.
        This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any plumbing, piping, fixtures, appliances or materials for damage to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any officer or employee thereof enforcing the plumbing code be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized in this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.52.040 Division II, Section 104.3.2 amended—Plan Review Fees.
        The third and fourth paragraphs of Section 104.3.2 of the CPC are amended to read as follows:

 

The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from permit fees specified in the City of El Cajon Schedule of Miscellaneous Fees and are in addition to permit fees.

 

When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional review, a fee shall be charged at the rate as specified on the city’s schedule of fees.

(Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.52.050 Division II, Section 104.5 amended—Fees.
        Section 104.5 of the CPC is amended to read as follows:

 

104.5 Fees.       The permit fees for all Building and Fire Safety Division transactions of the City of El Cajon shall be set by the city council by resolution, and may be amended from time to time, to be listed in the City of El Cajon Schedule of Miscellaneous Fees.

(Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.52.060 Division II, Section 107.1 amended—Board of Appeals.
        Section 107.1 of the CPC is amended to read as follows:

 

107.1 Board of Appeals. Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the plumbing code adopted by the city, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal.

(Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

15.52.070 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the California Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.52.080 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city. (Ord. 5092 § 4, 2019.)

Chapter 15.54 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
15.54.010 California Residential Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Residential Code, 2019 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, excluding section R103 and including appendix chapters H, K, Q, T and V, is adopted by reference as the residential building code of the city (the “residential building code”), for regulating the construction, erection, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures in the city, providing for the issuance of permits therefore, and each and all such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Residential Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added, deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The California Residential Code is referred to in this chapter as the “CRC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5093 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.54.020 Section R112.1 amended and Section R112.3 deleted—General.
        Section R112.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:

 

R112.1 General. Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the California Residential Code adopted by the city, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

 

        Section R112.3 Qualifications – Deleted. (Ord. 5093 § 4, 2019.)

 

 

15.54.030 Section Table R301.2(1) amended—Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
        Table R301.2(1) of the CRC is amended as follows:

 

Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria

Ground Snow Load

Wind Design

Seismic design Category

Subject to Damage From

Winter Design Temp.

Ice Barrier Underlayment Required

Flood Hazard

Air Freezing Index

Mean Annual Temp.

Speed mph

Topographic Effects

Special Wind Region

Wind Borne Debris Zone

Weathering

Frost Line Depth

Termite

Zero

85

No

No

No

D1, D2

Negligible

12

No

44

No

(a) 9/23/97 (b) 6/19/97 (c) 6/19/97 1634, 1653, 1654, 1660, 1661, 1662, 1666

0

64

 

Manual J Design Criteria

Elevation

Latitude

Winter Heating

Summer Cooling

Altitude Correction Factor

Indoor Design Temperature

Design Temperature Cooling

Heating Temperature Difference

387

32

44°

80°

1

70°

75°

26°

Cooling Temperature Difference

Wind Velocity Heating

Wind Velocity Cooling

Coincident Wet Bulb

Daily Range

Winter Humidity

Summer Humidity

 

5°

N/A

N/A

69

H

58

68

 

(Ord. 5093 § 4, 2019.)

 

 

15.54.040 Section R902.2 retitled and amended—Fire-Retardant-Treated Shingles and Shakes Prohibited.
        Section R902.2 of the CRC is retitled as: Wood shake and shingle roofs prohibited

        Section R902.2 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:

 

R902.2 Wood shake and shingle roofs prohibited. Wood shake and shingle roofs are not permitted except for minor repairs no larger than one roofing square in area.

(Ord. 5093 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.54.050 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the CRC as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 5093 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.54.060 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city. (Ord. 5093 § 4, 2019.)

Chapter 15.56 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
15.56.010 California Fire Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, and including Appendix Chapters 4, B, BB, C, CC, D, H, and O, but excluding section 109 and 112.4, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the fire code of the city (the “fire code”), for protecting the interests of health, life, and safety as they relate to the use or occupancy of buildings or premises. All of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added, deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The California Fire Code is referred to in this chapter as the “CFC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.020 Section 101.1 amended—Title.
        Section 101.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

101.1 Title. These regulations will be known as the Fire Code of the City of El Cajon, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.030 Section 105.1.1.1 added—Schedule of Fees.
        Section 105.1.1.1 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

105.1.1.1 Schedule of fees. The permit fees for all permits authorized by this code shall be as listed in the City of El Cajon Schedule of Miscellaneous Fees.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.040 Section 105.3.1 amended—Expiration.
        Section 105.3.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked, or for such a period of time as specified in the permit. Construction permits shall automatically become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one year, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year or more after the time the work is commenced. The maximum life of any construction permit is three years. If a final inspection is not obtained within the three-year time period, the permit will become invalid and a new permit will be required. Before such work recommences, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee to recommence work, if any, shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy, or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.050 Section 109 amended—Board of Appeals.
        Section 109 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Appeals Board. Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official/fire marshal, or fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of the fire code adopted by the City, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.060 Section 202 amended—Definitions.
        Section 202 of the CFC is amended by adding the following definitions:

 

Accessory Structure is a building or structure used to shelter or support any material, equipment, chattel, or occupancy other than a habitable building. (See “Structure” in Section 202 of the California Building Code.)

 

Combustible Vegetation is material that in its natural state will readily ignite, burn and transmit fire from the vegetative growth to any structure; this includes ground fuels which are any native or landscape vegetation not considered a tree and generally in contact with the ground.

 

Fire Authority Having Jurisdiction (FAHJ) is the designated entity providing enforcement of fire regulations as they relate to planning, construction, and development. This entity may also provide fire suppression and other emergency services.

 

Fire Department is any regularly organized fire department, fire protection district, a legally formed volunteer fire department recorded with the County of San Diego, or fire company regularly charged with the responsibility of providing fire protection to the jurisdiction.

 

Fire Hazard is anything that increases or could create an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or anything or act which could obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in the event of fire.

 

Hazardous Fire Area is any geographic area mapped by the State or local jurisdiction as a high or very high fire hazard area, or as set forth by the FAHJ that contains the type and condition of vegetation, topography, weather, and structure density to potentially increase the possibility of vegetation conflagration fires shall be considered a hazardous fire area.

 

Heavy Timber Construction as described in the California Building Code.

 

Off-site Roadway is a road, street, public highway, or private road used for fire apparatus access from a publicly maintained road to the boundary of the subject property.

 

On-site Roadway is a road, street, public highway, private road, or driveway used for fire apparatus access within the boundaries of the subject property or land division.

 

Planning Authority Having Jurisdiction (PAHJ) is the identified authority regulating and enforcing planning and/or construction standards.

 

Response Time is the elapsed time from the fire department’s receipt of the first alarm to when the first fire unit arrives at the scene.

 

Travel Time is the estimated time it would take for a responding agency to travel from the fire station to the furthest structure in a proposed development project, determined by measuring the safest, most direct, appropriate, and reliable route with consideration given to safe operating speeds for heavy fire apparatus.

 

Vegetation Conflagration is an uncontrolled fire spreading through vegetative fuels, and exposing and consuming structures in the advancing path of fire.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.070 Section 503.2.1 amended—Dimensions.
        Section 503.2.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed improved width of not less than twenty (20) feet, except that single family residential driveways not exceeding 150 feet in length from the public right-of-way and serving no more than two single family dwellings, shall have a minimum of sixteen (16) feet unobstructed improved width. Any of the following, which have separated lanes of one way traffic: gated entrances with card readers; guard stations or center medians, are allowed, provided that each lane is not less than fourteen (14) feet wide. All fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than thirteen feet six inches (13′ 6″). Vertical clearance or road widths shall be increased when, in the opinion of the fire code official, vertical clearances or road widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access.

 

Exception: Upon approval of the fire code official. Vertical clearance or road width may be reduced as long as the reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus. In cases where the vertical clearance has been reduced, approved signs shall be installed and maintained indicating the amount of vertical clearance.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.080 Section 503.3.1 added—Fire Lane Designation.
        Section 503.3.1 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

503.3.1 Fire lane designation. Where the fire code official determines that it is necessary to ensure adequate fire access, the fire code official may designate existing roadways as fire access roadways as provided by Vehicle Code section 22500.1 (public) or 22658(a) (private).

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.090 Section 505.1 amended—Premises Identification.
        Section 505.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 505.1 Address Identification; Address Numbers. Approved numbers and/or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings and at appropriate additional locations as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or roadway fronting the property from either direction of approach. Said numbers shall contrast with their background, and shall meet the following minimum standards as to size: minimum three inches (3″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for individual suites and apartments, minimum four inches (4″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for residential buildings, minimum eight inches (8″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for commercial, multi-residential buildings, and industrial buildings. Additional numbers shall be required where deemed necessary by the fire code official, such as rear access doors, building corners, and entrances to commercial centers. The fire code official may require larger address numbers based on visibility and the needs of emergency response personnel.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.100 Section 5704.2.9.6.1 amended—Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
        Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited except for zones classified as commercial or industrial.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.110 Section 5706.2.4.4 amended—Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
        Section 5706.2.4.4 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

5706.2.4.4 Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited except for zones classified as commercial or industrial.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.120 Section 5806.2 amended—Limitations.
        Section 5806.2 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited except for zones classified as commercial or industrial.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.130 Section 6104.2 amended—Maximum capacity within established limits.
        Section 6104.2 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The geographic limits in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated and congested areas is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of El Cajon except for areas zoned for industrial use.

(Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.140 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the California Fire Code as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.56.150 Violation—Penalty.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 5094 § 4, 2019.)

Chapter 15.60 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
15.60.010 Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, including appendix chapters A4 and A5, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the green building code of the city (the “green building code”), for regulating green construction practices in residential and commercial construction. Each and all such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added, deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The California Green Building Standards Code is referred to in this chapter as the “CGBSC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5095 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.60.020 Board of Appeals.
        Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the California Green Building Standards Code, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5095 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.60.030 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the CGBSC as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 5095 § 4, 2019.)

 

15.60.040 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city. (Ord. 5095 § 4, 2019.)

Chapter 15.64 LOT GRADING
15.64.010 Lateral support by graded property.
        The building official shall not approve in his final inspection any structure, nor shall he issue a certificate of occupancy or give clearance for electrical and gas supply to any improvement, where the lot upon which such structure or improvement is located has been graded or the terrain thereof has been otherwise altered so as to deprive contiguous land of lateral support without satisfactory provisions being made for corrective support. (Prior code 7G-1.)

 

15.64.020 Requirements.
        No grading, including clearing of vegetative matter, shall be done until all necessary environmental clearances are secured and a grading and drainage plan has been prepared by a civil engineer registered with the state of California and reviewed by the city. Exceptions to this requirement are:

A.    Earthwork construction regulated by the federal, state, county, or city governments, or by a local agency as defined by Government Code Sections 53090 through 53095 (special districts); pipeline or conduit excavation and backfill conducted by local agencies or public utilities. Earthwork construction performed by railway companies. This exemption, however, shall apply only when the earthwork construc-tion takes place on the property, or dedicated rights-of-way or easements of the above agencies;

B.     Excavation and backfill for installation of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a franchise or public property encroachment permit;

C.     Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay where some other authority has been obtained as required by law;

D.    Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers, archaeologists or paleontologists or engineering geologists;

E.     An excavation which is less than two feet in depth and does not create a slope steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and does not exceed fifty cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct or alter a drainage course.

F.     A fill less than twelve inches in depth and placed with a slope not steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and does not exceed fifty cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct or alter a drainage course.

(Ord. 4568 § 1, 1998.)

 

15.64.030 Violation—Misdemeanor.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violations of any provisions of this chapter are permitted, continued or committed by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in Chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 4568 § 2, 1998.)

 

15.64.040 Violations—Public nuisance.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, any grading done contrary to the provisions of this chapter is deemed a public nuisance. Upon order of the city council, the city attorney is authorized to commence necessary proceedings provided by local or state law to abate, remove, and/or enjoin such public nuisance. Any grading done without graders first having complied with the requirements of this chapter, regardless of whether such failure is due to neglect or refusal, shall be prima facie evidence that a public nuisance has been committed. To implement this section, the city attorney may proceed as in a civil or criminal penalty procedure. The civil remedy may be before a court within the local jurisdiction of the city or may be an adjudicatory hearing before the city council. (Ord. 4568 § 3, 1998.)

Chapter 15.68 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES
15.68.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

A.    “Structure” means and includes any house, dwelling, building or structure (as defined by the Uniform Building Code), or any section or portion thereof.

(Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.020 Application for relocation permit.
        In order to move or relocate a structure into or within the city, the owner, contractor or other person, firm or corporation proposing to relocate such structure, shall first obtain a relocation inspection permit (pre-move inspection). The building official may approve the structure to be moved subject to conditions or may deny permission to move the structure into or within the city.

        If the structure is approved for relocation, a building permit and a relocation permit may be applied for in accordance with the permissions set forth in this chapter.

        At the time an application is filed for a relocation inspection permit (pre-move inspection), the following shall be submitted;

A.    The present location of the structure;

B.     The proposed new location of the structure;

C.     Two current photographs of the structure (two different elevations).

(Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.030 Fees for relocation permit.
        A fee shall accompany each relocation permit application, which fee is to recompense the city for the expense involved in the inspection. The amount of such fee shall be collected by the city. The current fee structure shall be on file with the city clerk and the planning department and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.040 Inspection of proposed relocated structure.
        Upon receipt of an application for the relocation of a structure a preliminary inspection shall be made by the building official or a designated representative(s). (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.050 Effective date of order granting or denying permit—Time for appeal.
        The decision of the building division in granting or denying the permit to relocate an existing structure shall become final and effective ten days after rendering the report, unless within said ten-day period an appeal to the city council, in writing, is filed with the city clerk by any person dissatisfied with said decision. The filing of an appeal within said time limit shall stay the effective date of the decision of the building division until such time as the city council has acted on the appeal as hereinafter set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.060 Transmission of findings to city council.
        Upon receipt of a written appeal filed with the city clerk as provided herein, the building division shall transmit its complete record of the matter to the city council. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.070 Council to hear appeal.
        Within a period not to exceed thirty days following the request to consider appeal, the city council shall consider the appellant’s arguments and render its decision in granting or denying a permit to relocate an existing structure. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.080 Compliance with Title 17.
        All structures relocated in the city, or from one location to another location within the city, shall conform to all of the provisions of Title 17 of this code. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.090 Transportation permits.
        Transportation permits shall be applied for in accordance with Chapter 10.24 of this code. Application for building permit will not be accepted until it is determined by the city traffic engineer that the structure can be safely moved over public streets. Transportation permits shall not be required where the relocation is of a structure to a new site upon contiguous property of the same owner where the public streets are not entered or used during the relocation. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.100 Application for building permit in connection with the relocation of structure.
        If approval is given to relocate a structure, the applicant shall apply for a building permit and submit detailed plans outlining any and all foundation, plumbing and electrical work, along with any repairs, additions and alteration of the structure that may be necessary to bring it to city code stands. The applicant must also submit a certificate of termite inspection by a state licensed structural pest control contractor showing that the structure is free from termites. Fees shall be as adopted in the uniform building code. When a structure is moved from one location within the city to another location within the city, the applicant shall supply the building division with notices of discontinuance for gas, electric and phone utilities prior to issuance of building permits for the new site. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.110 Relocation bond.
A.    Every permit to relocate a structure shall provide that all work of moving, relocation, remodeling, repair and alteration of such structure, complete and ready for use according to the plans and specifications required by the building division, and all safety measures listed in Section 15.68.120, shall be accomplished and completed within one hundred eighty days from issuance of the building permit for said work. An extension of said time limit may be requested in writing to, and granted by, the city council, if done prior to the termination date. Every person, firm or corporation applying for a building permit in connection with a relocation of a structure shall deliver to the city building division a surety bond or cash deposit in the sum of seven thousand dollars, payable to the city, which by its terms shall be forfeited in case such structure is not completed and ready for occupancy according to said plans, specifications and requirements within such period.

B.     Notwithstanding the above surety bond or cash deposit limits, a permittee holding more than one relocation permit may request, and the building official may, in his/her discretion allow, alterative bonding or deposits to combine coverage of all relocation projects within the city. Such coverage may be transferable from finished projects to new projects.

C.     If the building official so determines, a demolition bond may be required in addition to a relocation bond, for the removal of remaining foundations. In the discretion of the building official, combined coverage may be allowed for relocation and demolition projects as described above.

(Ord. 4126 § 1, 1988; Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.120 Safety measures.
A.    As a part of the relocation process, the building official may, in his/her discretion, require that a demolition permit, as set out in Chapter 15.70 of this code, be obtained.

B.     Not more than thirty days after removal of any structure from a parcel of land in the city, the person proposing to relocate such structure shall comply with the following conditions with respect to such parcel:

1.     Securely and properly seal all sewer and other sanitary facilities remaining on the land;

2.     Fill with dirt or small rock all openings excavations in the land. All wells shall be abated in accordance with the laws of the state of California;

3.     Remove from the site all refuse, debris, old foundations, walls, slabs, waste material, septic tanks, cesspools and other impediments;

4.     Within ten days of removal and completion of these conditions, a letter shall be filed with the building division, by the permittee, certifying compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter relating to demolition of structures.

C.     The time periods set out in subsection B of this section shall not extend the permit life beyond one hundred eighty days.

(Ord. 4126 § 2, 1988; Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.130 Permit expiration.
        All work for which a permit is issued under this chapter shall be completed within one hundred eighty days of the permit issuance date. Permits issued shall expire one hundred eighty days from the issuance date. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.140 Right of city to clear property.
        Any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. The building official is authorized to abate summarily said nuisance by causing said requirements to be complied with, and said abatement by the city shall be at the expense of the person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance. The expense of the abatement of said nuisance by the city shall be a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation of the property owner. The expense of abatement shall be collected in accordance with the procedure for collection of costs outlined in Chapter 15.16 (commencing with Section 15.16.180) of this code. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.150 Disposition of funds.
        All money received under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and credited to the general fund. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.160 Compliance with chapter—Penalty for violation.
        No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any structure, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. All violations of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties in accordance with Chapters 1.24 and 15.18 of this code. (Ord. 4088 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.68.170 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Chapter 15.70 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
15.70.005 Definitions.
        “Demolition” means the removal of any structure, in whole or in part, from a lot, tract or parcel, by any means, including but not limited to, on-site destruction or removal of such structure from its lot or foundation. (Ord. 4126 § 3, 1988.)

 

15.70.010 Demolition permit—Fees.
        Before any structure within the city is demolished, the person, firm or corporation doing the demolition shall first obtain a demolition permit from the building division. A permit fee for demolishing, salvaging or wrecking any structure shall be collected by the city. The current fee structure shall be on file with the city clerk and the planning department, and shall be in such amounts as the city council may set from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.020 Utility disconnects.
        Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit the applicant shall supply the building division with notice of discontinuance of the following utilities: Gas, electricity and telephone. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.030 Inspection of proposed demolition site.
        Upon receipt of an application for the demolition of a structure, a preliminary inspection may be made by the building official or a designated representative(s). Upon completion of the inspection, the building official shall send either a letter of acceptance or denial of the application to the applicant. Acceptance letters shall contain a list of any conditions or requirements necessary to bring the structure up to city code standards. Denial letters shall contain a brief explanation of the major reason(s) for such denial. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.040 Demolition permits—Applicability of Chapter 10.24.
        Demolition permits may be subject to the issuance requirements of Chapter 10.24, Section 10.24.040B1, and the hold harmless requirement of Section 10.24.040B2 of this code if the building official or a designated representative determines such insurance or agreement is required. Application for demolition permit will not be accepted until it is determined by the building official that the structure can be safely demolished. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.050 Denial of demolition permit—Grounds.
        A demolition permit shall not be issued when any one of the following conditions exists:

A.    The building official determines the demolition is prohibitive from the standpoint of public safety or is contrary to the public interest.

B.     The applicant is known to have repeatedly violated conditions of previously issued permits, or has unsettled claims for damages resulting from past demolitions.

(Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.060 Effective date of order granting permit—Time for appeal.
        The decision of the building division in granting or denying the permit to demolish an existing structure shall become final and effective ten days after rendering the report, unless within said ten-day period an appeal to the city council, in writing, is filed with the city clerk by any person dissatisfied with said decision. The filing of an appeal within said time limit shall stay the effective date of the decision of the building division until such time as the city council has acted on the appeal as hereinafter set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.070 Transmission of findings to city council.
        Upon receipt of a written appeal filed with the city clerk as provided herein, the building division shall transmit its complete record of the matter to the city council. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.080 Council to hear appeal.
        Within period not to exceed thirty days following the request to consider appeal, the city council shall consider the appellant’s arguments and render its decision in granting or denying a permit to demolish an existing structure. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.090 Demolition bond.
A.    Every permit to demolish a structure shall provide that all work of demolishing, salvaging or wrecking, and all safety measures as listed in Section 15.70.100, shall be accomplished and completed within one hundred eighty days from issuance of the building permit for said demolition. An extension of said time limit may be requested in writing to, and granted by, the city council, if done prior to the termination date. Every person, firm or corporation who shall apply for a building permit in connection with a demolition of a structure may, in the discretion of the building official, be required to deliver to the city building division a surety bond or cash deposit in a sum of not more than seven thousand dollars, payable to the city, which by its terms shall be forfeited in case such building is not demolished according to said plans, specifications and requirements within such period.

B.     Notwithstanding the above surety bond or cash deposit limits, a permittee holding more than one demolition permit may request, and the building official may, in his/her discretion allow, alternative bonding or deposits to combine coverage of all demolition projects within the city. Such coverage may be transferable from finished projects to new projects.

(Ord. 4126 § 4, 1988; Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.100 Safety measures.
A.    As a part of the demolition process, and not more than thirty days after demolition of the structure, the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit is issued to demolish, salvage or wreck a structure on any parcel of land in the city, shall comply with the following:

1.     Securely and properly seal all sewer and other sanitary facilities remaining on the land;

2.     Fill with dirt or small rock all openings and excavations in the land. All wells shall be abated in accordance with the laws of the state of California;

3.     Remove from the site all refuse, debris, old foundations, walls, slabs, waste material, septic tanks, cesspools and other impediments;

4.     Within ten days of demolition and completion of these conditions, a letter shall be filed with the building division, by the permittee, certifying compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter relating to demolition of structures.

B.     The time periods set out above shall not extend the permit life beyond one hundred eighty days.

(Ord. 4126 § 5, 1988; Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.110 Permit expiration.
        All work for which a permit is issued under this chapter shall be completed within one hundred eighty days of the permit issuance date. Permits issued shall expire one hundred eighty days from the issuance date. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.120 Right of city to clear property.
        Any failure to comply with the provisions of building official is authorized to abate summarily said nuisance by causing said requirements to be complied with, and said abatement by the city shall be at the expense of the person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance. The expense of the abatement of said nuisance by the city shall be a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation of the property owner. The expense of abatement shall be collected in accordance with the procedure for collection of costs outlined in Chapter 15.16 (commencing with Section 15.16.180) of this code. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

 

15.70.130 Disposition of funds.
        All money received under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and credited to the general fund. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.140 Compliance with chapter—Penalty for violation.
        No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall demolish any structure, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. All violations of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties in accordance with Chapters 1.24 and 15.18 of this code. (Ord. 4089 § 1, 1988.)

 

15.70.150 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 5, 1991.)

Chapter 15.72 REGULATIONS FOR RETROFITTING OR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS UTILIZING OUTDATED MATERIALS OR METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION
15.72.010 Purpose.
        In compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 19160, the purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety, health, and welfare by identifying potential hazards associated with outdated materials and methods of construction and by establishing a mitigation program for these structures. (Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

 

15.72.020 Scope.
        The provisions of this chapter apply to buildings which have been identified as constituting a hazard due to outdated materials or methods of construction. Examples of such outdated materials and methods include but are not limited to:

1.     Unreinforced masonry construction;

2.     Residential soft story construction.

(Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

 

15.72.030 General.
        All structures identified as being hazardous due to outdated materials or methods of construction shall be demolished or retrofitted by December 31, 2020, unless an extension is granted by the Building Official. The building elements and design values regulated by this chapter shall be those listed in the California Existing Building Code as adopted by the City.

        In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the provisions of the California Building Code, Chapter 34, shall also apply to alterations or additions made to buildings within the scope of this chapter.

        This chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fire safety systems unless their condition will cause the building to be classified as a dangerous building under other provisions of this code.

        Alternate methods, materials, or designs may be approved and their use authorized by the Building Official. (Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

 

15.72.040 Order to comply.
        The Building Official may serve an order to comply with this chapter to those structures that have been identified under the provisions of this code. The order shall give the option to retrofit or demolish the structures identified. The option to retrofit will require the preparation of a structural survey, engineering report, and retrofit plan of the building to be completed in accordance with the provisions of the California Existing Building Code.

        The order shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner of the building as shown on the last equalized property tax assessment roll of the San Diego County Assessor. The order may also be served upon the person in apparent charge or control of the building. The order shall be served in person or by certified mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested. (Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

 

15.72.050 Appeal.
        The owner or person in charge or control of the building may appeal the Building Official’s initial determination that the building is within the scope of these regulations by submitting a report from a licensed structural engineer with substantiating evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

 

15.72.060 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

 

15.72.070 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 4961 § 1, 2010.)

Chapter 15.80 MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS
15.80.010 Articles 1 through 11 of Division 1, Chapter 2, Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations—Adopted by reference.
        Articles 1 through 11 of Division 1, Chapter 2, Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Sections 1000 through 1758, are adopted by reference as the mobile home regulations of the city. (Ord. 4787 § 2, 2004.)

 

15.80.020 Installation conformity.
        All installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of these regulations and with the recommended practices for safety to life and property. (Ord. 4787 § 2, 2004.)

 

15.80.030 Installation permits—Collection of fees.
        The permits for installation shall be issued by the building division, and the fees therefore shall be collected by the finance department. (Ord. 4787 § 2, 2004.)

 

15.80.040 Section 1018.(a) Division 1, Chapter 2, Article 1, Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations—Added.
        Section 1018.(a) of Article 1, Division 1, Chapter 2, Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, is added to read as follows:

 

        “Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the enforcement agency each time a mobile home is to be located on any site for the purpose of human habitation or occupancy as a dwelling.”

 

(Ord. 4787 § 2, 2004.)

 

15.80.050 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 or 1.24.020 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. The procedure for administrative citations in Chapter 1.14 may be used for enforcement of the mobile home regulations of this code. (Ord. 4787 § 2, 2004.)

 

15.80.060 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4787 § 2, 2004.)

Chapter 15.82 AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA
15.82.005 Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to facilitate the development and availability of housing affordable to Low and Moderate Income Households within the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency Project Area (the “Project Area”) as required under California Health and Safety Code Section 33413, and in order to provide housing opportunities to persons underserved in the El Cajon housing market. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.010 Findings.
        The City Council of the City of El Cajon finds and determines that:

A.    The community redevelopment law requires the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency to ensure that at least fifteen (15) percent of new and Substantially Rehabilitated Dwelling Units developed within the Agency’s Project Area by public or private entities or persons other than the Agency are affordable to Low and Moderate Income Households, of which forty (40) percent must be available at a cost affordable to Very Low Income Households. In addition, at least thirty (30) percent of all new or Substantially Rehabilitated Dwelling Units developed by a redevelopment agency shall be affordable to Low or Moderate Income Households, of which fifty (50) percent must be available at a cost affordable to Very Low Income Households.

B.     The City is experiencing an increasing shortage of housing affordable to moderate, low and very-low income households due to the high cost of housing and the development of new projects at market rate. As a result an increasing number of Lower Income Households are required to devote a large percentage of income to pay for housing, and are not provided adequate opportunities to acquire safe and affordable housing.

C.     Federal and state funds for the construction or creation of new affordable housing units are insufficient to fully address the problem of affordable housing within the City. In addition, the private housing market has not been willing to provide adequate housing opportunities to Moderate-, Low- and Very Low-Income Households that are restricted as affordable for a significant period of time.

D.    Owners of property within the Project Area, including Developers or Owners of Residential and Rehabilitation Projects, have in the past and will continue to derive direct and indirect benefits from activities undertaken by the Agency in its efforts to eliminate blight within the Project Area.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.015 Definitions.
        The words and terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings as provided in this section 15.82.015. Where words or terms are not defined in this section they shall have the meanings ordinarily ascribed to them or as may be further defined in this Code. Should any word, term or phrase defined in this section conflict with any other word, term or phrase defined in this Code, the definitions provided herein shall apply.

        “Adjusted For Family Size Appropriate To The Unit” shall mean for a household of one person in the case of a studio, two persons in the case of a one-bedroom, three persons in the case of a two-bedroom unit, four persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, and five persons in the case of a four-bedroom unit, as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5(h).

        “Affordable Housing Agreement” or “Agreement” means the agreement described in Section 15.82.045 of this Chapter between the Developer or Owner of a Residential or Rehabilitation Project and the City or Agency detailing how the provisions of this Chapter will be implemented.

        “Affordable Housing Cost” means the percentage of household income that can be dedicated to the Housing Cost of a Purchaser or Affordable Rent as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, as that section may be amended from time to time.

        “Affordable Housing Plan Application” or “Plan” is a form provided by the City to a Developer or Owner to be submitted prior to issuance of building permits or recording of any map for a Residential Development.

        “Affordable Housing Trust Fund” or “Fund” shall mean the fund created pursuant to Section 15.82.060 of this Chapter.

        “Affordable Unit” means those Dwelling Units developed pursuant to any Affordable Housing Agreement to satisfy the requirements of this Chapter, including For-Sale Units available at an Affordable Housing Cost, and Multi-Family Rental Units available at an Affordable Rent.

        “Affordable Rent” means affordable rent as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50053 and Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 6.5, Subchapter 1, Section 6922 of the California Code of Regulations, as those sections may be amended from time to time, or any state laws or regulations replacing Sections 50053 or 6922.

        “Agency” means the El Cajon Redevelopment Agency.

        “Agency Assistance” shall include any direct financial assistance provided by the City or Agency, the difference between the price of land provided by the City or Agency and the Fair Market Value of the land, the amount of in-kind fees waived by the City or Agency, the value of in-kind contributions made by or on behalf of the City or Agency, or any benefit in the reduction of the cost of a Dwelling Unit as determined by the difference in Fair Market Value and the price actually paid.

        “Agency-Assisted” shall mean units developed by the Agency as set forth in Health & Safety Code Section 33413(b)(1), as that section may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 33413(b)(1).

        “Agency-Developed” shall mean a Residential Project that the Agency rehabilitated, developed, or constructed, or caused to be rehabilitated, developed, or constructed while under the ownership of the Agency.

        “Agreement” shall have the same meaning as “Affordable Housing Agreement”.

        “Borrower” shall mean the person or persons purchasing a Unit from the Developer subject to an Agreement, or purchasing a Unit that is otherwise subject to an Agreement. A “Borrower” includes the purchaser of a Unit receiving Agency Assistance.

        “Borrower’s Cash Contribution” is defined as the sum of costs actually paid by any Borrower plus any gift funds approved by the City (less any refund) for the original purchase of the security property which may include, but are not limited to: down payment, installment payments of mortgage principal on the first trust deed, escrow fees, transfer taxes, recording fees, brokerage commissions, other similar costs of the acquisition, Documented Capital Improvements, plus not less than the Legal Rate of Interest on those cash payments. Borrower’s Cash Contribution does not include any credit for closing costs, rebate financing, concessions, etc., provided by any party other than borrower.

        “City” means the City of El Cajon.

        “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City or the City Manager’s designee.

        “Community Redevelopment Law” means Section 33000 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Condominium Conversion” means the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code.

        “Contingent Deferred Interest” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1917 of the California Civil Code as amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 1917.

        “Density Bonus” means an entitlement to building Dwelling Units in excess of the maximum number of units otherwise allowable, pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 et seq.

        “Department” shall mean the City of El Cajon Department of Redevelopment and Housing.

        “Developer” means the owner of any real property upon which a Residential Project is to be constructed or a Rehabilitation Project developed.

        “Development Agreement” means an agreement between a Developer or Owner and the City entered into pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq., but is not an Agreement or an Affordable Housing Agreement.

        “Director” shall mean the City of El Cajon Department of Redevelopment and Housing Director.

        “Documented Capital Improvements” is defined by the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) as improvements (not repairs) in IRS publication 530 (or equivalent).

        “Dwelling Unit” or “Unit” has the meaning set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.

        “Extremely Low Income Households” means persons or families whose income does not exceed 30% of the Area Median Income, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50106, as that section may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 50106.

        “Fair Market Value” shall mean the price that a willing buyer would pay and a willing seller would accept in an arm’s length transaction in a competitive market.

        “Family” has the meaning set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.

        “Feasible” means reasonably capable of being financed, rehabilitated, built and marketed, given the economic conditions prevailing at the time of project approval and taking into account any incentives made available under this section. In all cases, the City Council shall determine feasibility.

        “Floor Area” has the same meaning as set forth in Section 207-F of California Building Code.

        “For-Sale Units” means those Dwelling Units developed as part of a Residential Project, or contained within a Rehabilitation Project, which the Developer or Owner intends to offer for individual sale or which could be offered for individual sale, including but not limited to single-family detached homes, duplex units, condominiums and cooperatives.

        “Fund” shall have the same meaning as “Affordable Housing Trust Fund”.

        “General Plan” has the same meaning as the El Cajon General Plan adopted May 18, 1970 and any amendments thereto.

        “Gross Appreciation” is calculated by subtracting the original Unrestricted Fair Market Value of the Affordable Unit at the time of purchase from the current Unrestricted Fair Market Value of the Affordable Unit at the time of sale, rental, refinance, transfer, or conveyance.

        “Gross Building Floor Area” shall be defined as the total Floor Area and shall include all roofed structures requiring a building permit.

        “Gross Income” has the same meaning as set forth in Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 6.5, Subchapter 2, Section 6914 of California Code of Regulations, as those sections may be amended from time to time, or any state regulation or regulations replacing Section 6914.

        “Guidelines” means the guidelines adopted by the City Council pursuant to Section 15.82.020 for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.

        “Household” means one or more persons occupying the same housing unit (except foster children, unborn children and children being pursued for legal custody or adoption who are not currently living with the household).

        “Housing Cost of a Purchaser” has the same meaning as set forth in Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 6.5, Subchapter 2, Section 6920 of California Code of Regulations, as those sections may be amended from time to time, or any state regulation or regulations replacing Section 6920.

        “Legal Rate Of Interest” means interest calculated on the Borrower’s Cash Contribution based on the Federal Funds Rate at the time of sale, rental, refinance, transfer, conveyance, etc., of the Affordable Unit.

        “Longest Feasible Time” includes, but is not limited to, unlimited duration as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 33413(g) as that section may be amended from time to time.

        “Lot” shall have the same meaning as “Residential Lot”.

        “Low and Moderate Income Households” has the same meaning as “Persons and Families of Low or Moderate Income” set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, as that section may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 50093.

        “Lower Income Households” means persons or families whose income does not exceed 80% of the Area Median Income, as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, as that section may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 50079.5.

        “Maximum Affordable Purchase Price” shall mean that price at which a Low and Moderate Income Household can purchase an Affordable Unit at an Affordable Housing Cost, Adjusted For Family Size Appropriate To The Unit.

        “Mixed-Use Development” or “Mixed Use” means a comprehensively planned and designed development consisting of retail and/or office spaces combined with residential uses developed in compliance with, and subject to, Specific Plan 182 adopted to implement Special Development Area No. 9. The Residential Units may be above or adjacent to the retail/office component. If above, the Residential Units may contain the retail or office spaces within the same space such as a loft subject to compliance with the applicable building and fire codes. Mixed uses may be permitted by conditional use permit within Special Development Area No. 9.

        “Moderate Income Household” means persons or families whose income does not exceed 120% of the Area Median Income, as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5(g), as may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 50052.5(g).

        “Multi-Family Rental Units” means those multi-family dwelling units developed as part of a Residential Project, or contained within a Rehabilitation Project, which the Developer or Owner intends to offer for lease or rent or which are customarily offered for lease or rent.

        “Net Appreciation” shall be calculated by subtracting the Borrower’s Cash Contribution from Gross Appreciation.

        “One Location” means all adjacent land within the Project Area owned or controlled by the same Owner, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road or other public or private right-of-way.

        “Owner” includes the person, persons, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, or public or private entity having sufficient proprietary interest in real property to commence and maintain development of a Residential or Rehabilitation Project on the real property, or the Owner’s agent, assignee or successor in interest.

        “Persons and Families of Low or Moderate Income” shall have the same meaning as “Low and Moderate Income Households”.

        “Plan” shall have the same meaning as “Affordable Housing Plan Application”.

        “Planning Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City of El Cajon established pursuant to state law.

        “Project” shall have the same meaning as “Residential Project”.

        “Project Area” means that portion of the City located within the Redevelopment Project Area of the City of El Cajon and any addition, deletion or amendment from the project area as the City may approve from time to time.

        “Redevelopment Plan” means the Redevelopment Plan for the Project Area.

        “Redevelopment Project” means any Project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency.

        “Redevelopment Project Area” means that portion of the City located within the redevelopment district of the City of El Cajon, as initially established by the City pursuant to Ordinance No. 2434, adopted December 28, 1971, amended by the City pursuant to Ordinance No. 4038, adopted July 14, 1987, and any subsequent addition to or deletion from the Project Area as the City may approve from time to time.

        “Rehabilitated Dwelling Units” means those units that involve Rehabilitation of the Residential Project.

        “Rehabilitation” includes the construction, reconstruction, renovation, replacement, extension, repair, betterment, equipping, developing, embellishing, or otherwise improving real property consistent with standards of strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety, so that such structures are satisfactory and safe to occupy for residential purposes and are not conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency, or crime. Rehabilitation may also include alterations to the structure of a cosmetic or aesthetic nature.

        “Rehabilitation Project” means any project involving the Substantial Rehabilitation or Rehabilitation of three or more Dwelling Units at one location and requiring the issuance of a building permit, including in the aggregate all Dwelling Units for which building permits or discretionary approvals have been applied for from or granted by the City.

        “Residential Lot” or “Lot” means any parcel of land created with the intention that it will be used for the development of a Dwelling Unit.

        “Residential Project” means any project involving the construction, or Substantial Rehabilitation, or Rehabilitation of three or more Dwelling Units at one location and requiring the issuance of a building permit, or the creation of one or more Residential Lots at one location, including in the aggregate all Dwelling Units or Residential Lots for which building permits or discretionary approvals have been applied for from or granted by the City.

        “Specific Plan” means a Specific Plan of the City prepared and adopted in accordance with Government Code Sections 65450 et seq., as those sections may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Sections 65450.

        “Substantially Rehabilitated Dwelling Units” means all units substantially rehabilitated, with Agency Assistance as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 33413(b)(2)(A)(iii) and shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2006, and as of that date shall be repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2006, deletes or extends that date.

        “Substantial Rehabilitation” means Rehabilitation, the value of which constitutes twenty-five (25) percent of the after rehabilitation value of the dwelling, inclusive of the land value, set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 33413(b)(2)(A)(iv) and shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2006, and as of that date shall be repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted on or before January 1, 2006, deletes or extends that date.

        “Unit” shall have the same meaning as “Dwelling Unit”.

        “Unrestricted Fair Market Value” shall have the same meaning as “Fair Market Value”.

        “Very Low Income Households” means a Household whose income is less than 50% of the Area Median Income, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50105, as that section may be amended from time to time, or any state law or laws replacing Section 50105.

        “Zoning Ordinance” means Title 17 of the municipal code of the City of El Cajon, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.020 Guidelines.
        The City shall establish and adopt submittal requirements, review procedures, standards and guidelines for Affordable Units to be referred to as the Affordable Housing Guidelines (“Guidelines”). The Director shall coordinate, revise or amend as necessary, Guidelines for the implementation of this Chapter consistent with the terms and requirements contained herein. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.025 Provision of affordable housing—Procedures.
        No building permit shall be issued, and no use permit, Development Agreement, final parcel or subdivision map, or Agreement with the Agency shall be approved or recorded, in connection with any Residential or Rehabilitation Project located within the Project Area, until the Director confirms in writing that:

A.    An Affordable Housing Plan Application has been submitted to the City, and the Residential Project is exempt; or

B.     An Affordable Housing Agreement has been executed by the Developer or Owner and the City and that Agreement has been recorded with the San Diego County Recorder; or

C.     The Developer or Owner has requested and the City Council has determined in accordance with Section 15.82.070 of this Chapter that it is not reasonable to require the Developer or Owner to comply with the requirements of this Chapter in whole or in part.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.030 Development of affordable units.
        Standard Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all Developers of Residential Projects in the Redevelopment Project Area shall comply with the following:

A.    Number of Affordable Units (non-Agency Developed). Multi-family Rental and For-Sale Units: Fifteen percent (15%) of all new and Substantially Rehabilitated Dwelling Units shall be available at an Affordable Housing Cost to, and occupied by Persons and Families of Low or

 

Moderate Income. Not less than forty percent (40%) of those dwelling units required shall be available at an Affordable Housing Cost to Very Low-Income Households.

B.     Number of Affordable Units (Agency Developed). Multi-family Rental or For-Sale Units: thirty percent (30%) of all new and Substantially Rehabilitated Dwelling Units shall be available at an Affordable Housing Cost to, and occupied by, Persons and Families of Low or Moderate Income. Not less than fifty percent (50%) of those dwelling units required shall be available at an Affordable Housing Cost to Very Low-Income Households.

C.     Income limits, Affordable Housing Cost, Housing Cost of a Purchaser, Maximum Affordable Purchase Price, Affordable Rent, and Utility Schedules. The Department shall publish on no less than an annual basis, income limits for Low and Moderate Income Households and schedules for the following:

1.     Income Limits: all Affordable Units must be sold or rented to Low and Moderate Income Households at an Affordable Housing Cost or Affordable Rent.

2.     Affordable Housing Cost (owner-occupied housing): the maximum Affordable Housing Cost shall not exceed the following, Adjusted for Family Size Appropriate To The Unit:

a.     Extremely Low Income Households: the product of 30% times 30% of the Area Median Income;

b.     Very Low Income Households: the product of 30% times 50% of the area Median Income;

c.     Lower Income Households: the product of 30% of the Gross Income of the Household;

d.     Moderate Income Households: shall not be less than 28% of the Gross Income of the Household, nor shall it exceed 35% of the Gross Income of the Household.

3.     Housing Cost of a Purchaser: shall be calculated in accordance with California Code of Regulations Section 6920. In the event such regulation is no longer effective, it shall include (a) principal and interest on a mortgage loan including any additional loans, and any loan insurance fees associated therewith; (b) property taxes and assessments; (c) fire and casualty insurance; property maintenance and repairs; (d) reasonable allowance for utilities, including garbage, sewer, water, electricity, gas, other heating, cooking, and refrigeration fuels at an adequate level of service (utilities do not include telephone); (e) homeowners’ association fees; (f) space rent, if any. The Housing Cost of a Purchaser shall not exceed the Affordable Housing Cost.

4.     Maximum Affordable Purchase Price: shall be based on a 30-year fully-amortized fixed rate mortgage as reported by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC) weekly primary mortgage market survey, rounded to the nearest 1/8th (.125%) percentage, with three (3) percent down payment. The Department shall publish, on no less than an annual basis, Maximum Affordable Purchase Price limits based on current factors for mortgage insurance, property taxes, fire insurance, maintenance and utilities, HOA dues, space rent, Adjusted For Family Size Appropriate To The Unit.

5.     Affordable Rent: the maximum Affordable Rent shall not exceed the following, Adjusted For Family Size Appropriate To The Unit:

a.     Extremely Low Income Households: the product of 30% times 30% of the Area Median Income;

b.     Very Low Income Households: the product of 30% times 50% of the Area Median Income;

 

c.     Lower Income Households: the product of 30% times 60% of the Area Median Income;

d.     Moderate Income Households: the product of 30% of the Gross Income of the Household.

        Affordable Rent shall include the total of monthly payments for a rental or cooperative unit for: (i) use and occupancy of a housing unit and land and facilities associated therewith; (ii) any separately charged fees or service charges by the lessor which are required of all tenants, other than security deposits; (iii) a reasonable allowance for utilities not included in (i) or (ii), including garbage collection, sewer, water, electricity, gas, and other heating, cooking and refrigeration fuels, all at an adequate level of service; and (iv) possessory interest, taxes, or other fees or charges assessed for use of the land and facilities associated therewith by a public entity other than the lessor.

6.     Current Utility Schedule. The Department shall publish the most current utility schedule reported by the San Diego County Housing Authority, as may be amended from time to time.

D.    Location of Affordable Units. Affordable units shall be built on the site of the Residential Project and reasonably dispersed throughout the Project.

E.     Timing of Development. Affordable units constructed within a Residential Project or within phases of a Residential Project shall be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of market rate units.

F.     Exterior Appearance. Affordable units shall from the exterior be visibly indistinguishable from market rate units and be dispersed through the Residential Project.

G.    Development Standards. Affordable units shall comply with all applicable development standards of the El Cajon Zoning Ordinance and the conditions of approval for the Residential Project. Affordable units shall contain on average the same number of bedrooms as the market rate units in the Project, and shall be comparable with the market rate units in terms of materials and finished quality.

H.    Application of Percentages. If the application of any percentage required by this Chapter yields a fraction, the resulting fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.035 Incentives.
A.    Density Bonus. In the case of Residential Projects where a Developer or Owner is willing to produce Lower Income Household Units above and beyond the requirements of this Chapter, the City Council may, if requested by the Developer or Owner and after a recommendation by the Planning Commission, grant a density bonus as provided in Chapter 17.220 or Section 17.220.050 of the Zoning Ordinance.

B.     Other Incentives. The City Council may, if requested by the Developer or Owner and after review by the Director, grant such other incentives to the Developer or Owner as it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the following:

1.     Assistance in marketing the Project through sources including, but may not be limited to, the City website.

2.     Deferred payment of any in-lieu fees pursuant to Section 15.82.040(A)(2) provided that:

a.     The deferral of in-lieu fees are secured by a lien contract or similar document, which must be executed prior to issuance of building permits or recording of any map, with the County Recorder of San Diego County; and

b.     The amount of deferred in-lieu fees shall be based on the greater of: (i) in-lieu fees approved at the time a map is recorded; or (ii) in-lieu fees approved at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the Project specified in subsection (B)(2)(d) of this section;

c.     Developer or Owner shall execute all documents necessary to ensure collection of deferred in-lieu fees at an interest rate to be determined by the Director; and

d.     The payment schedule of the deferred in-lieu fees shall be structured such that the total aggregate amount of in-lieu fees must be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a unit that results in ninety percent (90%) construction of the Project, but in no event prior to construction of the final unit in the Project.

3.     Assistance in obtaining such federal, state or local funding and/or subsidies as may be available in connection with the development of affordable housing.

(Ord. 5033 § 9, 2015; Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.040 Alternatives.
        To the extent the Developer or Owner demonstrates that full compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 15.82.030 are not Feasible, the City Council may permit the Developer or Owner to meet all or a portion of its obligations through one or more of the following alternatives:

A.    Land Dedication.

1.     A Developer or Owner may make an irrevocable offer to dedicate land within the Project Area to the Agency or to a nonprofit Developer or Owner of affordable housing approved by the Agency. The land offered for dedication shall have a value, as established by an independent appraisal performed by an appraiser selected or approved by the City, which equals or exceeds the product of the number of Affordable Units for which the Developer or Owner proposes to substitute dedicated land multiplied by the Maximum Affordable Purchase Price in effect for the Project at the time of the offer to dedicate.

2.     The Developer or Owner must identify the land to be dedicated at the earliest possible time in accordance with Section 15.82.025 of this Chapter. The land as a substitute for Affordable Units shall be suitable for development similar in style, quantity and quality as the Residential Project and shall be consistent with the City’s General Plan designation applicable to the land offered for dedication.

3.     The property must be appropriately zoned, buildable, and free of toxic substances and contaminated soils or other environmental constraints, and large enough to accommodate, not less than, the number of required Affordable Units required by the Residential Project.

4.     Dedication of the land shall occur prior to issuance of a building permit or recording of any map.

5.     The City Council may approve, conditionally approve, or reject such offer of dedication. If the City rejects the offer, the Developer or Owner shall be required to meet the obligations by other means set forth in this Chapter.

B.     In-Lieu Fees.

1.     The Developer or Owner may meet its obligation under this section through the payment of in-lieu fees.

2.     The City Council shall annually adopt a resolution setting forth the amount of in-lieu fees as part of the City Fee Schedule. The schedule shall reflect the total estimated cost to the Agency of developing the Affordable Units, or an alternative amount approved by the City Council. In-lieu fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.

3.     The In-lieu fee shall be based on one hundred percent (100%) of the total Gross Building Floor Area of the entire Residential Project, multiplied by the in-lieu fee, in effect as of the date of intended issuance of building permits or recording of any map, whichever occurs first. The total Gross Building Floor Area shall be determined by the Building Division.

4.     In-lieu fees shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the Residential Project or recording of any map, whichever occurs first.

5.     In the event in-lieu fees are paid and a Residential Project application expires, the in-lieu fee pursuant to Section 15.82.040(A)(2)(d) for the new Residential Project application shall apply and the Developer or Owner shall receive credit for in-lieu fees previously paid for the Residential Project.

C.     Production of Affordable Housing Units off-site or outside the Project Area.

1.     The Developer or Owner may propose to meet its obligations under this section with Units located off-site or outside of the Project Area. The Units shall be identified by the Developer or Owner in accordance with Section 15.82.025 of this Chapter.

2.     Number of Affordable Units: The number of units shall equal or exceed the following:

a.     If the units are located off-site but inside of the Project Area, the provisions of Section 15.82.030 shall apply.

b.     If the units are located outside of the Project Area, two units outside a Project Area for each unit that otherwise would have been required to be available inside a Project Area shall be required at an Affordable Housing Cost or Affordable Rent, and occupied by, Persons and Families of Low or Moderate Income:

i.      Not less than forty percent (40%) of the required Affordable Units of this subsection shall be available to and occupied by Very Low Income Households at an Affordable Housing Cost or Affordable Rent.

3.     The units shall be similar in style, quantity, quality, and amenities of the units that would have been produced on-site.

4.     The production of Affordable Units off-site or outside the Project Area shall be built concurrently with the Residential Project to be built inside the Project Area.

5.     All other requirements of this Chapter shall apply to the production of Affordable Units off-site or outside the Project Area.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.045 Affordable housing agreements.
A.    Contents. Evidence of compliance with this Chapter shall be in the form of an Affordable Housing Agreement between the Developer or Owner and the City. Affordable Housing Agreements shall require compliance with all applicable terms of this Chapter, and shall include the following:

1.     Residential Projects.

a.     If the Developer or Owner is required to construct or produce Affordable Units, the Agreement shall indicate the family income targeted; number, location, tenure of affordability, size and construction scheduling of all Affordable Units and any other information required by the City relative to the obligations imposed by this Chapter.

b.     If the Developer or Owner is permitted to dedicate land for the development of Affordable Units, the Agreement shall identify the site of the dedicated land and shall provide for the implementation of such dedication in a manner deemed appropriate and timely by the City.

c.     If the Developer or Owner is permitted to pay an in-lieu fee, the Agreement shall specify the amount of the fee, method and timing of payment. No building permit shall be issued or final map recorded until the Developer or Owner provides written proof of the payment of all in-lieu fees required prior to the issuance of the building permit, recordation of a map or a deferral of fees in compliance with Section 15.82.035(B)(2).

d.     The Developer or Owner shall execute all other documentation necessary to enforce the Affordable Housing Agreement and affordability of the Affordable Units.

B.     Recordation. The Agreement shall be recorded and provide for all applicable affordability controls in the form of covenants running with the land, prior to the earlier of the issuance of any building permit or final subdivision or parcel map recordation for the Residential or Rehabilitation Project. Recordation shall be against the real property upon which the Affordable Units are to be located.

C.     Review and Approval. Affordable Housing Agreements shall be reviewed by the Director and approved by the Agency and the City Attorney.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.050 Duration of affordability.
        Affordable Units shall remain affordable for at least the length of time required by Health and Safety Code Section 33413 at the time of the recordation of the affordability controls:

A.    Owner-occupied units shall be affordable for the Longest Feasible Time but not less than forty-five (45) years;

B.     Rental units shall be affordable for the Longest Feasible Time but for not less than fifty-five (55) years.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.055 Occupancy requirements.
A.    General Standards.

1.     Affordable Units are reserved for Very Low, Low or Moderate-Income Households at an Affordable Housing Cost. The income limits, maximum allowable rents, sales prices and utility schedules for the Affordable Units shall be published by the Department on an annual basis.

2.     Any person who occupies a rental Affordable Unit or purchases an Affordable Unit shall occupy the unit as his or her principal residence.

3.     None of the following individuals, or their immediate family members, who are a party to the Residential Project shall be eligible to purchase or rent an Affordable Unit: City employees and officials who have policymaking authority or influence regarding City housing programs; the Residential Project Owner, Developer, officers, employees, or subcontractors.

B.     For-Sale Affordable Units.

1.     Selection of Purchasers. The Developer or Owner of ownership Affordable Units is required to fill vacant units in the following manner:

a.     If residential ownership or rental units are being demolished, or households are displaced in conjunction with the Residential Development, the existing or displaced households shall be given the right of first refusal to purchase and occupy the Affordable Units;

b.     The Developer or Owner should make all efforts to offer Affordable Units to those households who work and/or live in the City of El Cajon;

c.     All Affordable Units shall be sold by lottery to ensure the greatest degree of impartiality;

d.     The purchasers of Affordable Units shall not own any other real property.

2.     Initial Eligibility. As a condition of the close of escrow of the Affordable Unit to the initial purchaser, the Developer, Owner, or purchasers lender of choice, shall submit acceptable documentation to the Department to determine eligibility as set forth in Section 15.82.030, as set forth in the Guidelines.

3.     Ongoing Eligibility. The purchaser shall submit, on an annual basis to the Director or designee, purchaser occupancy certification and related documentation for each Affordable Unit.

4.     Resale or Transfer to an Income-Eligible Purchaser. After the initial sale of the Affordable Unit, the unit shall remain affordable to subsequent eligible buyers pursuant to a resale restriction agreement, or equivalent document, which shall be in effect for forty-five (45) years.

a.     The owner of an Affordable Unit wishing to sell that unit shall notify the City prior to accepting an offer.

b.     The City of El Cajon shall have the right of first refusal to purchase the Affordable Unit.

c.     The owner of an Affordable Unit may sell that unit to an income-eligible purchaser at the applicable Affordable Housing Cost provided that the Department certifies the purchase price and eligibility of the buyer.

d.     The purchaser shall execute all reasonable and necessary documents in an amount that constitutes the difference between the Unrestricted Fair Market Value of the Affordable Unit and Maximum Affordable Purchase Price actually paid (“Agency Assistance”).

e.     The City shall prepare and the purchaser shall execute all documentation necessary to ensure continued eligibility of the Affordable Unit.

f.      The unit shall be sold at no greater than the Maximum Affordable Purchase Price, applicable to the unit.

5.     Resale or Transfer to a Non Income-Eligible Purchaser. After the initial sale, and upon any sale, rental, refinance, transfer, or conveyance of the Affordable Unit to a non income-eligible purchaser, the City shall receive:

a.     The sum which is calculated as the difference between the original Unrestricted Fair Market Value of the Affordable Unit at the time of purchase and the Maximum Affordable Purchase Price of the Affordable Unit actually paid (“Agency Assistance”), as determined by an appraisal approved by the City; and

b.     A share of the equity in the Net Appreciation in the Affordable Unit.

i.      Net Appreciation to the City shall not exceed that percentage of Agency Assistance of the Unrestricted Fair Market Value of the Affordable Unit at the time of an initial purchase.

c.     All funds collected shall be deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.

d.     The property shall be sold at no less than Fair Market Value.

6.     The City of El Cajon shall be entitled to the right of first refusal on any for sale Affordable Unit upon its listing for sale.

7.     Title or Occupancy Change. The Director must approve any change of title or occupancy that occurs after the initial purchase of an Affordable Unit.

8.     Penalty for Ineligible Resale or Use. In the event of a sale of the Affordable Unit to a non-eligible purchaser, the City shall recapture funds as provided in this section.

9.     Monitoring. The Director reserves the right to annually monitor each purchaser’s compliance with regard to occupancy, including annual property inspections.

C.     Multi-family Rental Affordable Units.

1.     Selection of Tenants. The owner of rental Affordable Units is required to fill vacant units in the following manner:

a.     If residential ownership or rental units are being demolished, or households are displaced in conjunction with the Residential Development, the displaced households shall be given the right of first refusal to occupy the Affordable Units;

b.     The Developer or Owner should make all efforts to offer Affordable Units to those households who work and/or live in the City.

2.     Initial Eligibility of Tenants. The Owner or designee of Affordable Units shall select income-qualified households, which shall in turn be subject to eligibility certification by the department or designee. The Developer, Owner or designee shall submit acceptable documentation to determine household eligibility as set forth in Section 15.82.030 which may include, but is not limited to: an application, three-years federal tax returns, W-2 forms, pay stubs, bank statements and other documentation as required.

3.     Ongoing eligibility. The Owner or designee shall submit, on an annual basis, to the Director or designee tenant household and income certifications for each Affordable Unit.

4.     Changes in Income of Tenant. If after moving into an Affordable Unit, the tenant’s income exceeds the income limit for that unit, the following shall apply:

a.     The next available comparable unit must be rented at Affordable Rent to a Very Low, Lower or Moderate Income Household as the Affordable Unit lost.

5.     Monitoring. The Director reserves the right to annually monitor the project compliance with regard to occupancy, Affordable Rents, including annual property inspections.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.060 Affordable housing trust fund.
A.    There is hereby established the City of El Cajon Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Separate accounts within such fund may be created from time to time to avoid commingling as required by law or as deemed appropriate to further the purposes of the Fund.

B.     The Fund shall be administered by the Director who shall have the authority to govern funds consistent with this Chapter, and to prescribe procedures for said purpose.

C.     Purposes and Uses of Funds.

1.     Monies deposited in the Fund along with any interest earnings on such monies shall be used solely to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to Persons and Families of Low or Moderate Income; including, but not limited to: acquisition of property and property rights, cost of construction including costs associated with planning, administration, and design, as well as actual building or installation, as well as any other costs associated with the construction or financing of affordable housing; reimbursement to the City for such costs if funds were advanced by the City from other sources; and reimbursement of Developers or Property Owners who have been required or permitted to install facilities which are beyond that which can be attributed to a specific development. To the maximum extent possible, all monies should be used to provide for additional affordable housing. Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative expenses not reimbursed through processing fees, including reasonable consultant and legal expenses related to the establishment and/or administration of the Fund and reasonable expenses for administering the process of calculating, collecting, and accounting for Affordable Housing Trust Fund fees and any deferred City fees authorized by this Chapter.

2.     Monies in the Fund may be disbursed, hypothecated, collateralized or otherwise employed for these purposes from time to time as the Director and Agency determine is appropriate to accomplish the purposes of the Fund.

3.     Expenditures from the Fund shall be controlled, authorized and paid in accordance with general City budgetary policies. Execution of contracts related to the use or administration of Fund monies shall be in accordance with standard council policy.

D.    The Director shall, on an annual basis through the budgetary process, report on the status and priorities of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.065 Exceptions, exemptions.
        The requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Residential or Rehabilitation Projects for which a Residential Project application has been received by the City prior to the effective date of this ordinance provided, however, that if a Residential Project application has been received, not earlier than four years prior to the effective date of this ordinance, for which building permits have not been issued, and the Developer is required by law to develop Affordable Units, this Chapter shall apply to the Project;

B.     Residential Projects of less than three units;

C.     Applications for a Residential Project of three or more units that do not involve Substantial Rehabilitation received on or prior to December 31, 2005 unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2006, deletes or extends that date;

D.    Any dwelling unit which is damaged or destroyed by fire or natural catastrophe so long as the square footage, reconstruction, and use of the building remains the same;

E.     A Residential or Rehabilitation Project subject to a separate agreement with the City or Agency for the production of affordable housing units that exceed the requirements of this Chapter.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.070 Adjustments, waivers.
        The requirements of this Chapter may be reduced, modified, adjusted or waived if the Developer or Owner demonstrates to the City Council that there is not a reasonable relationship or nexus between the impact of a proposed Residential Development and the requirements of this Chapter, or that applying the requirement of this Chapter would take property in violation of the United States or California Constitutions.

A.    Timing. To receive consideration for an adjustment or waiver, the Developer or Owner must make the request to the City and provide supporting documentation when applying for a first approval for the Residential Development, and/or as part of any appeal that the City provides as part of the process for the first approval.

B.     Considerations. In making a determination on an application to adjust or waive the requirements of this Chapter, the City Council may assume each of the following when applicable: (i) that the Developer or Owner is subject to the affordable housing requirement or in-lieu fee; and (ii) the extent to which the Developer or Owner will benefit from incentives under Section 15.82.035; (iii) the loss of affordable housing units may result in the imposition of obligations on the City or the Agency under applicable federal or state law, the impact of which cannot be fully mitigated by the Developer or Owner as a condition of approval.

C.     Modification of Plan. If the City Council, upon legal advice provided by or at the behest of the City Attorney, determines that the application of the provision of this Chapter lacks a reasonable relationship between the impact of a proposed Residential Project and the requirements of this Chapter, or that applying the requirement of this Chapter would take property in violation of the United States or California Constitutions, the Affordable Housing Plan shall be modified, adjusted or waived to reduce the obligations under this Chapter to the extent necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result. If the City Council determines that no violation of the United States or California Constitutions would occur through application of this Chapter, the requirements of this Chapter remain applicable.

(Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.075 Fees.
        The City Council may, by resolution, establish reasonable fees and deposits for the administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.080 Judicial review.
        Nothing in this Chapter shall in any way preclude or limit any aggrieved party from seeking judicial review after such person has exhausted the administrative remedies provided by this Chapter. However, it shall be conclusively presumed that a litigant has not exhausted his or her administrative remedies as to any issue, which is not raised in the administrative proceedings authorized herein. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

 

15.82.085 Violation—Penalties.
        Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

        In addition to the above, the city council may request the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the rights of the city under any Affordable Housing Agreement, including but not limited to actions for specific performance, injunctive relief or damages. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

 

15.82.090 Severability.
        If any provision or section of this chapter is determined to be invalid or unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the enforceability or validity of the remaining provisions or sections of the chapter. (Ord. 4825 § 1, 2005.)

Chapter 15.84 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
15.84.010 California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, including appendix chapters A1, A2, A3, and A4, but excluding section 103, and appendix chapter B, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the existing building code of the city (the “existing building code”), except as hereinafter modified, amended, repealed or deleted, for regulating the construction, erection, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures in the city, when rebuilding or reconstructing a building or structure damaged by emergencies created by seismic activities, winds, floods, conflagrations, or other such disasters, or for retrofitting of existing buildings for soft story or unreinforced masonry construction, and is by this reference made a part hereof as though fully set out herein. The California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, is referred to in this chapter as the “CEBC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5097 § 3, 2019.)

 

15.84.015 Section 112 Amended—Board of Appeals.
        Section 112 of the CEBC is amended to read as follows:

 

112.  Board of Appeals. Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the California Existing Building Code adopted by the city, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

(Ord. 5097 § 3, 2019.)

 

15.84.020 Liability unaffected by inspection.
        This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, electrical device or electrical materials for damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City or any officer or employee thereof enforcing this code be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized within the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4962 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.84.030 Appeals board.
        Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the existing building code adopted by the City, shall be heard in accordance with the board of appeals procedure as outlined in the California Building Code as amended by Chapter 15.04 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 4962 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.84.040 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the CEBC as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4962 § 4, 2010.)

 

15.84.050 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 4962 § 4, 2010.)

Chapter 15.86 FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES
15.86.010 Designation of Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones in Local Responsibility Areas.
        The City of El Cajon hereby designates Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones and Wildland Urban Interface Areas within its jurisdictional boundaries pursuant to California Government Code Section 51179. The Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones and Wildland Urban Interface Areas designated by this ordinance are designated on a map titled El Cajon Fire Hazard Severity Zones, dated January 27, 2009, and retained on file at the Fire Department Administrative Office and the Building and Fire Safety Division in El Cajon City Hall. This map is intended to supersede other maps previously adopted by the City of El Cajon designating high fire hazard areas. (Ord. 5027 § 1, 2015.)

Chapter 15.88 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
15.88.010 California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
        The California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the historical building code of the city (the “historical building code”), except as hereinafter modified, amended, repealed or deleted, for regulating the construction, erection, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all historical buildings and structures in the city, and is by this reference made a part hereof as though fully set out herein. The California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition, is referred to in this chapter as the “CHBC,” and one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 5096 § 3, 2019.)

 

15.88.020 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of the CHBC as adopted and amended by this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5096 § 3, 2019.)

15.88.030 Violation—Penalty
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the City. (Ord. 5096 § 3, 2019.)

Chapter 15.90 POST DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT
15.90.010 Application of provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of El Cajon. (Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.90.020 Definitions.
        Whenever the following words are used in this chapter they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A.    “Placard” is a sign or notice, not less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches in size, with not less than twelve-point font sized lettering.

B.     “Safety assessment” is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy.

(Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.90.030 Placards.
        This section establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representative to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.

        The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures:

(1)    “INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted” is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean, certify or warrant that there is no damage to the building or structure.

(2)    “RESTRICTED USE” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

(3)    “UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered.

(Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.90.040 Removal of placards prohibited.
        Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. The placard shall contain language to inform persons of such prohibitions. (Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.90.050 Liability unaffected by inspection.
        This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling, building, or installing any installation in violation of this code. Nor shall the city or any officer or employee thereof enforcing this chapter be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized within the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.90.060 Public nuisance.
        A violation of any provision of this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

 

15.90.070 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code, unless prosecution of the violation is charged as an infraction by the prosecuting attorney. (Ord. 4898 § 2, 2007.)

Chapter 15.92 EXPEDITED PROCESSING OF PERMITTING FOR SMALL ROOFTOP SOLAR, ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS, AND ADVANCED ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS
15.92.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows:

        “Association,” when used as a noun, means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

        “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with the California Electrical Code, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

        “Advanced energy storage” means an energy storage system, as defined in Section 2835 of the Public Utilities Code, as well as an energy storage system that is designed to provide backup energy services in the event of a grid outage, that is limited to both of the following:

 

        (A)   Electrochemical energy storage in non-venting packages.

        (B)   Customer sited installations.

        “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following: electronic mail (i.e., “e-mail), the city’s website operated through the internet, or telefacsimile.

        “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

        1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

        2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

        3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

        4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by title 17 of this code.

        “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of section 801.5 of the California Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

 

15.92.020 Applicability.
        A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems, electric vehicle charging stations, and advanced energy storage systems in the city of El Cajon.

        B.     Small residential rooftop solar energy systems, electric vehicle charging stations, and advanced energy storage systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system, electric vehicle charging stations, or advanced energy storage systems in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

 

15.92.030 Solar energy system requirements.
        A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, federal government, and the city of El Cajon.

        B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

        C.     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

 

15.92.035 Advanced Energy Storage Systems.
        A.    All advanced energy storage systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, federal government, and the city of El Cajon.

        B.     All advanced energy storage systems shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Electrical Code.

        C.     All advanced energy storage systems shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

 

15.92.037 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations.
        A.    All electric vehicle charging systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, federal government, and the city of El Cajon.

        B.     All electric vehicle charging systems shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Electrical Code.

        C.     All electric vehicle charging systems shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

 

15.92.040 Streamlining the permit process for small residential solar systems, electric vehicle charging stations, and advanced energy storage systems.
        A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system, electric vehicle charging station, or advanced energy storage system shall be made available to the public on the city of El Cajon website.

        B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system, electric vehicle charging station, and advanced energy storage system permit applicants.

        C.     An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

        D.    The Building and Fire Safety Division shall maintain a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems, electric vehicle charging stations, or advanced energy storage systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

 

15.92.050 Permit review and inspection requirements.
        A.    The Building and Fire Safety Division shall issue a building permit in a timely manner after receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, as well as all applicable local, state and federal requirements for health and safety.

        B.     Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

        C.     Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

        D.    No approval of any association is required for the issuance of a permit for a solar energy permit, electric vehicle charging station, or advanced energy storage system.

        E.     If an application is deemed incomplete or requires corrections to be addressed, a written or emailed correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. If the building official finds that the installation of a solar energy system, electric vehicle charging station, or advanced energy storage system will have a specific, adverse, impact upon the public health or safety, requiring a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this code the decision shall be in writing, and may be appealed to the Planning Commission as provided in Chapter 17.30. If a minor conditional use permit is required by the building official, based on findings that the solar energy system, electric vehicle charging station, or advanced energy storage system will have a specific, adverse, impact upon the public health or safety, and the director of community development finds that there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse, impact, and denies application for a minor conditional use permit, the director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission as provided in Chapter 17.30.

        F.     For a small residential rooftop solar energy system one consolidated building inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, re-inspections are required. For inspection of electric vehicle charging stations and advanced energy storage systems, final approval shall be granted with the fewest inspections possible to ascertain the safety and code compliance of the system. (Ord. 5053 § 2, 2016.)

TITLE 15 ENDNOTES

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.04 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 16.08 FEES
Chapter 16.12 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS—PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.16 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS—REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.18 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS AND VESTING TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 16.20 FINAL MAP REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.24 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS-PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.28 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS—REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.32 PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.34 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 16.36 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
Chapter 16.40 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 16.48 ENFORCEMENT—CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
Chapter 16.52 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Chapter 16.56 CREATION OF EASEMENTS BY RECORDED COVENANTS
Chapter 16.60 STANDARD URBAN STORM WATER MITIGATION PLAN
Chapter 16.100 REPEALED
Chapter 16.101 REPEALED
Chapter 16.102 REPEALED
Chapter 16.103 REPEALED
Chapter 16.104 REPEALED
Chapter 16.105 REPEALED
Chapter 16.106 REPEALED
Chapter 16.107 REPEALED
Chapter 16.108 REPEALED
TITLE 16 ENDNOTES

Chapter 16.04 GENERAL REGULATIONS
16.04.010 Title purpose.
        This title is adopted to supplement the Subdivision Map Act, and may be cited as the “subdivision ordinance.” No subdivision shall be created except in accordance with this title. Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reversion to acreage by complying with all of the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 3782 § 1, 1984; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.010.)

 

16.04.020 Definitions.
        Words used herein that are defined in the Subdivision Map Act but not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as is given to them in said Subdivision Map Act. Whenever the following words are used in this title, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

A.    “Adjustment plat” means a plat prepared pursuant to Chapter 16.36 of this title and certified by the city engineer as having been approved pursuant to this title and filed in the office of the city planning division.

B.     “Bicycle” means a device upon which any person may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement.

C.     “Bicycle route” is the generic term for all facilities that explicitly provide for bicycle travel by a course which is to be traveled.

D.    “Cable television lines” means electronic cable, conduit and any other appurtenances thereto which distribute television or other electronic signals.

E.     “Certificate of compliance” means a document describing a unit or contiguous units of real property and stating that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and applicable city ordinances.

F.     “City of El Cajon standards” refers to those standards and specifications, including standard drawings, as may be adopted by resolution by the city council from time to time. These standards are to be on file in the office of the city clerk and the office of the city engineer.

G.    “Final map” means a map prepared pursuant to Chapter 16.20 of this title and the Subdivision Map Act which after approval and recordation is effective to complete the subdivision of a major subdivision.

H.    “Improvement” means:

1.     Such street work and utilities, including ornamental street lights and walkways, to be installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on land to be used for public or private streets, alleys, highways, ways, bicycle routes and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic, drainage, flood control, fire protection and sanitation needs as a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map or final map;

2.     Such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by

 

        any other entity approved by the city council or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan required by Article 5 (commencing with Section 65300) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code, or any specific plan adopted pursuant to Article 8 (commencing with Section 65450) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code.

I.      “Interior lot” means a lot which has side lot lines approximately parallel and has frontage on only one street.

J.      “Lot” means lot, parcel or tract of real property.

K.    “Lot area” means the horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot exclusive of:

1.     The area of any street right-of-way or road easement;

2.     Any flood control easement or walkway which, as a condition of approval of the subdivision map on which the lot is shown, must be fenced; and

3.     Any portion of the lot which is less than thirty-five feet wide for a distance of fifty feet or more and which is designated or used to provide vehicular or pedestrian access to the part of such lot which is designed for use as a building site.

L.     “Major subdivision” means a subdivision of five or more lots.

M.    “Minor subdivision” means a subdivision of four or fewer lots.

N.    “Notice of violation” means a recorded document describing a unit or contiguous units of real property, naming the owners thereof, and describing the manner in which said real property has been divided, or has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act and/or city ordinances.

O.    “Parcel map” means a map prepared pursuant to Chapter 16.32 of this code and the Subdivision Map Act which, after approval and recordation, is effective to create a minor subdivision.

P.     “Remainder parcel” means the largest of four or fewer lots created by the division of an original lot or parcel, which largest lot contains a gross area equal to or greater than the sum of the areas of the other lot or lots created, but not less than forty acres.

Q.    “Street” means a state highway, county or city road or street, public road, street, alley, or thoroughfare.

S.     “Subdivision” has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 66424 of the Subdivision Map Act, but shall not include the following:

1.     The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within a duplex, multiple dwelling, apartment building, industrial building, commercial building, mobile home park, or trailer park;

2.     Mineral, oil, or gas leases;

3.     Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state of California.

T.     “Subdivision Map Act” means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California.

U.    “Tentative map” means a map prepared for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed major subdivision and filed with the planning commission precedent to the preparation and filing of a final map.

V.    “Tentative parcel map” means a map prepared for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed minor subdivision and filed with the city engineer for approval or conditional approval, precedent to the preparation and filing of a parcel map or precedent to waiver of the requirement for a parcel map.

W.    “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

X.    “Vesting tentative map” means a tentative map and “vesting tentative parcel map” means a tentative parcel map, for a residential subdivision which conforms with the requirements of Chapter 16.18 of this code and confers upon the subdivider certain rights established by this title.

(Ord. 3953 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1,, 1975: prior code § 16.04.020.)

 

16.04.030 Prohibition.
        No person shall create a subdivision except in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.030.)

 

16.04.040 Application of Subdivision Map Act.
        Except as otherwise expressly provided in this title, all of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which apply to subdivisions as defined in that act, and all of the provisions of this title, apply to subdivisions as defined in this title. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code 16.04.040.)

 

16.04.050 Extent of regulations.
A.    No real property, improved or unimproved, consisting of a single unit or two or more contiguous units and owned by the same person or persons, shall be divided into two or more lots, including any lot retained by the owner, except in accordance with the provisions of this title.

B.     No parcel may be subdivided if it was illegally created, unless as part of the division the illegality is eliminated. If such elimination is not possible, a notice of violation with respect to the parcel shall be recorded. In no event shall a substitution be permitted unless the entire legal parcel is subdivided when the owner of any portion of the illegal parcel is the person who owned the property at the time of the illegal subdivision.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.050.)

 

16.04.060 Advisory agency designation.
A.    The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, for major subdivisions. The planning commission may prescribe, subject to the approval of the city council, such additional rules and regulations as are necessary or advisable with respect to the form and content of tentative maps required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title and the data to be furnished with such tentative maps.

B.     The city engineer is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, for minor subdivisions. The city engineer may prescribe, subject to the approval of the city council, such additional rules and regulations as are necessary or advisable with respect to the form and content of tentative parcel maps required by this title.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.060.)

 

16.04.070 Environmental impact review.
        All subdivisions shall be subject to environmental review in accordance with the provisions of California law and applicable provisions of this code. In addition, every map approved pursuant to this title shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to offsite property, as set forth in this code. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.070.)

 

16.04.080 Soils report.
A.    A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer registered in this state and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the appropriate official or body for every subdivision.

B.     A preliminary soils report may be waived by the city engineer providing the city engineer finds that, due to the knowledge the city has as to the qualities of the soils in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.

C.     If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils report indicates, the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the city engineer. Such soils investigation shall be done by a civil engineer registered in this state, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists.

D.    The city council may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and a condition to the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.080.)

 

16.04.090 Reservations.
A.    As a condition of approval of a final or parcel map, the subdivider shall reserve sites appropriate in area and location for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses, according to the procedural standards and formula contained in this section.

B.     If a park, recreational facility, fire station, library or other public facility or use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and parks element, or a public building element, the subdivider may be required to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the above specific plan or general plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C.     The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D.    The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map, plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred in any loan covering such reserved area.

E.     If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.04.090.)

 

16.04.100 Merger.
A.    Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner, which have not been created by a lawful lot split, parcel map, final subdivision map or record of survey, shall be merged for purposes of this title when both of the following conditions exist:

1.     Any one of such parcels or units does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development under ordinances of the city; and

2.     Any one of such parcels or units is not developed with a building for which a permit has been issued by the city, or which was built prior to the time such permits were required by the city.

B.     The director of building and planning is directed to record the notice of merger, and provide the notice of intention, as provided by Section 66424.2 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(Ord. 3145 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1325, 1977.)

 

16.04.110 Subdivided lands—Map of freeways.
        An owner, subdivider, or agent offering to sell or lease subdivided lands shall supply to a prospective purchaser or lessee of the property a map showing the location of all freeways which are existing or have been adopted in the general plan of the jurisdiction in which the property is located.

        The map shall be prepared and provided by the planning department. Said map shall be drawn to scale and shall include the area covering two statute miles surrounding the subdivision.

        The map shall be posted in a conspicuous place at any office where sales or leases or offers to sell or lease lots within the subdivision are regularly made. A copy of the map shall be made available for examination by a prospective purchaser or lessee before execution of an offer to purchase or lease, and shall be given to each purchaser and lessee at the request of the purchaser or lessee. (Ord. 4153 § 1, 1989.)

 

16.04.120 Public nuisance.
        The violation of any provision of this title is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 4318 § 8, 1991.)

Chapter 16.08 FEES
16.08.010 Fees.
        All fees, not otherwise specified in this chapter, for filing or processing planning applications, environmental documents, subdivision maps, drainage plans, annexations, reversions to acreage, appeals, extensions, or administering other miscellaneous planning functions, certificates of compliance, or for obtaining copies of planning documents, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 4322 § 2, 1992; Ord. 3953 § 2, 1986; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.010.)

 

(Ord. No. 4395, Amended, 03/02/93)

 

16.08.020 Repealed.
        (Ord. 4322 § 3 1992; Ord. 3239 § 6, 1978; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.040.)

 

(Ord. No. 4395, Repealed, 03/02/93)

 

16.08.030 Repealed.
        (Ord. 4322 § 3, 1992; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.050.)

 

(Ord. No. 4395, Repealed, 03/02/93)

 

16.08.040 Repealed.
        (Ord. 4322 § 3, 1992; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.100.)

 

(Ord. No. 4395, Repealed, 03/02/93)

 

16.08.050 Repealed.
        (Ord. 4322 § 3, 1992; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.110.)

 

(Ord. No. 4395, Repealed, 03/02/93)

 

16.08.060 Streets and lots reserved for future streets excluded from computation.
        Streets and lots reserved for future streets shall be disregarded in computing the fees and charges imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 4322 § 3, 1992; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.120.)

 

16.08.070 Drainage and sewer facilities—Payment of fees required.
        Prior to filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees for defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and stormwaters from local or neighborhood drainage areas or sanitary sewer facilities for local sanitary sewer areas established pursuant to Section 66483 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 4322 § 3, 1992; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.08.130.)

 

16.08.080 Bridge crossings and major thoroughfares—Purpose.
        The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 4322 § 3, 1992; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: Prior code § 16.08.140.)

Chapter 16.12 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS—PROCEDURE
16.12.010 Tentative map required.
A.    Any person proposing to create a major subdivision shall file a tentative map pursuant to this chapter with the secretary of the planning commission. The city council shall not approve a final map unless prior thereto a tentative map of the subdivision shown thereon shall have been filed with and reported on by the planning commission. Prior to filing a tentative map, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall confer with the planning director and the city engineer regarding the preparation of the map. A proposed tentative map may not be filed unless it conforms to the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Where a parcel map is authorized for a major subdivision pursuant to Section 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the city engineer shall not approve such map unless prior thereto a tentative map of the subdivision shown thereon shall have been filed and reported on by the planning commission and approved by the city council.

C.     Tentative maps shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. The subdivider shall file as many copies of the tentative map or other required information as the planning director may require.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.010.)

 

16.12.020 Grading plan.
        There shall be filed with each tentative map a grading plan showing any grading proposed for the creation of building sites within the subdivision or for construction or installation of improvements to serve the subdivision. The grading plan, together with the original topographical contours, may be shown on the tentative map. This plan shall indicate approximate earthwork volumes of proposed excavation and filling operations. In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be filed with the tentative map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.020.)

 

16.12.030 Preliminary title report.
        There shall be filed with each tentative map a current preliminary title report for the property being subdivided. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.030.)

 

16.12.040 Size of map.
        The size of such tentative map is optional; the scale shall not be less than two hundred feet to the inch. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.040.)

 

16.12.050 Information on map.
        Each tentative map shall contain the following information:

A.    Name and address of the owner whose property is proposed to be subdivided and the name and address of the subdivider;

B.     Name and address of registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor who prepared the maps;

C.     North point;

D.    Scale;

E.     Date of preparation;

F.     The location, width and proposed names of all streets within the boundaries of proposed subdivision and approximate grades thereof;

G.    Location and width of alleys;

H.    Name, location and width of adjacent streets;

I.      Lot lines and approximate dimensions and numbers of each lot;

J.      Approximate location and width of watercourses or areas subject to inundation from floods, and location or structures, from floods, and location of structures, irrigation ditches, and other permanent physical features;

K.    Approximate contours at two-foot intervals;

L.     Approximate location of existing buildings and permanent structures;

M.    Location of all major vegetation, showing size and type;

N.    Legal description of the exterior boundaries of the subdivisions;

O.    Width and location of all existing or proposed public or private easements;

P.     Classification of lots as to intended residential, commercial, industrial or other uses;

Q.    Location of railroads;

R.     Approximate radii of curves;

S.     Proposed name and city tract number of the subdivision;

T.     Any proposed phasing by units;

U.    Number of units to be constructed when a condominium or community apartment project is involved.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.050.)

 

16.12.060 Supplemental information.
        The tentative map shall show thereon, or be accompanied by reports and written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters:

A.    Source of water supply;

B.     Type of street improvement and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install;

C.     Proposed method of sewage disposal, including location of facilities;

D.    Proposed storm water sewer or other means of drainage, including the location of such facilities;

E.     Protective covenants to be recorded;

F.     Proposed tree planting.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.060.)

 

16.12.070 Planning director’s duties.
A.    The planning director shall obtain for the planning commission the reports and recommendations of the city engineer, the parks and recreation director, the fire chief, or their authorized representatives, with respect to the design of the proposed subdivision and the kind, nature and extent of the proposed improvements. Recommendations may also be obtained from any other person affected by or interested in the proposed subdivision, if such recommendation is found to be necessary.

B.     The planning director shall prepare a staff report to the planning commission containing the reports and recommendations regarding the tentative map. A copy of the reports and recommendations shall be provided for the subdivider at least five days prior to planning commission consideration of his tentative map.

C.     The planning director shall set the map for public hearing before the planning commission.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.070.)

 

16.12.080 Planning commission duties.
        The planning commission is authorized and directed to carry out the following actions:

A.    Hold a public hearing on the tentative map. Notice thereof shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in Section 17.74.070B of this code. Any interested person may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard.

B.     Pursuant to this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, the planning commission shall investigate:

1.     Each tentative map filed with the planning commission;

2.     All improvements proposed to be constructed and installed in (or to serve) the subdivision.

        At the conclusion of the hearing on the map, the planning commission shall make a report to the city council in the form of a resolution with respect to the design of the subdivision and the kind, nature and extent of the proposed improvements. The report of the planning commission shall include the findings and recommendations on the findings required by the Subdivision Map Act and shall be forwarded to the city council within fifty days of the date the tentative map was filed with the secretary of the planning commission. The report shall be simultaneously filed with the city clerk, for the purposes of Section 16.12.090, when recommending approval or approval with conditions of each tentative map.

        Denial of a tentative map shall be set forth in a planning commission resolution. Such denial is final unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 16.12.085. Within ten days of adoption of the resolution denying the tentative map, the applicant shall be notified of the decision. Notice shall include a copy of the resolution and a letter setting forth the appeals procedure as set out in Section 16.12.085B. A copy of the notice and resolution shall be placed on the city council’s agenda for information.

C.     Where the planning commission recommends approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, it shall also recommend, pursuant to the provisions of this title, the kind, nature and extent of the improvements to be constructed or installed in or to serve the subdivision for which such tentative map is filed; provided, however, where the planning commission does not prescribe the kind, nature or extent of the improvements to be constructed or installed, improvements shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the city of El Cajon standards.

(Ord. 4329 § 1, 1992; Ord. 3702 § 2, 1983; Ord. § 2860 § 1,, 1975: prior code § 16.12.080.)

 

16.12.085 Appeal of planning commission denial of tentative map—Hearing fees.
A.    A tentative map that is denied by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal shall be conducted as a public hearing pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 16.12.090.

B.     A hearing will be scheduled upon the filing, with the city clerk, of a written appeal by any person denied map approval by the planning commission or by the filing of a written request for review by a member of the city council. Such appeal or request shall be filed within ten days of the written notice of the decision of the planning commission to the applicant that the tentative map has been denied.

C.     An administrative fee to cover the hearing costs incurred by the city shall be charged to the appellant. The fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, and kept on file in the office of the city clerk.

(Ord. 4329 § 2, 1992.)

 

16.12.090 City council action.
A.    When a report on a tentative map is filed with the city clerk by the planning commission, the city council shall, at its next regular meeting, set the matter for public hearing before the city council. The date of the public hearing must be within thirty days after the city council meeting.

        If the planning commission does not file a report with the city clerk within fifty days of the date the tentative map was filed with the secretary of the planning commission, the city council shall, at its next regular meeting, set the matter for public hearing before the city council. The date of the public hearing must be within thirty days after the city council meeting.

B.     The city council shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map, and notice thereof shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in Section 17.74.070B of this code. Any interested person may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard.

C.     The city council shall review the planning commission’s report on a proposed tentative map, shall consider the matter, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within the time limits prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act. The city council shall announce its decision by resolution. Any decision to approve or conditionally approve a tentative map shall include a description, pursuant to the provisions of this title, of the kind, nature and extent of any improvements required to be constructed or installed in or to serve the subdivision. If the city council fails to act within the required time limit, the recommendations of the planning commission regarding the tentative map shall be deemed to be the decision of the city council in regard thereto.

D.    The city council shall not approve or conditionally approve a tentative map unless they find that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plans.

E.     The city council shall not approve or conditionally approve a tentative map if they make any of the following findings:

1.     That the proposed map is not consistent

        with applicable general and specific plans;

2.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the applicable general and specific plans;

3.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

4.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

5.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

6.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

7.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or easements established by court judgment, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a map if they find that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public;

8.     That all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act have not been met;

9.     That all requirements of the ordinances and policies of the city have not been met;

10.   That the proposed map fails to meet or perform any of the requirements or conditions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act unless they find that such failure is a result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map.

(Ord. 3702 §§ 1, 3, 1983; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.090.)

 

16.12.100 Expiration of tentative maps.
        The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire two years from the date the map was approved or conditionally approved unless it is extended in accordance with Section 16.12.110 of this chapter. Within such two-year period or the period of any extension, the subdivider may cause a final map to be prepared and submitted to the city council for approval or disapproval in accordance with the tentative map as approved or conditionally approved and in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 3611 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.100.)

 

16.12.110 Extension of tentative map.
A.    The subdivider may request an extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by written application to the city engineer. Such application shall be filed before the approval or conditional approval is due to expire. The application shall state the reasons for the requested extension.

B.     The city council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the requested extension. An extension shall not exceed one year from the preceding expiration date. No more than three such extensions may be granted; except that, a fourth such extension may be granted, provided that a public hearing on the matter is held before the city council prior to any fourth such extension being granted. The public hearing required by this subsection shall be held at the sole expense of the subdivider.

C.     Prior to granting an extension, the city council may refer the request to the planning commission for recommendation and report. The planning commission shall report within forty-five (45) days of the council’s referral.

(Ord. No. 4931 § 2, 2009.)

 

16.12.120 Revised tentative map.
        Where a subdivider desires to revise or alter a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved by the city council, the subdivider may file with the secretary of the planning commission a revised tentative map on payment of the fees prescribed in Chapter 16.08 of this title.

A.    A revised tentative map shall conform to the following requirements:

1.     The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall generally conform to the street and lot pattern shown on the approved tentative map.

2.     The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall include only one contiguous area consisting of all or a portion of the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map together with such additional land, if any, as the subdivider desires to include.

3.     The map shall contain all of the information required on tentative maps and shall be accompanied by such data as is required to be filed with tentative maps.

B.     A revised tentative map shall be filed within twenty-four months after the approval of the tentative map by the city council, or, if an extension of time is granted, within the period specified in such extension.

C.     Upon the filing of a revised tentative map and payment of the prescribed fee, such revised tentative map shall be treated in all respects as an original tentative map and shall be reported on, approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved in the same manner as a tentative map, provided, however, that the subdivider shall have two years from the approval or conditional approval of the original tentative map within which to obtain final map approval, unless such period is extended pursuant to Section 16.12.110 of this title, in which case the subdivider shall obtain final map approval within the period of any such extension.

(Ord. 3672 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.12.120.)

 

16.12.130 Vesting tentative maps.
        The vesting tentative map may be filed and processed in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a tentative map except as provided in Chapter 16.18 of this code. (Ord. 3953 § 5, 1986.)

Chapter 16.16 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS—REQUIREMENTS
16.16.010 Design.
        All major subdivisions for which a tentative map is required by this title shall conform to the following requirements as to design:

A.    No lot shall include land in more than a single tax code area.

B.     Every lot shall contain the minimum lot area specified in the zoning ordinance for the zone in which said lot is located.

C.     Every lot shall front on a dedicated street or a street offered for dedication unless otherwise authorized by the zoning ordinance for the zone in which said lot is located at the time the final map is submitted to the city council for its approval.

D.    Every lot shall have a lot width as specified in the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located.

E.     Lots whose side lines are approximately radial to the center of a cul-de-sac or the center of the intersection of two dead-end streets shall be at least fifty feet wide, measured at the setback line.

F.     Panhandle-shaped or flag-shaped lots, if permitted pursuant to this title or the ordinances of the city, shall have minimum frontage of twenty feet or a combined frontage for two lots of thirty feet, on a dedicated street, and shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zone classification.

G.    Unless specifically waived, through lots shall not be allowed unless vehicular access rights are relinquished to one of the abutting streets.

H.    Unless specifically waived, the sidelines of all lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street upon which the lots front with a maximum deviation of up to ten degrees allowed.

I.      Unless specifically waived, lot depth shall be at least ninety feet and shall be no greater than three times the average width.

J.      Whenever practicable, subdivision of residential property abutting primary and secondary arterial routes shown on the circulation element of the city general plan, railroads, transmission lines and open flood-control channels shall be designed so that the lots do not front on nor have access from such rights-of-way.

K.    Whenever practicable, side and rear lot lines shall be located along the top of manmade slopes instead of at the toe or at intermediate locations on said slopes.

L.     Bicycle routes shown on the city general plan shall be included in the subdivision when such routes pass through or abut the subdivision.

        Whenever rights-of-way for streets are required to be dedicated in subdivisions containing two hundred or more lots, the subdivider shall include bicycle routes when necessary and feasible for the use and safety of the residents.

M.    Consideration shall be given to assuring proper development of abutting properties in the development of the street plan.

(Ord. 4105 § 1, 1988; Ord. 3195 § 2, 1978; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.010.)

 

16.16.020 Conformance to street plans.
        All streets shown on a tentative map shall be in substantial conformance to the circulation element of the general plan, and they shall relate to the existing streets in the areas adjoining the subdivision. Such streets shall also conform to any applicable master plans, specific plans, or other officially adopted street plans. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.020.)

 

16.16.030 Dedication.
A.    The subdivider shall offer to dedicate rights-of-way for streets within the subdivision in accordance with city standards.

B.     No final map shall be approved unless the street or streets providing primary access to the subdivision are dedicated to and maintained by a city, county, or state, and said street or streets meet city standards for right-of-way width.

C.     Streets which are proposed on the boundaries of a subdivision shall have a dedicated width of no less than forty feet, together with a strip of land one foot wide on its outer edge, which shall be offered to the city for street purposes, and over which access rights are relinquished.

D.    All streets proposed to be terminated at the subdivision boundary shall include a strip of land one foot wide across said street at its point of termination at said boundary, which shall be portions of the adjacent lots, offered for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

E.     Intersections of existing streets, or of existing streets with streets shown on the circulation element of the general plan, shall be offset at least two hundred feet.

F.     Where it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of a subdivision to provide adequate circulation for residents of a subdivision, the subdivider shall cause the required easements to be dedicated to the city and shall improve said easements in accordance with city standards.

G.    Where a drainage facility or flood-control facility is necessary for the use of lot owners or for the protection of lots, adequate rights-of-way for such drainage facilities or flood-control facilities shall be offered for dedication to the city or to such other public entities as the city council designates, and shall be shown on the map.

H.    Where it is necessary to extend a drainage facility or flood-control facility beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate drainage or flood-control needs, the required rights-of-way shall be offered for dedication.

I.      Drainage facilities and flood-control facilities within and without the subdivision shall be provided so as to carry storm runoff, both tributary to and originating within the subdivision.

J.      The subdivider shall offer to dedicate in accordance with the city standards the necessary right-of-way for bicycle routes under the following circumstances:

1.     When such routes as shown on the city general plan pass through or abut the subdivision;

2.     When a subdivider is required to dedicate rights-of-way for streets in a subdivision containing two hundred or more lots and such route is necessary and feasible for the use and safety of the residents.

K.    Where required, a dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on a final map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.030.)

 

16.16.040 Required improvements.
A.    Before approving a final map the city council shall require, and before approving a parcel map of a major subdivision the city engineer shall require, and before a final map is approved by operation of law, it shall be required:

1.     That the subdivider grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land dedicated or to be dedicated for streets or easements, bicycle routes, and all private streets and private easements laid out on a final map or parcel map in such manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, and in accordance with the city standards;

2.     That the subdivider install or agree to install all drainage and flood-control structures and facilities required by the city engineer, which drainage and flood-control structures and facilities shall conform to the city standards or the standards of other appropriate agencies as the city engineer adopts;

3.     That the subdivider install or agree to install fire hydrants and connections of a type and location approved by the fire chief. Fire hydrant connections, including valves, shall be installed to the rear or back of the sidewalk;

4.     That the subdivider provide all necessary easements and rights-of-way to accommodate all streets, drainage and flood-control structures and facilities and sewer systems extending beyond the boundaries of the subdivision;

5.     That the subdivider shall provide that the subdivision be connected to a domestic water system approved by the city and all water mains shall be of a material subject to the requirements of the water company or agency serving the subdivision. That the subdivider shall install or agree to install all required water systems necessary to serve the subdivision, and that all waterline appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving, or provisions have been made to insure said construction;

6.     That where a sewer line is constructed or laid within a street or road, the subdivider has installed or agreed to install sewer lines of a type and size approved by the city engineer to the property line of each lot within the subdivision, and that all sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving, or provisions have been made to insure said construction.

B.     If the city council rejects the offer of dedication of streets delineated on the map pursuant to Section 66477.1 of the Subdivision Map Act, no surfacing shall be required on any street so rejected by said council, provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as relieving the subdivider of the obligation of:

1.     Grading such rejected streets to grades and widths required by the city standards;

2.     Installing all drainage structures and facilities required by the city engineer and which shall conform to the city standards;

3.     Installing water supply pipelines, fire hydrants and connections as may be required by the city engineer and fire chief.

C.     No surfacing is required on any private street laid out on any parcel map where each parcel shown on such map contains a gross area of twenty acres or more, provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as relieving a subdivider of the obligation of:

1.     Grading such private streets to grades and widths required by the city standards;

2.     Installing all drainage structures and facilities required by the city engineer which shall conform to the city of El Cajon Standards; and

3.     Installing water supply pipelines, fire hydrants and connections as may be required.

D.    All new and existing utility distribution facilities, including cable television conduit and lines within the boundaries of any new subdivision or within any half street abutting a new subdivision, shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection, and he shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities, including franchised cable television operators, for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities and street lighting systems may be placed aboveground subject to approval of the city engineer as to type and location. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the installation and maintenance of overhead electric transmission lines in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts and long-distance and trunk communication facilities. The installation of cable television lines may be waived when, in the opinion of the city council, no franchised cable television operator is found to be willing and able to install cable television lines in the subdivision. Notwithstanding any such waiver, the installation of cable television conduit is required.

E.     The subdivider shall construct or shall cause to be constructed at his cost a street lighting system conforming to city standards.

F.     Where the city has adopted a flood-control element or drainage element of the general plan, any improvements shall conform to such element wherever possible.

G.    The subdivider shall comply or agree to comply with all the conditions of approval contained in the resolution approving the tentative map and not otherwise provided for by this section.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.040.)

 

16.16.050 Monuments.
A.    Every final map shall show the following monuments:

1.     Boundary Monuments. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be monumented with permanent monuments of not smaller than two-inch iron pipe at least twenty-four inches long set at each corner and at intermediate points along the boundary not more than one thousand feet apart and at the beginning and end points of all curves, provided, if any existing record and identified monument meeting the foregoing requirements is found at any such corner or point, such monument may be used in lieu of a new monument;

2.     Lot Corner Monuments. All lot corners, except when coincident with exterior boundary corners, shall be monumented with permanent monuments of one of the following types:

a.     Three-fourth-inch diameter iron pipe at least twelve inches long,

b.     One-half-inch diameter steel rod at least twelve inches long,

c.     Lead plug and copper identification disks set in concrete sidewalks or curbs;

3.     Such additional monuments to mark the limiting lines of streets as the city engineer may require;

4.     All other monuments set or proposed to be set.

B.     The subdivider shall cause the foregoing monuments to be set by a licensed surveyor or engineer.

C.     All monuments and their installation shall conform to the city standards.

D.    All of the foregoing monuments shall be set prior to the approval of the map by the city council unless the setting thereof is deferred in accordance with Section 66496 of the Subdivision Map Act, provided, however, the setting of exterior boundary monuments shall not be deferred unless the city engineer determines that such monuments might be disturbed by the construction      of improvements.

E.     Where the setting of monuments is deferred following filing of a final map, such monuments shall be set within one year of the date of filing of the map with the County Recorder unless an extension is granted in writing by the city engineer. The setting of monuments shall not be deferred if a parcel map is filed unless expressly allowed by the city engineer.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.050.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Amended, 03/23/93)

 

16.16.060 Agreement to improve.
        Unless the city council requires the subdivider to construct improvements prior to final map approval, the subdivider may elect to agree to construct improvements or to otherwise comply with the requirements of this title and with the conditions in the resolution approving the tentative map, or, if authorized by the city council, may contract to initiate and consummate special assessment district proceedings in lieu of constructing improvements, as provided in Section 66462 of the Subdivision Map Act. In such case, he shall prepare and deposit with the city clerk detailed plans and specifications of the improvements to be constructed or the condition to be met, and such plans and specifications shall be made a part of any such agreement or contract and of the improvement security securing the same. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.060.)

 

16.16.070 Improvement security—Required.
        The improvement agreement referred to in Section 16.16.060 shall be secured by one of the following:

A.    A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties substantially in the form prescribed by Sections 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Subdivision Map Act;

B.     A deposit either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company selected by the city of cash or negotiable bonds at the kind approved for securing deposits of its public monies;

C.     An irrevocable instrument of credit from one or more responsible financial institutions regulated by federal or state government and pledging that the funds are on deposit and guaranteed for payment on demand by the city.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.070.)

 

16.16.080 Improvement security—Amount.
        Improvement security shall be in the following amounts:

A.    Bonds under Section 16.16.070A shall be in the total amount of one hundred fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed, and shall include:

1.     An amount equal to fifty percent of such estimated cost, to secure payment to the contractor, the subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act; and

2.     An amount equal to one hundred percent of such cost, to secure the faithful performance of the act or agreement, and upon release of any portion from such obligation, twenty-five percent of the one hundred percent shall immediately become obligated to guarantee or warrant the work for a period of one year following completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished.

B.     A deposit under Section 16.16.070B and an irrevocable instrument of credit under Section 16.16.070C shall be in the total amount of one hundred ten percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed, and shall include:

1.     An amount equal to fifty percent of such cost, which shall secure both the faithful performance of the act or agreement and payment to the contractor, the subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act; and

2.     An amount equal to fifty percent of such cost, to secure the faithful performance of the act or agreement, and upon release of any portion from such obligation, one-half of the fifty percent shall immediately become obligated to guarantee or warrant the work for a period of one year following completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished; and

3.     An amount equal to ten percent of such cost to secure payment of reasonable costs, expenses and fees, including attorneys’ fees, which may be incurred in successfully enforcing the obligation secured.

(Ord. 3195 § 3, 1978; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.080.)

 

16.16.090 Improvement security—Release.
A.    Bonds in the amounts required by Section 16.16.080A shall be released in the following manner:

1.     The labor and material bond may, six months after the performance of the act or the completion and acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount not less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if no such actions have been filed, the security may be released in full.

2.     The warranty portion (twenty-five percent) of the faithful performance and warranty bond shall remain for a period of one year after completion and acceptance of the entire act or work and may then be released. The faithful performance portion (seventy-five percent) may be released upon final completion and acceptance of the work, except that the city engineer may authorize partial releases or reductions of the faithful performance portion, in increments of not less than twenty-five percent of the bond amounts, in conjunction with completion and acceptance of corresponding portions of the work.

B.     A deposit or an irrevocable instrument of credit in the amounts required by Section 16.16.080B shall be released in the following manner:

1.     The warranty and enforcement expenses portions (a total of thirty-five percent) of the total shall remain for a period of one year after completion and acceptance of the entire act or work and may then be released.

2.     The labor and materials portion (fifty percent) may, six months after the performance of the act or the completion and acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount not less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if no such actions have been filed, the security may be released in full.

3.     The remaining twenty-five percent may be released upon final completion and acceptance of the work, except that the city engineer may authorize release of said portion in conjunction with completion and acceptance of a corresponding portion of the work.

(Ord. 3195 § 4, 1978; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.090.)

 

16.16.100 Improvement security—Forfeiture.
        Upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, acts or obligations within the time specified, the city council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof, or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the subdivider is in default and may cause the improvement security, or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act and any other obligations of the subdivider secured thereby, to be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.16.100.)

Chapter 16.18 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS AND VESTING TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
16.18.010 Authority.
        This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1 of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state—Subdivision Map Act) and is intended to implement the provisions of that chapter. (Ord. 3953 § 6, 1986.)

 

16.18.020 Filing and processing.
A.    Whenever this title requires the filing of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map for a residential development the subdivider may file a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face “vesting tentative map.” If the map is a vesting tentative parcel map the words “vesting tentative parcel map” shall appear conspicuously on its face.

C.     In addition to the other information required by this title to be shown on or provided with a tentative map or tentative parcel map a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall show or be accompanied by the following information in a form satisfactory to the city engineer and director of building and planning:

1.     The height, bulk and location of proposed buildings;

2.     Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put and general architectural renderings of the buildings;

3.     Detailed lot lines and dimensions;

4.     Detailed design (plan and profile) and specifications, prepared by a registered civil engineer, for all public facilities, including, but not limited to, on and off site sewer, water and drainage facilities; roads including final grades and alignment; and other on and off site improvements;

5.     Detailed geological, drainage, flood-control, soils, traffic, or other reports deemed necessary by the director of building and planning to permit a complete review of the design and improvements for the subdivision. The subdivider, for subdivisions over four units, shall also submit a fiscal impact report prepared by an independent economic analyst, analyzing the projected impacts the development will have on public facilities and services; the report shall include marketing information and a cost benefit analysis for the project;

6.     Detailed final grading and drainage plans, prepared by a registered civil engineer, showing existing and proposed finished grades at contour intervals, satisfactory to the city engineer;

7.     Detailed landscape plans prepared in accordance with city ordinances, policies and standards;

8.     Detailed environmental information sufficient to permit assessment of all environmental effects of the project including cumulative and long-term effects.

D.    Notwithstanding Section 16.12.080 all vesting tentative maps regardless of the number of lots shall be considered by the city council pursuant to Section 16.12.090 after a report and recommendation by the planning commission.

E.     Notwithstanding Section 16.24.100 all vesting tentative parcel maps shall be referred to the planning commission for consideration pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.12.080. The decision of the planning commission concerning a vesting tentative parcel map shall be final unless the decision is appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.24.140.

F.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.12.110 the time for filing a final map for a vesting tentative map shall not be extended except for subdivisions of one hundred or more units where an extension is necessary to accomplish an approved phasing program. Failure to file a final map within the time period established by Section 16.12.100 shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map for all or any part of the property included within the vesting tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new map pursuant to this title.

G.    Notwithstanding Section 16.24.180 the time for filing a parcel map for a vesting tentative parcel map shall not be extended. Failure to file a parcel map within the time period established by Sections 16.24.160 and 16.24.170 shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map for all or any part of the property included within the vesting tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new map pursuant to this title.

H.    A vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall not be approved or conditionally approved unless the city council or planning commission, whichever is the final decision making body, finds on the basis of the studies and reports submitted by the subdivider that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impacts created by the subdivision will be available for the entire time that the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by Section 16.18.030 exist.

(Ord. 3953 § 6, 1986.)

 

16.18.030 Rights conferred.
A.    Approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall confer a right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Government Code. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed the approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map was approved or conditionally approved. Any disputes whether a development substantially complies with the approved or conditionally approved map, or with the ordinances, policies or standards described in this subsection, shall be resolved by the city council.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section the permit or entitlement for development may be conditionally approved or denied if at the time of the issuance of the permit approval or entitlement any of the following are determined:

1.     A failure to condition or deny the permit or entitlement would place the residents of the subdivision or of the immediate community or both in a condition dangerous to their health or safety or both; or

2.     The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

C.     The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall expire if:

1.     A final map or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map or the vesting tentative parcel map;

2.     The applicant has requested and the city has approved a change in the type, density, bulk or design of the development unless an amendment to the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map has been approved.

D.    Upon the filing of a final map or parcel map for a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map the rights conferred by subsection A of this section shall continue for one year. Upon recording of the final map or parcel map under this chapter, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face “vesting final map” or “vesting parcel map.” Where several final maps or parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map this period shall begin for each phase when the final map or parcel map for that phase is recorded. Phasing of projects must be approved coincidentally with map approval.

E.     The time period set forth in subsection D of this section shall automatically be extended by any time used for processing a complete drainage/grading plan if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is accepted.

F.     A subdivider may apply to the city council for a one-year extension of the rights conferred by subdivision D at any time before the time period set forth in subsection D expires. An extension may be granted only if the council finds, at public hearing, that the map still complies with the requirements of this chapter. The city council may approve, conditionally approve or deny an extension in its sole discretion.

G.    If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time set forth in subsections D through F of this section the rights referred to therein shall continue until the expiration of that building permit or any extension of that permit.

H.    Upon the expiration of the time limits specified in subsections A, D, E, F or G of this section, all rights conferred by this section shall cease and the project shall be considered as the same as any subdivision which was not processed pursuant to this chapter.

I.      Notwithstanding subsection A of this section the amount of any fees which are required to be paid either as a condition of the map approval or by operation of any law shall be determined by application of the law or policy in effect at the time the fee is paid. The amounts of the fees are not vested upon approval of the vesting tentative map or tentative parcel map.

(Ord. 3953 § 6, 1986.)

 

16.18.040 Consistency with zoning and general plan.
        No vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall be approved if the proposed map or the design or improvement of the proposed development are not consistent with the applicable general, specific or master plans or with the applicable provisions of Title 17 of this code. If development of the project for which a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map requires any permits or approvals pursuant to Title 17 of this code those permits or approvals shall be processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map. A vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall not be approved if all other discretionary permits or approvals have not been approved either prior to or concurrently with approval of the map. (Ord. 3953 § 6, 1986.)

Chapter 16.20 FINAL MAP REQUIREMENTS
16.20.010 Maps to conform to requirements of city council.
        All final and parcel maps for major subdivisions shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and also shall conform to the requirements specified in the city council resolution approving or conditionally approving the tentative map.

        However, the provisions of Section 66473 of the Subdivision Map Act may be waived when the city council finds that nonconformity of a map is due to technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map. (Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.010.)

 

16.20.020 City council to approve maps.
        No final map shall be filed in the office of the county recorder until approved by the city council. The city council shall not approve a final map unless there is a valid tentative map for the subdivision. A final map may be filed for a portion of the land encompassed within an approved tentative map, provided the city council has approved such a filing in phases in its approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.020.)

 

16.20.030 Required offer of dedication.
        As a condition precedent to the approval by the city council of any final map, all parcels of land shown thereon, and intended for any public use, shall be offered for dedication for public use except those parcels, other than streets, intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivisions, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.030.)

 

16.20.040 Grant of open space easement.
        In the event that a grant of an open space easement is to be made over any portion of the subdivision, the final map shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the subdivided land granting such open space easement and stating the conditions of the grant. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.040.)

 

16.20.050 Type of map required.
        Unless otherwise provided in this title, a final map shall be prepared and filed pursuant to an approved tentative map for every major subdivision. In lieu of filing a final map, unless otherwise required by the Subdivision Map Act, a parcel map with a form and content in accord with Chapter 16.32 of this title may be filed pursuant to an approved tentative map when any of the following conditions prevail:

A.    The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the city council.

B.     Each parcel created by this division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway, and no dedication is required by the city council.

C.     The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development and which has the approval of the city council.

D.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of forty acres or more, or each is a quarter-quarter section or larger.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.050.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Amended, 03/23/93)

 

16.20.060 Additional data on final maps.
        Every final map shall:

A.    Contain a definite description of the land subdivided by references to recorded deeds, recorded maps, and official United States surveys. Reference to tracts, recorded deeds and recorded maps shall be spelled out, worded identically with original records, and show the book and page of records or map numbers;

B.     Show the basis of bearings used, the relationship of said bearings to the true meridian, and the north point of said map shall appear on each sheet thereof;

C.     Show the acreage of all parcels containing one acre or more to the nearest hundredth;

D.    Clearly indicate, by description or a distinctive boundary line, any area subject to flooding at times of high tide or heavy rainfall, and state that such area is subject to flooding at times of high tide or heavy rainfall;

E.     Show a solid line separating all private ways, easements and other rights-of-way not to be accepted as public streets and shown on said map from public streets and clearly designate their names and the manner in which the right is reserved or granted.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.060.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Amended, 03/23/93)

 

16.20.070 Record of easements.
A.    The final map shall show the centerline data, width and side lines of all easements to which the land is subject or to be subjected. If the easement is not definitely located on record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet.

B.     Easements for storm drains, sewers and other purposes shall be denoted by broken lines.

C.     The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if already of record, proper reference to the records given.

D.    Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication.

E.     Easements for public utility companies shall be designated on the final map as “easements for public utilities.”

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.070.)

 

16.20.080 Survey data.
A.    The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets; length, tangents, radii and central angles or radial bearings of all curves; the total width of each street; the width of the portion being dedicated; the width of existing dedication; and the width of each side of the centerline; also the width or rights-of-way of railroads, flood-control or drainage channels and any other easements existing or being dedicated by the map.

B.     Surveys in connection with subdivision maps prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivisions and all lots and blocks shall close. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be net dimensions, and no ditto marks shall be used.

C.     Traverse sheets and work sheets showing the closure of the exterior boundaries and of each irregular block and lot shall be provided.

D.    The final map shall also have indicated thereon the following:

1.     Suitable primary survey control points:

a.     Section corners,

b.     Monuments (existing outside of subdivision);

2.     Location of all permanent monuments within subdivision;

3.     Ties to any city or county boundary lines involved;

4.     Ties to and identification of adjacent subdivisions;

5.     Required certificates.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.080.)

 

16.20.090 Lot numbers.
A.    The lots shall be numbered and/or lettered consecutively, commencing with the number “1” or letter “A”, with no omissions or duplications. In the case of successive subdivisions of the same basic name, the numbering may be successively extended from the previous subdivision bearing the same general name.

B.     Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.090.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Amended, 03/23/93)

 

16.20.100 Established lines.
A.    Whenever the city engineer has established the centerline of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record, relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated.

B.     The final map shall show city boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision clearly and tied in.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.100.)

 

16.20.110 Additional certificates on final maps.
        In addition to certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, every final map shall bear the following certificates or endorsements:

A.    A certificate by the city treasurer, where applicable, to the effect that there are no unpaid special assessments or bonds which may be paid in full shown by the records in their offices against the subdivision or any part thereof;

B.     A certificate by the clerk of the board of supervisors that the provisions of Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code have been complied with regarding deposits for taxes on the property within the subdivision;

C.     Certificate of the county recorder as to the filing of the map;

D.    A certificate signed and sealed by the engineer/surveyor in accordance with Section 66441 of the Subdivision Map Act;

E.     A certificate signed by the city engineer in accordance with Section 66442 of the Subdivision Map Act;

F.     A certificate signed by the secretary of the planning commission that the tentative map has been submitted to the planning commission for report and recommendation;

G.    Endorsement by the city attorney of his approval of the map as to form;

H.    A certificate signed by the city clerk attesting to the approval of the map by the city council and its acceptance, acceptance subject to improvement, or rejection on behalf of the public of all dedications shown thereon;

I.      An owner’s certificate as required by Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act which shall bear the signatures of all parties owning any record title interest in the land subdivided except those which have been omitted pursuant to Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act. The names of any parties who own interests described in Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act and who have not signed the owner’s certificate shall be set forth in the owner’s certificate together with a description of their respective interests and the reasons why they have not signed the certificate. All such signatures of owners and others, whether individuals or corporations, must be properly signed and acknowledged before a notary public. If a subdivision map is signed by a corporation, a certified copy of the resolution passed by the board of directors of such corporation authorizing that action may be required.

J.      Where dedications are required, a certificate offering to dedicate interests in real property for specified public purposes in accord with Section 66439 of the Subdivision Map Act. The certificate shall be properly signed and acknowledged before a notary public and shall be signed by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided subject to the provisions of Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act. If any dedication or consent shown on a subdivision map is signed by a corporation, a certified copy of the resolution passed by the board of directors of such corporation authorizing that action may be required.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.110.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Amended, 03/23/93)

 

16.20.120 Repealed.
        (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.120.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Repealed, 03/23/93)

 

16.20.130 Title company subdivision guarantee.
        There shall be filed with the city engineer a subdivision guarantee from a qualified title insurance company which guarantees that the parties named therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the county recorder, present to the county recorder, pursuant to the requirements of Section 66465 of the Subdivision Map Act, a letter stating that at the time of filing of the final or parcel map in the office of the county recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided whose signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code, as shown by the records in the office of the recorder. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.130.)

 

(Ord. No. 4398, Amended, 03/23/93)

 

16.20.140 Approval as to form.
        All final subdivision maps filed with or submitted to the city council shall be first submitted to the city attorney and approved as to form by him. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code Sec. 16.20.140.)

 

16.20.150 Stamping or printing of certificates.
        The affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments and approvals required or permitted by this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act to appear upon maps may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink in such a manner as will guarantee a permanent record in black upon the tracing cloth or polyester-base film. If ink is used on polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.150.)

 

16.20.160 Soil reports.
        When a soil report of the soil conditions within a subdivision has been prepared prior to the approval of the final map by the city engineer, that fact together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report shall be noted on the final map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.20.160.)

Chapter 16.24 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS-PROCEDURE
16.24.010 Applicability.
        No person shall create a minor subdivision except in accordance with a parcel map approved pursuant to this title and the Subdivision Map Act and filed in the office of the county recorder unless such requirement for a parcel map is otherwise waived pursuant to Section 16.24.150. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    The conveyance, transfer, creation or establishment of an easement for sewer, water or gas pipelines and appurtenances or electrical or telephone poles and lines or conduit and appurtenances;

B.     The leasing of a dwelling on a lot which, together with all contiguous land owned by the same person or persons, has an area of less than forty thousand square feet;

C.     The conveyance or transfer of land or any interest therein by or to the United States, state, county, city, school district, special district or public utility.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.010.)

 

16.24.020 Tentative parcel map required.
        Any person proposing to create a minor subdivision pursuant to this title shall file with the city engineer a tentative parcel map pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, provided, however, an adjustment plat may be filed in lieu of a tentative parcel map under the conditions specified in Chapter 16.34 of this title. The city engineer shall not certify a parcel map pursuant to Section 66450 of the Subdivision Map Act unless prior thereto a tentative parcel map of the minor subdivision shown thereon shall have been filed with and approved by the city engineer or, on appeal, by the city council. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.020.)

 

16.24.030 Application.
        The subdivider applying for a minor subdivision or adjustment plat shall file an application with the city engineer together with copies of a tentative parcel map or an adjustment plat as required by the city engineer prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 16.34 of this title. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.030.)

 

16.24.040 Information to be filed with tentative parcel map.
        Such information as may be prescribed by the rules and regulations approved by the city council pursuant to Section 16.04.060 of this title and such additional information as the city engineer may find necessary with respect to any particular case to implement the provisions of this title shall accompany the tentative parcel map or adjustment plat at the time of submission. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.040.)

 

16.24.050 Grading plan.
        There shall be filed with each tentative parcel map a grading plan showing graded building site elevations and grading proposed for the creation of building sites or for construction or installation of improvements to serve the subdivision. The grading plan together with the original topographical contours may both be shown on the tentative parcel map. In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be placed on the tentative parcel map. This plan shall indicate approximate earthwork volumes of proposed excavation and filling operations. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.050.)

 

16.24.060 Preliminary title report.
        There shall be filed with each tentative parcel map a current preliminary title report of the property being subdivided or altered. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.060.)

 

16.24.070 Replacement tentative parcel map.
        A replacement tentative parcel map shall be submitted when the city engineer finds that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original tentative parcel map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.070.)

 

16.24.080 Revised tentative parcel map.
        Where a subdivider desires to revise an approved tentative parcel map, he may file with the city engineer, prior to the expiration of the approved tentative parcel map, a revised tentative parcel map on payment of the fees specified in Section 16.08.060. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.080.)

 

16.24.090 City engineer—Duties.
        The city engineer is authorized and directed to carry out the duties assigned to him by this title including but not limited to the following:

A.    Obtain the recommendations of other city departments, governmental agencies or special districts as may be deemed appropriate or necessary by the city engineer in order to carry out the provisions of this title;

B.     Investigate each tentative parcel map filed pursuant to this chapter and indicate by written report the kind, nature and extent of improvements required to be installed on or to serve the land to be divided;

C.     Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative parcel maps, and report, as provided in this chapter, his approval, conditional approval or disapproval directly to the subdivider;

D.    Waive the requirement for filing and recordation of a parcel map for certain subdivisions as provided for in this title.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.090.)

 

16.24.100 Assignment of certain responsibilities to city engineer.
        The responsibilities of the city council pursuant to Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1 and 66474.6 of the Subdivision Map Act are assigned to the city engineer with respect to those tentative parcel maps filed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.100.)

 

16.24.110 Action of the city engineer.
        Within five working days after a tentative parcel map has been filed, the city engineer shall transmit copies of said map together with accompanying information to such public agencies and public and private utilities as the city engineer determines may be concerned. Each of the public agencies and utilities may, within ten working days after the map has been sent to such agency, forward to the city engineer a written report of its findings and recommendations thereon. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.110.)

 

16.24.113 Planning commission—Duties.
A.    The city engineer and the director of community development may jointly refer a tentative parcel map to the planning commission for consideration. The following examples are not all-inclusive.

1.     Tentative parcel maps filed in conjunction with planned residential developments or planned unit developments;

2.     Tentative parcel maps filed to subdivide properties where there have been or are expected to be developmental problems such as soil stability, topography and restricted access or street frontage;

3.     Tentative parcel maps filed to subdivide properties in areas which have not been previously subdivided or where public controversy regarding the proposed subdivision is anticipated.

B.     The actions of the planning commission with respect to the referral of a tentative parcel map shall be the same as those specified for the city engineer in Section 16.24.110.

C.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative parcel map as specified in Section 16.12.080(A) of this title.

D.    Pursuant to this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, the planning commission shall investigate:

1.     Each tentative map filed with the planning commission;

2.     All improvements proposed to be constructed and installed in (or to serve) the subdivision.

        At the conclusion of the hearing on the map, the planning commission shall make a report in the form of a resolution to the city council with respect to the design of the subdivision and the kind, nature and extent of the proposed improvements. The report of the planning commission shall include the findings and recommendations on the findings required by the Subdivision Map Act and shall be forwarded to the city council within fifty days of the date the tentative parcel map application was accepted as complete. The report shall be simultaneously filed with the city clerk for the purposes of Section 16.24.115 when recommending approval or approval with conditions of each tentative parcel map.

        Denial of a tentative parcel map shall be set forth in a planning commission resolution. Such denial is final unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 16.12.085 of this title. Within ten days of the adoption of the resolution denying the tentative parcel map, the applicant shall be notified of the decision. Notice shall include a copy of the resolution and a letter setting forth the appeals procedure as set out in Section 16.12.085B. A copy of the notice and resolution shall be placed on the city council’s agenda for information.

(Ord. 4329 § 3, 1992.)

 

16.24.115 City council action.
        In the event that the city council takes action on a tentative parcel map for a minor subdivision, the city council shall hold a public hearing and give notice thereof, in the same manner as provided by Section 16.12.090B for tentative subdivision maps. (Ord. 3750 § 1, 1984.)

 

16.24.120 Consideration of tentative parcel map—Notice of decision.
A.    Within fifty calendar days after a tentative parcel map is filed, the city engineer shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove such map. The time limit specified in this paragraph may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the city engineer. If the tentative parcel map is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice of disapproval.

B.     The city engineer shall notify the subdivider of his preliminary decision to conditionally approve or disapprove a tentative parcel map, along with the conditions of conditional approval or the reasons for disapproval, within forty days after said tentative parcel map is filed. If the applicant is dissatisfied with such preliminary decision or with any condition pertaining thereto, he may request in writing that such preliminary decision be reviewed. Such request must be received by the city engineer within ten calendar days after the date of the preliminary decision.

        Upon receipt within the time prescribed of said written request for review of a preliminary decision, the city engineer shall arrange a time and place for such review and shall notify the applicant and appropriate city departments and agencies thereof. In the event that a review cannot be arranged or completed prior to fifty days after the tentative parcel map is filed, the request for review shall be deemed to constitute consent of the applicant to extend for a reasonable period not to exceed ten working days the time limit in which the city engineer must approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative parcel map. After completion of the review, the city engineer shall render his final approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative parcel map as provided in this section.

        In the event no written request for review is received within the time prescribed, the preliminary decision shall become final and the subdivider shall be so notified as provided in this section.

C.     The subdivider shall be informed of the preliminary decision and of the final decision of the city engineer by written notice. Notice shall be deemed to have been given upon deposit of the notice in the United States mail with postage thereon prepaid.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.120.)

 

16.24.130 Disapproval of tentative parcel map.
        The city engineer shall not approve a tentative parcel map under any of the following circumstances:

A.    The land proposed for division is a lot or parcel which was part of a prior parcel map which both:

1.     Was approved or recorded less than two years prior to the filing for approval of the subject tentative parcel map; and

2.     Resulted in the creation of more lots than had previously existed;

        where the total number of lots created by all maps exceeds four.

B.     The land proposed for division is a lot or parcel created illegally, unless said lot or parcel has been approved by the city engineer or, on appeal, by the city council and a certificate of compliance relative thereto has been filed with the county recorder.

C.     The subdivision proposes creation of five or more lots.

D.    The city engineer finds that the tentative parcel map does not meet the requirements of this title.

E.     The land proposed for division is a lot or parcel that was part of an approved tentative parcel map wherein the parcel map requirement was waived pursuant to provisions of this division and a certificate of compliance has been filed with the county recorder pursuant to Chapter 16.44 of this title.

F.     The city engineer or the director of building and planning, makes any of the following findings:

1.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

2.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the applicable general and specific plans;

3.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

4.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

5.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

6.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

7.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or easements established by court judgment, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city engineer may approve a map if he finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public.

(Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.130.)

 

16.24.140 Appeal—Notice.
A.    The subdivider may appeal any action of the city engineer with respect to a tentative parcel map or adjustment plat to the city council as provided in Section 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     Any interested person may appeal to the city council from any decision made relative to a tentative parcel map or adjustment plat. Any such appellant shall be entitled to the same notice and rights regarding testimony as apply to the subdivider under Section 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act.

C.     The city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, and notice thereof shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in subsection B of Section 17.74.070 of this code. Any interested person may appear at such hearing and shall be heard.

D.    The city council shall hold the hearing and act on the map within the time limits prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act.

(Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.140.)

 

16.24.150 Waiver of parcel map.
A.    Other provisions of this title to the contrary notwithstanding, provided a finding is made by the city engineer or, on appeal, by the city council that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood and water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act and provided further that the subdivider complies with the public facilities element of the general plan and any provisions which would otherwise apply to the proposed subdivision, the requirement that a parcel map be prepared, filed and recorded may be waived for the following types of minor subdivisions:

1.     A minor subdivision wherein each resulting lot or parcel contains a gross area of forty acres or more, or each is a quarter-quarter section or larger;

2.     A minor subdivision only for the purpose of leasing the lots resulting from such division;

3.     A minor subdivision wherein each resulting lot or parcel was previously a legally created separate lot under separate ownership but which subsequently came into the same ownership as adjoining parcels such that the total quantity of real property under the same ownership is shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units.

B.     An applicant for a subdivision pursuant to subsections A(1) and A(2) of this section may be required to file a tentative parcel map pursuant to this chapter together with a written request that the parcel map requirement be waived. An applicant for a subdivision pursuant to subsection A(3) of this section shall pay the fee prescribed by Section 16.08.060 for tentative parcel maps and shall file an application and request for parcel map waiver which shall contain sufficient information in the opinion of the city engineer to enable the city engineer, or, on appeal, the city council, to make the

        finding required by this section. The processing of any application pursuant to subsection A(3) of this section shall be subject to the same time requirements and appeal procedures as are provided in this title for tentative parcel maps. In any case, where waiver of the parcel map is granted by the city engineer, or, on appeal, by the city council, the city engineer shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 16.48 of this title.

(Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.150.)

 

16.24.160 Expiration of tentative parcel map.
        The approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall expire two years from the date the map was approved or conditionally approved unless it is extended in accord with Section 16.24.180. (Ord. 3672 § 2, 1983; Ord. 3376 § 1, 1979; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.160.)

 

16.24.170 Time to file parcel map.
        Within two years after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map, or within the period of any extension thereof, the subdivider may file with the city engineer a parcel map in substantial conformance with the tentative parcel map as approved or conditionally approved and in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 3672 § 3, 1983; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.24.170.)

 

16.24.180 Extension of tentative parcel map.
A.    The subdivider may request an extension of the tentative parcel map approval or conditional approval by written application to the city engineer. Such application shall be filed before the approval or conditional approval is due to expire.

B.     The city engineer may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the requested extension, for a period not exceeding one year from the original expiration date.

C.     An additional one-year extension, not exceeding three years from the original expiration date, may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the city council upon written application by the subdivider prior to the first extension expiration date.

D.    An additional one-year extension, not exceeding four years from the original expiration date, may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the city council upon written application by the subdivider prior to the third extension expiration date. However, this fourth extension may only be granted after a public hearing is held before the city council. Furthermore, the public hearing required by this subsection shall be held at the sole expense of the subdivider.

E.     Any decision by the city engineer in regard to an extension may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 16.24.140.

(Ord. No. 4398, 1993; Ord. 4931 § 3, 3009.)

 

16.24.190 Vesting tentative parcel map.
        A vesting tentative parcel map may be filed and processed in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a tentative parcel map except as provided in Chapter 16.18 of this code. (Ord. 3953 § 7, 1986.)

Chapter 16.28 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS—REQUIREMENTS
16.28.010 Design of minor subdivisions.
        Except as otherwise provided in this title, all minor subdivisions shall conform to the lot design requirements of Section 16.16.010 of this title. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.010.)

 

16.28.030 Dedication and access.
        No parcel map filed pursuant to Chapter 16.32 of this title shall be approved by the city engineer unless and until the following conditions have been satisfied:

A.    There shall be offered for dedication, pursuant to Section 16.28.050 of this title, right-of-way for streets in accordance with the circulation element of the general plan, any applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted street plans and the city standards within and adjacent to the boundaries of the land to be subdivided.

B.     Streets which are proposed on the boundaries of a subdivision shall be offered for dedication to a width of no less than forty feet. A strip of land one foot wide extending along the outer edge of said land offered for dedication may be required to be offered to the city for street purposes and over which rights are to be relinquished.

C.     Offers of dedication for streets which terminate at the boundary of the minor subdivision may be required to include a strip of land one foot wide extending across said street at its point of termination at said boundary which shall be portions of the adjacent lots, offered for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

D.    Easements for public utilities and drainage ways shall be offered for dedication in the manner prescribed by Section 16.28.050 of this title as required by the city engineer when he determines that such offers of dedication are necessary to serve the subdivision and/or are a reasonable and logical extension of such facilities as exist in the vicinity.

(Ord. 4398, 1993; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.030.)

 

16.28.040 Waiver of direct access to streets.
        The city engineer may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on a parcel map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.040.)

 

16.28.050 Dedication procedure.
A.    Pursuant to Section 66447 of the Subdivision Map Act, all dedications or offers of dedication required by the provisions of this chapter shall be by statement on the parcel map.

B.     An offer of dedication, except as provided in subsection (b) of Section 66477.2 of the Subdivision Map Act, shall continue until such dedication is accepted or the offer is abandoned or otherwise terminated.

C.     The city engineer shall accept dedications or offers of dedication or reject such offers on behalf of the city pursuant to Section 66463 of the Subdivision Map Act.

D.    The city engineer may quitclaim right-of-way on a parcel map when the right-of-way has previously been vacated by city council.

(Ord. 4398, 1993; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.050.)

 

 

16.28.060 Required improvements.
        As a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map for a minor subdivision filed pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and this title, it shall be required that the subdivider either has constructed, or has executed an agreement pursuant to Section 16.28.070 to construct:

A.    Improvements in accordance with city standards all rights-of-way offered for dedication for street purposes which are accepted by the city;

B.     Other improvements and facilities in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 16.16.040 of this title.

(Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.060.)

 

16.28.070 Agreement to improve.
A.    In lieu of constructing the improvements required by Section 16.28.060 prior to approval of the parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement which requires their construction at a subsequent time. Such agreement shall be accompanied by improvement security in accord with Sections 16.16.070, 16.16.080, 16.16.090 and 16.16.100 of this title.

B.     The subdivider shall prepare and deposit with the city engineer detailed plans and specifications of the improvements to be constructed, and such plans and specifications shall be made a part of any such agreement and of the improvement security.

C.     Requirements for construction of such improvements shall be noticed and recorded as provided in Section 66411.1 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(Ord. 3157 § 1, 1977; Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.070.)

 

16.28.080 Exemption from improvements.
        Other provisions of this title to the contrary notwithstanding, the following minor subdivisions shall not be subject to the public improvement or dedication requirements of this chapter except insofar as is necessary to comply with the Subdivision Map Act, including Sections 66426 and 66428 thereof: any parcel or parcels of land divided into lots or parcels, each of a gross area of forty acres or more or each of which is a quarter-quarter section or larger. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.080.)

 

16.28.090 Lien contract for improvements.
        In lieu of constructing or agreeing under Section 16.28.070 to construct any required improvements, upon application, the city council may allow the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city to construct the improvements in the future, and require the subdivider to grant the city a lien on the property to be divided securing such future improvements. The lien granted under authority herein may be used to secure future improvements in easements, rights-of-way or irrevocable offers of dedication or any other improvements or conditions of the map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.090.)

 

16.28.100 Covenant not to oppose an improvement district.
        In connection with a lien contract under Section 16.28.090, the city council may require that the subdivider execute a covenant not to oppose the formation of an improvement district. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.100.)

 

16.28.110 Monuments and flagging.
        Every parcel map shall show monuments which shall be set by a licensed surveyor or engineer in accordance with Section 16.16.050 of this title; provided that two-inch iron pipes at least twenty-four inches long for exterior boundary monuments are not required unless the city engineer determines that the exterior boundary cannot be adequately monumented by monuments of a lesser standard; and further provided that monumentation of the exterior boundary of a remainder parcel need not be placed or shown on the parcel map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.28.110.)

Chapter 16.32 PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS
16.32.010 Maps to conform to requirements of city engineer and city council.
        All parcel maps shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and also shall conform to the requirements specified in the report of the city engineer approving or conditionally approving the tentative parcel map, unless an appeal is made by the subdivider to the city council and the city council modifies, rejects or overrules the recommendations of the city engineer, in which event the map also shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer as modified by the city council and the requirements imposed by the city council. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.010.)

 

16.32.020 City engineer to approve maps.
        No parcel map shall be filed with the county recorder until said map has been approved by the city engineer. A parcel map may not be filed for a portion of an approved tentative parcel map. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.020.)

 

16.32.030 Land subject to inundation.
        Lots or portions of lots shown on a parcel map which are subject to inundation as determined by the city engineer shall be identified and so labeled. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.030.)

 

16.32.040 Additional certificates on parcel maps.
        In addition to the certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, a parcel map shall bear the following certificates:

A.    A certificate by the city engineer that the map complies with all the provisions of this title and conforms to the approved tentative parcel map or, in the case of a parcel map for a major subdivision filed pursuant to Section 16.20.050 of this title, to the approved tentative map;

B.     Where dedications or offers of dedications are not required, a certificate signed and acknowledged by the subdivider only; in all other cases, a certificate as required by subsection I of Section 16.20.110;

C.     A dedication certificate is required by subsection J of Section 16.20.110;

D.    An engineer’s/surveyor’s certificate shall be provided in accordance with Section 66449(a) of the Subdivision Map Act;

E.     A recorder’s certificate shall be provided in accordance with Section 66449(b) of the Subdivision Map Act;

F.     A certificate by the city attesting acceptance or rejection on behalf of the public of all dedications shown thereon.

(Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.040.)

 

16.32.050 Title company subdivision guarantee.
        There shall be filed with the city engineer a subdivision guarantee from a qualified title insurance company which guarantees that the parties named therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. The title company shall, on the date the parcel map will be transmitted to the county recorder, present to the county recorder, pursuant to the requirements of Section 66465 of the Subdivision Map Act, a letter stating that at the time of filing of the parcel map in the office of the county recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided whose signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code, as shown by the records in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.050.)

 

16.32.060 Stamping or printing of certificates.
        The affidavits, certificates, acknowledgements and approvals required or permitted by this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act to appear upon parcel maps may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink in such a manner as will guarantee a permanent record in black upon the tracing cloth or polyester-base film. If ink is used on polyester-base film, the base surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.060.)

 

16.32.070 Additional data on parcel maps.
        Additional data on parcel maps shall be as listed in Sections 16.20.060 and 16.20.070 of this title, as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 3376 § 2, 1979; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.32.070.)

Chapter 16.34 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
16.34.010 Applicability.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title to the contrary, the procedure set forth in this chapter shall govern the processing of and requirements for lot line adjustments. A deed shall be recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to adjust the boundaries provided the city engineer determines that the exchange of property does not:

A.    Violate the provisions of Title 15 or Title 17 of this code;

B.     Include any lots or parcels created illegally, unless said lot or parcel has been approved pursuant to Chapter 16.48 of this title, and a certificate of compliance relative thereto has been filed with the county recorder;

C.     Impair any existing access or create a need for new access to any adjacent lots or parcels;

D.    Impair any existing easements or create a need for any new easements serving any adjacent lots or parcels;

E.     Require substantial alteration of any existing improvements.

        The provisions set forth herein shall not apply to lot consolidation. (Ord. 4571 § 1, 1998; Ord. 4398, 1993; Ord. 3970 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3376 § 3, 1979; Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.34.010.)

 

16.34.020 Procedure for approval of lot line adjustments.
A.    Application. The applicant shall file an application and a reproducible plat showing existing and proposed property lines, and a fee as set forth in Section 16.08.090 of this title, which will not be refundable. The city engineer may refer copies of such plat to other public agencies for review and comment thereon.

B.     Approval. Within fifteen working days after the application for approval of the lot line adjustment has been filed, the city engineer shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such lot line adjustment. The applicant shall be notified of the engineering action by written notice. Notice shall be deemed to have been given upon deposit of the notice in the United States mail with postage thereon prepaid. The city engineer may impose conditions or exactions on the approval of the lot line adjustment to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with Titles 15 and 17 of this code, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. The conditions imposed by the city engineer shall be satisfied prior to recording the deed.

C.     Certification. The city engineer and the planning director shall certify on the deed that the lot line adjustment is approved prior to recording of the deed and subsequent to compliance with subsection B of this section.

(Ord. 4398, 1993; Ord. 3970 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3195 § 5, 1978; Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.34.020.)

 

16.34.030 Failure to record deed.
        Failure to record a deed within one year from the date of the written notice pursuant to subsection B of Section 16.34.020 shall make the approval null and void and there shall be no change in the lot line. (Ord. 4398, 1993; Ord. 3970 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.34.030.)

Chapter 16.36 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
16.36.010 Purpose of amendment.
        After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map to correct any type of map error or omission as provided in California Government Code Section 66469, as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. (Ord. 3782 § 2, 1984.)

 

16.36.020 Modification of recorded final map.
        After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, such a recorded final map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map, if the city council finds that there are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or necessary, and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map, and the city council finds that the map as modified conforms to the provisions of Title 16. Any such modifications shall be set for public hearing as provided for in Title 16 of this code. The planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on the proposed modification. (Ord. 3782 § 2, 1984.)

Chapter 16.40 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
16.40.010 Reversions to acreage by final map.
        Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.010.)

 

16.40.020 Initiation of proceedings by owners.
        Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 16.40.040 and such other information as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.020.)

 

16.40.030 Initiation of proceedings by city council.
        The city council at the request of the owner, an authorized agent or on its own motion may by resolution initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the city engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.030.)

 

16.40.040 Data for reversion to acreage.
        Petitioners for a reversion to acreage shall file the following:

A.    Evidence of title to the real property; and

B.     Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest(s) in the property; or

C.     Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

D.    Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record; or

E.     A tentative map in the form prescribed by Chapter 16.12 of this title; or

F.     A final map in the form prescribed by Chapter 16.20 of this title which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.040.)

 

16.40.050 Proceedings before the city council.
A.    A public hearing shall be held before the city council on all petitions for, and city council initiations for, reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act, and as provided in Section 17.74.070B of this code. The city engineer may give such notice as he deems necessary or advisable.

B.     The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records in writing that:

1.     Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes;

2.     All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or

3.     None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

4.     No lots shown on the final or parcel map were filed for record.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.050.)

 

16.40.060 Conditions of approval.
        The city council may require as conditions of the reversion:

A.    That the owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or easements;

B.     The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvements securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this title.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.060.)

 

16.40.070 Return of fees and deposits—Release of securities.
        Except as provided in Section 16.40.060, upon filing of the final map for reversion of acreage with the county recorder, all fees and deposits shall be returned to the subdivider and all improvement securities shall be released by the city council. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.070.)

 

16.40.080 Delivery of final map.
        After the hearing before the city council and approval of the reversion, the final map shall be delivered to the county recorder. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.080.)

 

16.40.090 Effect of filing reversion map with the county recorder.
        Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.40.090.)

Chapter 16.48 ENFORCEMENT—CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
16.48.010 Enforcement.
        Whenever the county assessor or the head of any city department finds that the provisions of this title or of the Subdivision Map Act have been violated, he shall report such violation to the director of building and planning and the city engineer. It shall be the duty of the director of building and planning to investigate such report and enforce the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.010.)

 

16.48.020 Notice of violation.
        Whenever the director of building and planning has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, he shall file and mail all notices required by section 66499.36 of said act. (Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.020.)

 

16.48.030 Development permits and approvals withheld.
A.    No building permit, grading permit or any other permit shall be issued or any approval granted that is necessary to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto applicable at the time such division occurred unless the city engineer and the director of building and planning or, on appeal, the city council find that development of such real property is not contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is the current owner of the real property with or without actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his interests in such real property.

B.     Whenever any person submits an application to the director of building and planning for a building permit for proposed construction of more than one main building as defined in the zoning ordinance on any single lot or building site, the director of building and planning shall refer such application together with the plot plan or site development plan to the director of building and planning for his determination as to whether such proposed construction would create a subdivision. The director of building and planning shall not issue a building permit for such proposed construction unless the director of building and planning has approved the plot plan or the site development plan and determined that the proposed construction would not constitute a violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

C.     Upon receipt of either:

1.     A written notification from the issuing authority that a permit or approval is being sought to develop real property which has been subdivided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto; or

2.     A written request from the owner of such real property;

        the director of building and planning, or, on appeal, the city council, shall determine whether such real property is or is not approved for development and shall so inform the owner thereof and the authority or body which has originated said notification. If it is determined that such real property is approved for development, the director of building and planning, or the city council, whichever had made such determination, may impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property, and which had been established at such time by said act or city ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, and are appropriate to satisfy public health and safety considerations and other considerations as are hereinafter specified, and the director of building and planning shall cause a certificate of compliance relative to the subject real property and reflecting such conditions to be filed with the county recorder pursuant to Section 16.48.040 of this chapter.

D.    In determining whether approval or conditional approval should be granted for development of real property divided or resulting from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, the director of building and planning or the city council shall give consideration to:

1.     Whether the real property meets the requirements of the applicable zoning regulations and the general plan;

2.     Whether the real property has a satisfactory potable water supply;

3.     Whether the real property has legal access to a city or county maintained road;

4.     Whether the current owner would have been required to dedicate land for any public purpose or construct or install any improvements pursuant to the terms of the Subdivision Map Act or city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto had the subdivision by which said real property was created been submitted for approval at the time the current owner acquired the property.

(Ord. 3125 § 1, 1977; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.030.)

 

16.48.040 Certificates of compliance.
A.    Any owner of real property may request in writing that the director of building and planning make a determination whether such real property complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, or that such real property does not comply with said provisions, and the director of building and planning shall so notify the owner thereof setting forth the particulars of such compliance or noncompliance. If the subject real property is found to be in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, the director of building and planning shall cause a certificate of compliance relative to such real property to be filed for record with the county recorder.

B.     Certificates of compliance shall be issued only for real property that:

1.     Was divided or resulted from a division in compliance with city ordinances regulating the division of real property and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time such real property was divided or resulted from such division; or

2.     Has been approved for development pursuant to Section 16.48.030 of this chapter. Such certificates of compliance may be granted subject to conditions as specified in Section 16.48.030, and such conditions may be fulfilled and implemented by the property owner who has applied for a certificate of compliance or by a grantee of such property owner. If such conditions are not fulfilled or implemented by the applicant, property owner or the grantee, the certificate of compliance shall have no force or effect upon any subsequent transfer of the property, and any subsequent transferee or assignee shall make a new application for a certificate of compliance, and said certificate of compliance shall be subject to such conditions as would have been applicable at the time such assignee or transferee acquired the property. In any case, no permit or other approval necessary to develop said real property shall be issued or granted until such conditions have been fulfilled and implemented; or

3.     Has been approved for division, and the requirement for preparing, filing and recording a parcel map has been waived pursuant to Section 16.24.150 of this title.

C.     A recorded final subdivision map or recorded parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the lots described therein, and no additional certificates of compliance shall be issued therefor.

(Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.040.)

 

16.48.050 Appeal.
        Any interested person may appeal any action of the director of building and planning pursuant to this chapter to the city council as provided in Section 16.24.140 of this title. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.050.)

 

16.48.060 Infractions.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set out in the El Cajon municipal ordinances. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.060.)

 

16.48.070 Severability.
        If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application thereof, and to this end the provisions of this title are severable. (Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.070.)

 

16.48.080 Conflict—Approved maps.
        The provisions of the Subdivision Map Act as defined in this title and any amendments thereto, and this title, shall not apply to any map which has been approved pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act as it was in effect on April 30, 1975, and the predecessors to this title as they were in effect on April 30, 1975. Such maps shall be processed under the law which applied to them at the time of such approval, provided the subdivider completes the subdivision process within the period of the initial approval of the map or any extension granted prior to May 1, 1975, or by March 1, 1976, whichever occurs first. Any map for which an extension is granted after May 1, 1975, shall comply with the provisions of this title. Notwithstanding the fact that a map or request for extension thereof was filed prior to May 1, 1975, such map or request for an extension shall comply with the provisions of this title if it has not been approved prior to May 1, 1975. (Ord. 2874 § 1, 1975; Ord. 2860 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.48.080.)

Chapter 16.52 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
16.52.010 Purpose and intent of Sections 16.52.010 through 16.52.030.
        It is the purpose and intent of this article to require the undergrounding of all future distribution utility installations and all present distribution installations within or adjacent to new subdivisions in the city, except where a tentative subdivision map has been previously accepted by the council, or in those circumstances where such undergrounding would not be feasible or practical as set forth herein. (Prior code § 25A-1.)

 

16.52.020 Undergrounding requirements—Exceptions.
        All privately owned public distribution utility systems and service facilities within or adjacent to any subdivision shall henceforth be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities and street lighting systems may be placed aboveground subject to approval of the city engineer as to type and location. The owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities. (Ord. 2864 § 2, 1975: prior code § 25A-2.)

 

16.52.030 Subdivider responsible for compliance—Requirements.
        The subdivider shall be responsible for the requirements of Sections 16.52.010 through 16.52.030 and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the public utility companies for the installation of underground facilities and the relocation of existing facilities. The subdivider shall provide the city with letters indicating that such arrangements have been made with the public utility companies stipulating the undergrounding of such utility facilities concurrent with the filing of the final map of any subdivision as required by this chapter and the state Subdivision Map Act, and subject to the approval of the city. Such arrangements between the subdivider and the public utility companies as a condition of approval of the final map may be waived as provided herein:

A.    The provisions of this section shall not require the undergrounding of power transmission lines of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts or long-distance and trunk communication facilities;

B.     Ornamental street lighting will be required as recommended by the city engineer;

C.     Television and radio reception should be provided by concealed antennae or by an underground or otherwise concealed cable and one central antennae as shown on the approved plot plan;

D.    The city engineer shall have the authority to waive the undergrounding requirements of this section for any subdivision where the proposed undergrounding would not result in a reduction of the number of poles already in existence.

(Ord. 4718 § 4, 2003.)

 

16.52.040 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Commission” means the public utilities commission of the state.

B.     “Person” means individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

C.     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

D.    “Underground utility district or district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.50.060 of this chapter.

E.     “Utility” means all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.

(Prior code § 25A-4.)

 

16.52.050 Public hearing by council—Notice.
        The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned of the time and place of such hearing by mail at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 25A-5.)

 

16.52.060 Designation of underground utility district.
        If after any such public hearing the council finds that the public health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall by resolution declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Immediately following its adoption, the city clerk shall cause a certified copy of such resolution to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district. It shall also provide that the council shall by subsequent resolution fix the time within which property in the district must be ready to receive underground service, and poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall be removed.

        A reasonable time shall be allowed for removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 25A-6.)

 

16.52.070 Unlawful acts.
        Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 16.52.060 hereof, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 16.52.120 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in Sections 16.52.040 through 16.52.170. (Prior code § 25A-7.)

 

16.52.080 Exceptions—Emergency or unusual circumstances.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances and without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Prior code § 25A-8.)

 

16.52.090 Exceptions—Types of facilities.
        This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.52.060 hereof, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, shall not apply to the following types of facilities:

A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of sixty-nine thousand volts;

E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts;

H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.

(Prior code § 25A-9.)

 

16.52.100 Notification of property owners and utility companies.
        Within fifteen days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.52.060 hereof, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the commission.

        Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.52.060 together with a copy of this chapter to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 25A-10.)

 

16.52.110 Responsibility—Utility companies.
        If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.52.060 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Prior code § 25A-11.)

 

16.52.120 Property owners—Responsibility for service connection.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 16.52.110 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.52.060, the city engineer shall proceed pursuant to either of the following alternatives:

1.     Alternative One. The city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt and posting of such notice. Thirty days after such posting and giving of notice as provided hereinabove, the city engineer shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property.

2.     Alternative Two.

a.     The city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

b.     The written notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of El Cajon, California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof cause a copy thereof printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises.

c.     The notice to provide the required underground utilities given and posted by the city engineer shall particularly specify that work is required to be done, and shall state that, if such work is not completed within thirty days after service of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

d.     If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

e.     The city engineer shall forthwith upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

f.      Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

g.     If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and such assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year from such time.

(Prior code § 25A-12.)

 

16.52.130 City removal of property.
        The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.52.060. (Prior code § 25A-13.)

 

16.52.140 Time extension.
        In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.52.060 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Prior code § 25A-14.)

 

16.52.150 Undergrounding requirements—Generally.
A.    Property improvements with a total valuation of sixty thousand dollars or more, for a single permit or the cumulative total for multiple permits during a one-year period, shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, have all electrical, communication, C.A.T.V., and similar distribution, service wires, and/or cables placed underground. The owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities.

B.     Exceptions.

1.     Existing single-family dwellings undergoing remodel or expansion;

2.     A waiver of the undergrounding requirement may be submitted for review by the city manager. The city manager’s denial of the waiver, in full or in part, may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 1.36 of this code. (Ord. 4610 § 1, 1999; Ord. 4432, 1993; Ord. 4398, 1993; Ord. 3995 § 1, 1986; Ord. 3760 § 1, 1984; prior code § 25A-15.)

 

16.52.160 Above ground structures.
        Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities may be placed above ground. (Prior code § 25A-16.)

 

16.52.170 Suspension of requirements.
        The city council may waive the requirements of this chapter in a particular case where it is shown, and the city council so finds, that topography, soil or other conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the installation and maintenance of overhead electric transmission lines. (Prior code § 25A-17.)

Chapter 16.56 CREATION OF EASEMENTS BY RECORDED COVENANTS
16.56.010 Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of Article 2.7 (commencing with section 65870) of Chapter 4 of Division 1, Title 7, of the California Government Code, subject to the limitations specified in section 65875 thereof. (Ord. 5077 § 2, 2019.)

 

16.56.020 Creation of easement by covenant.
        Whenever an easement for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping or open space purposes is required by the county to be made in connection with approval of any subdivision, site plan, building permit, general plan or zoning amendment, or in satisfaction of such requirement imposed pursuant to any adopted city procedure, regulation or ordinance, such easement may be created by recorded covenant, provided:

A.    At the time of recording of the covenant of easement, all the real property benefitted or burdened by the covenant is under common ownership;

B.     The covenant of easement contains a legal description of the real property to be subject to the easement and of the real property to be benefitted thereby, identifies the approval, permit or designation granted which relied upon or required the covenant, and is executed by the owner of the real property. (Ord. 5077 § 2, 2019.)

 

16.56.030 Release of covenant.
        The covenant of easement shall be released in the same manner as public streets, highways or service easements under Streets and Highways Code section 8300 et seq., provided that the city council make an additional finding that the restriction is no longer necessary to achieve city land use goals. (Ord. 5077 § 2, 2019.)

Chapter 16.60 STANDARD URBAN STORM WATER MITIGATION PLAN
16.60.010 Title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (“SUSMP”) ordinance of the City of El Cajon.” (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.020 Statutory Authority.
A.    The municipal storm water NPDES permit (Order No. R9-2013-0001, as subsequently modified by amendment or renewal order, NPDES No. CAS0109266,  hereinafter collectively referred to as “Municipal Permit”) issued to the municipal agencies within the San Diego region, including the City of El Cajon (“City”), by the San Diego RWQCB on May 8, 2013, requires the development and implementation of a program addressing urban runoff pollution related development issues for both public and private projects.

B.     The requirement to implement a program for development planning is based on federal and state statutes including: Section 402 (p) of the Clean Water Act, Section 6217 of the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (“CZARA”), and the California Water Code. The Clean Water Act amendments of 1987 established a framework for regulating urban runoff discharges from municipal, industrial, and construction activities under the NPDES program. The municipal permit requires the implementation of a local BMP Design Manual that incorporates the minimum Low Impact Development (LID)/Site Design, and Permanent BMP Design requirements developed in the Countywide Model BMP Design Manual. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.030 Purpose.
        The regulations of this chapter were developed to address post-construction urban runoff pollution from new development and redevelopment projects. The goal of this chapter is to develop and implement practicable policies to ensure, to the maximum extent practicable (“MEP”) that development does not increase pollutant loads from a project site or result in increased erosion in channels or streams downstream of the development. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.040 Applicability of chapter.
        The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the development plan approval process for discretionary development applications, and prior to issuing development permits for ministerial projects. All “development projects” must include control measures to reduce the discharge of storm water pollutants to the MEP. Development projects are construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction activities that have the potential to contact storm water and contribute an anthropogenic source of pollutants or reduce the natural absorption and infiltration abilities of the land. Each development project is classified as either a “standard development project” (“SDP”) or a “priority development project” (“PDP”). This chapter includes regulations that apply to all development projects as well as additional regulations that apply only to priority development projects. Projects that meet any of the criteria in section 16.60.050 are not considered development projects and are not subject to the requirements of this chapter. All development projects are subject to the requirements of this chapter, subject to the lawful prior approval provisions of the municipal permit. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.050 Exempt projects.
        The following activities are not considered “development projects,” and the requirements of this chapter do not apply to them:

A.    Replacement of impervious surfaces that are part of a routine maintenance activity, such as:

1.     Replacing roof material on an existing building;

2.     Rebuilding a structure to original design after damage from earthquake, fire or similar disasters;

3.     Restoring pavement or other surface materials affected by trenches from utility work;

4.     Resurfacing existing roads and parking lots, including slurry, overlay, and restriping;

5.     Routine replacement of damaged pavement, including full depth replacement, if the sole purpose is to repair the damage;

6.     Constructing new sidewalk, pedestrian ramps, bicycle lanes, or trails (within existing impervious street right-of-way); and

7.     Restoring a historic building to its original historic design.

B.     Repair or improvements to an existing building or structure that do not alter the size:

1.     Plumbing, electrical and HVAC work;

2.     Interior alterations including major interior remodels and tenant build-out within an existing commercial building; and

3.     Exterior alterations that do not change the general dimensions and structural framing of the building (does not include building additions or projects where the existing building is demolished).

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.060 Priority development projects.
        The following types of development projects, except those excluded in accordance with section 16.60.070, are considered priority development projects:

A.    New development projects that create 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surfaces (collectively over the entire project site). This includes commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public development projects on public or private land.

B.     Redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site on an existing site of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surfaces). This includes commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public development projects on public or private land.

C.     New and redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site), and support one or more of the following uses:

D.    Restaurants. This category is defined as a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption described in Standard Industrial Classification (“SIC”) code 5812.

1.     Hillside development projects. This category includes development on any natural slope that is twenty-five percent (25%) or greater.

2.     Parking lots. This category is defined as a land area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, for business, or for commerce.

3.     Streets, roads, highways, freeways, and driveways. This category is defined as any paved impervious surface used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles.

E.     New or redevelopment projects that create or replace 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site), and discharging directly to an Environmentally Sensitive Area (“ESA”). “Discharging directly to” includes flow that is conveyed overland a distance of 200 feet or less from the project to the ESA, or conveyed in a pipe or open channel any distance as an isolated flow from the project to the ESA (i.e. not commingled with flows from adjacent lands).

F.     New development projects, or redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, that support one or more of the following uses:

1.     Automotive repair shops. This category is defined as a facility that is categorized in any one of the following SIC codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539.

2.     Retail gasoline outlets (“RGOs”). This category includes RGOs that meet the following criteria (a) 5,000 square feet or more in size or (b) a projected Average Daily Traffic (“ADT”) of 100 or more vehicles per day.

        New or redevelopment projects that result in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of land and are expected to generate pollutants post construction. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.070 Limited exclusions from designation as a priority development project.
        The following development projects are considered standard projects, even if they otherwise meet the criteria to be considered a priority development project category in section 16.60.060:

A.    New or retrofit paved sidewalks, pedestrian ramps, bicycle lanes, or trails that meet at least one of the following criteria:

1.     Designed and constructed to direct storm water runoff to adjacent vegetated areas, or other non-erodible permeable areas;

2.     Designed and constructed to be hydraulically disconnected1 from paved streets or roads; and

3.     Designed and constructed with permeable pavements or surfaces.

B.     Retrofit or redevelopment of existing paved alleys, streets, or roads that are designed and constructed in accordance with USEPA Green Streets guidance, as defined in the El Cajon BMP Design Manual.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

1            A sidewalk, bicycle lane or trail is considered to be hydraulically disconnected from paved streets or roads if they drain via separate drainage pathways (e.g., separate inlets) such that overland flows do not comingle with street or road runoff.

 

16.60.080 Areas excluded from impervious area calculations.
        The following areas may be excluded in the calculation of amount of impervious area added or replaced when determining if the project is a priority development project:

A.    Areas of a project that are considered exempt from storm water requirements in accordance with section 16.60.050.

B.     Swimming pools and decorative ponds with adequate freeboard or an overflow structure that does not release to the MS4 storm drain system.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.090 Standard development projects.
        All development projects, as defined in sections 16.60.040 and 16.60.050, that are not priority development projects are standard development projects. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.100 Applicability of chapter 13.10.
        The provisions of chapter 13.10 (Storm Water Management and Discharge Control), including the definitions and enforcement provisions, shall be applicable to this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.110 Administration—Limitations.
        Interpretation of this chapter shall assure consistency with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall implement the requirements of the municipal permit. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.120 Administration—Provisions for Storm Water BMP Design Standards requirements.
        The requirements of this chapter shall be incorporated into the project design and shown on the project plans prior to approval of discretionary permits. For projects requiring only ministerial permits, the requirements of this chapter shall be incorporated into the project design and shown on the project plans prior to the issuance of any ministerial permits. City departments carrying out public projects that are not required to obtain permits shall be responsible for ensuring the requirements of this chapter are incorporated into the project design and shown on the project plans prior to bidding for construction contracts, or equivalent. For public projects, the requirements of this chapter must be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans before allowing the project to commence. In addition, all qualifying public and private standard and priority development projects, shall submit a Storm Water Mitigation Plan (“SWMitP”) documenting how the project design complies with the requirements of this chapter before permits are issued for both private and public projects and before projects are allowed to commence. The City of El Cajon BMP Design Manual, which shall be made available on the City’s website, is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this chapter’s requirements. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.130 Administration—Implementation.
        All development projects shall implement source control and Low Impact Development (LID) site design BMPs. Furthermore, all priority development projects shall implement structural BMPs. Storm water BMPs shall be considered and implemented where expressly required by this chapter and if not so required where determined applicable and feasible by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works. The storm water BMPs shall adhere to the requirements of this chapter, and shall be correctly designed in accordance with the requirements of the El Cajon BMP Design Manual so as to remove pollutants to the MEP. Priority projects must also be designed so that runoff rates and durations are controlled to maintain or reduce downstream erosion conditions and protect stream habitat. Design criteria and procedures for hydromodification management are identified in section 16.60.240 and further outlined in the City of El Cajon BMP Design Manual. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.140 General requirements for storm water BMPs.
        All development projects must meet the following requirements:

A.    Onsite BMPs shall be located so as to remove pollutants from runoff prior to its discharge to any receiving waters, and as close to the source as possible;

B.     Structural BMPs shall not be constructed within the Waters of the U.S.; and

C.     Onsite BMPs shall be designed and implemented with measures to avoid the creation of nuisances or pollutions associated with vectors (e.g. mosquitoes, rodents, or flies).

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.150 Requirements to implement site design and source control storm water BMPs.
        All development projects must implement site design BMPs, which incorporate LID principles, and source control BMPs. Additional technical details and guidelines for selection of appropriate site design and source control BMPs are provided in the City of El Cajon BMP Design Manual.

A.    Site design performance standards define minimum requirements for how a site must incorporate site design BMPs, including the location of BMPs and the use of integrated site design practices. The following site design practices must be implemented at all development projects, where applicable and feasible:

1.     Maintenance or restoration of natural storage reservoirs and drainage corridors (including topographic depressions, areas of permeable soils, natural swales, and ephemeral and intermittent streams). If development projects propose to disturb water bodies shall also comply with all applicable requirements of other agencies, including, but not limited to, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board;

2.     Buffer zones for natural water bodies (where buffer zones are technically infeasible, the project applicant shall include other buffers such as trees, access restrictions, or similar measures);

3.     Conservation of natural areas within the project footprint including existing trees, other vegetation, and soils;

4.     Construction of streets, sidewalks, or parking lot aisles to the minimum widths necessary, provided public safety is not compromised;

5.     Minimization of the impervious footprint of the project;

6.     Minimization of soil compaction to landscaped areas;

7.     Disconnection of impervious surfaces through distributed pervious areas;

8.     Landscaped or other pervious areas designed and constructed to effectively receive and infiltrate, retain and/or treat runoff from impervious areas, prior to discharging to the MS4;

9.     Small collection strategies located at, or as close as possible to, the source (i.e. the point where storm water initially meets the ground) to minimize the transport of runoff and pollutants to the MS4 and receiving waters;

10.   Use of permeable materials for projects with low traffic areas and appropriate soil conditions;

11.   Landscaping with native or drought tolerant species; and

12.   Harvesting and using precipitation.

B.     Source control BMPs shall be implemented at all development projects in accordance with sections 16.60.160 through 16.60.220, where applicable and feasible.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.160 Preventing illicit discharges into the MS4.
        Development projects shall design projects to prevent illicit discharges in accordance with the requirements of El Cajon Municipal Code chapter 13.10. BMPs required to prevent discharges include, but are not limited to, those listed below. BMPs to prevent illicit discharges shall be incorporated into the project design where applicable.

A.    Interior floor drains and elevator shaft pumps shall be plumbed to the sanitary sewer system.

B.     Drains within indoor parking garages, except for drains that receive runoff from areas exposed to precipitation, shall be plumbed to the sanitary sewer system.

C.     Fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to drain fire sprinkler system test water to the sanitary sewer.

D.    Boiler drain lines shall be directly or indirectly connected to the sanitary sewer system and may not discharge to the storm drain system.

E.     Condensate, including air conditioning condensate, drain lines may discharge to landscaped areas or other pervious areas stabilized to prevent erosion if the flow is small enough that runoff will not occur. Condensate drain lines may not discharge to the storm drain system.

F.     Rooftop mounted equipment with potential to produce pollutants shall have overhead coverage and/or have secondary containment.

G.    Any drainage sumps onsite shall feature a sediment sump to reduce the quantity of sediment in pumped water.

H.    Roofing, gutters, and trim made of copper or other unprotected metals that may leach into runoff shall be avoided, where feasible.

I.      Vehicle and equipment wash areas shall be designed in accordance with section 16.60.220(B).

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.170 Providing storm drain system stenciling and signage.
        Storm drain stencils are highly visible source control messages, typically placed directly adjacent to storm drain inlets. The stencils contain a brief statement that explains that the dumping of improper materials into the storm water conveyance system is prohibited. Graphical icons, either illustrating anti-dumping symbols or images of receiving water fauna, are effective supplements to the anti-dumping message. Development projects shall include the following requirements in the project design:

A.    Provide stenciling or labeling of all storm drain inlets and catch basins within the project area with prohibitive language (such as: “NO DUMPING DRAINS TO THE OCEAN – NO TIRE DESECHOS HABITO EN EL AGUA”) and/or graphical icons to discourage illegal dumping;

B.     Post signs and prohibitive language and/or graphical icons, which prohibit illegal dumping at public access points along channels and creeks within the project area; and

C.     Maintain legibility of stencils and signs.

D.    Contact the City of El Cajon at (619) 441-1653 for a stencil.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.180 Protecting outdoor material storage areas from rainfall, run-on, runoff, and wind dispersal.
        Improper storage of materials outdoors may increase the potential for toxic compounds, oil and grease, heavy metals, nutrients, suspended solids, and other pollutants to enter the storm water conveyance system. Where the development project plans include outdoor areas for storage of materials that may contribute pollutants to the storm water conveyance system, the following storm water BMPs are required:

A.    Materials with the potential to contribute pollutants to storm water runoff or non-storm water discharges shall be stored in a covered area protected from run-on, such as, but not limited to, a cabinet, shed, or area with a permanent roof or awning and graded or bermed to prevent run-on, where feasible. Where not feasible, berms, dikes, curbs, or other containment structures shall be placed around the perimeter of the storage area to divert run-on around the storage area and reduce the potential for runoff from the storage area. In all cases, runoff from roofs and downspouts shall be directed away from storage areas.

B.     Effective secondary containment shall be provided and maintained for all containers of liquid with the potential to leak or to spill onto outdoor areas to prevent leaks or spills from discharging pollutants to the storm water conveyance structure. Secondary containment may also be required for non-liquid materials where necessary to prevent discharges of pollutants to the storm water conveyance system. Where secondary containment is proposed, the storage area in which the secondary containment structure is located shall have a roof or awning that extends beyond the limits of the storage area to minimize collection of precipitation within the secondary containment system, where feasible. A manufactured shed or equivalent may be used to satisfy this requirement in cases where the shed or equivalent provides sufficient storage capacity.

C.     Bollards, traffic barriers, fences, curbs, or other equivalent measures shall be installed to protect material storage containers stored in locations accessible to vehicles. These measures are intended to prevent damage to containers that could result in spills or leaks.

D.    Storage areas for hazardous materials shall meet all applicable requirements for storage of hazardous materials.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.190 Protecting outdoor work areas from rainfall, run-on, runoff, and wind dispersal.
        Where the development project plans include outdoor work areas, the following storm water BMPs are required:

A.    Outdoor work areas shall be provided with permanent overhead coverage, where feasible, and protected from run-on. Where permanent overhead coverage is not feasible, berms, dikes, curbs, or other containment structures shall be placed around the perimeter of the storage area to divert run-on around the work area and reduce the potential for runoff from the work area. In all cases, runoff from roofs and downspouts shall be directed away from work areas;

B.     Impermeable surfaces shall be established for outdoor work areas to prevent contamination of soil or underlying groundwater, as applicable;

C.     Outdoor work areas shall be located as far away from storm drains or discharge points as possible. Storm drains shall not be located within outdoor work areas; and

D.    In cases where work performed in outdoor areas generates or uses water or other liquids, adequate controls to prevent illicit discharges shall be utilized. Plumbed connection of outdoor work areas to the sanitary sewer system may be required. All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall obtain appropriate permits.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.200 Designing trash storage areas to reduce pollution introduction.
        All trash container storage areas shall meet the following requirements (limited exclusion: residential developments at which individual trash service and an individual trash storage container is proposed for each residence):

A.    Paved with an impervious surface, designed not to allow run-on from adjoining areas and roofs, screened or walled to prevent off-site transport of trash;

B.     Provide attached lids on all trash containers that exclude rain, and a permanent fire resistant roof or awning to minimize direct precipitation;

C.     Locate storm drains away from the immediate vicinity of the trash storage area; and

D.    Post signs on high density residential, commercial, and industrial trash enclosure areas informing users that hazardous materials are not to be disposed.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.210 Using efficient irrigation systems and landscape design.
        Development projects shall design landscaping and landscape irrigation systems to minimize pesticide and fertilizer use and to prevent the runoff of excess irrigation water into the storm water conveyance system. Irrigation runoff discharges to the storm water conveyance system are considered illicit discharges. The irrigation system shall be in compliance with the requirements of all City ordinances regulating the efficient irrigation of landscaping, including, but not limited to, El Cajon Municipal Code chapter 17.195. The following methods to eliminate irrigation runoff shall be considered, and incorporated and implemented where determined applicable and feasible by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works:

A.    Employing rain shutoff devices to prevent irrigation after precipitation;

B.     Designing irrigation systems to each landscape area’s specific water requirements;

C.     Using flow reducers or shutoff valves triggered by a pressure drop to control water loss in the event of broken sprinkler heads or lines;

D.    Using drip irrigation systems where appropriate;

E.     Using native, drought tolerant, or pest-resistant, plant species;

F.     Sloping adjacent paved or other impervious areas to drain to landscaping or to infiltration, retention, or biofiltration BMPs; and

G.    Employing other comparable, equally effective, methods to eliminate irrigation water runoff.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.220 Incorporating requirements applicable to specific sources of pollutants or discharges.
        Each of the following requirements shall be incorporated into the design of development projects as applicable and feasible. Multiple requirements may apply at one project. Alternative features or design concepts that are comparable and equally effective to the listed requirements may be approved by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works.

A.    Buildings design features that discourage entry of pests shall be noted in the project’s SWMitP submittal.

B.     Vehicle and Equipment Cleaning Areas. Development projects that include areas for washing, steam cleaning, or other cleaning of vehicles or equipment shall incorporate the following features into the design of such areas, as applicable:

1.     Self-contained, and covered with a roof or overhang;

2.     Have a grade or berm area to prevent run-on from surrounding areas;

3.     Equipped with a clarifier, grease interceptor, or other pretreatment facility, as appropriate;

4.     Properly connected to a sanitary sewer; and

5.     No storm drains shall be located within wash areas.

C.     Vehicle or Equipment Maintenance Bays. Maintenance bays shall include the following:

1.     Repair/maintenance bays shall be indoors; or, designed to preclude urban run-on and runoff; and

2.     Design a repair/maintenance bay drainage system to capture all wash water, leaks and spills. Connect drains to a sump for collection and disposal. Direct connection of the repair/maintenance bays to the storm drain system is prohibited. Applicable permits must be obtained for connections to the sanitary sewer system.

D.    Fueling Areas. Retail and non-retail fuel dispensing areas shall contain the following:

1.     Overhanging roof structure or canopy. The cover’s minimum dimensions must be equal to or greater than the area within the grade break. The cover must not drain onto the fuel dispensing area and the downspouts must be routed to prevent drainage across the fueling area. The fueling area shall drain to the project’s structural prior to discharging to the storm water conveyance system;

2.     Paved with Portland cement concrete (or equivalent smooth impervious surface). The use of asphalt concrete is prohibited;

3.     Have an appropriate slope to prevent ponding, and must be separated from the rest of the site by a grade break that prevents run-on of urban runoff; and

4.     At a minimum, the concrete fuel dispensing area must extend 6.5 feet (2.0 meters) from the corner of each fuel dispenser, or the length at which the hose and nozzle assembly may be operated plus one (1) foot (0.3 meter), whichever is less.

E.     Dock Areas. Loading/unloading dock areas shall include the following:

1.     Cover loading dock areas, or design drainage to preclude urban run-on and runoff;

2.     Provide a roof overhang over the loading area or install door skirts (cowling) at each bay that enclose the end of the trailer; and

3.     Direct connections to storm drains from depressed loading docks (truck wells) are prohibited.

F.     Plazas, Sidewalks, and Parking Areas. To minimize the offsite transport of pollutants from parking areas, plazas, sidewalks, and parking areas shall regularly be swept or cleaned using an equally effective method. If pressure washing or other wet cleaning method is used, controls must be implemented to prevent illicit discharges to the storm water conveyance system.

1.     Where landscaping is proposed in parking areas, incorporate landscape areas into the drainage design; and

2.     Overflow parking (parking stalls provided in excess of the city’s minimum parking requirements) should be constructed with permeable paving.

G.    Hillside Landscaping. Hillside areas that are disturbed by project development shall be landscaped with deep-rooted, drought tolerant plant species selected for erosion control, satisfactory to the City Engineer/Director of Public Works.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.230 Selection of structural BMPs.
        All priority development projects must implement structural BMPs to control pollutants in stormwater that may be discharged from a project as listed below. All priority development projects shall design, construct and implement structural BMPs that meet the design standards of this section and the applicable portions of the El Cajon BMP Design Manual.

A.    Each priority development project must implement structural BMPs that are designed to retain (intercept, store, infiltrate, evaporate, and/or evapotranspire) onsite the pollutants contained in the volume of storm water runoff produced from a 24-hour 85th percentile storm event (design capture volume).

1.     If implementing BMPs to retain the full design capture volume onsite for a priority development project is not technically feasible, then the priority development project may utilize biofiltration BMPs. Biofiltration BMPs must be designed to have an appropriate hydraulic loading rate to maximize storm water retention and pollutant removal, as well as to prevent erosion, scour, and channeling within the BMP, and must be sized to:

a.     Treat 1.5 times the design capture volume not reliably retained onsite; or

b.     Treat the design capture volume not reliably retained onsite with a flow-thru design that has a total volume, including pore spaces and pre-filter detention volume, sized to hold at least 0.75 times the portion of the design capture volume not reliably retained onsite.

B.     If the priority development project is a redevelopment project, the structural BMP performance requirements and hydromodification management requirements apply to redevelopment priority development projects as follows:

1.     Where redevelopment results in the creation or replacement of impervious surface in an amount of less than fifty percent of the surface area of the previously existing development, then the structural BMP performance requirements for priority development projects apply only to the creation or replacement of impervious surface, and not the entire development; or

2.     Where redevelopment results in the creation or replacement of impervious surface in an amount of more than fifty percent of the surface area of the previously existing development, then the structural BMP performance requirements for priority development projects apply to the entire development.

C.     BMPs implemented to comply with this section shall treat runoff from the development project and shall be located onsite, except as otherwise allowed by section 16.60.250.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.240 Hydromodification management BMP requirements.
        Priority development projects shall implement BMPs to manage hydromodification that may be caused by storm water runoff discharged from a project as follows:

A.    Post-project flow rates and durations must meet the following criteria:

1.     For flow rates ranging from 10 percent, 30 percent or 50 percent of the pre-development 2-year runoff event (0.1Q2, 0.3Q2, or 0.5Q2) to the pre-development 10-year runoff event (Q10), the post-project discharge rates and durations shall not deviate above the pre-development rates and durations by more than 10 percent over and more than 10 percent of the length of the flow duration curve. The specific lower flow threshold will depend on the erosion susceptibility of the receiving stream for the project site. Guidelines for selection of the appropriate lower flow threshold are provided in the San Diego Hydromodification Management Plan.

2.     For flow rates ranging from the lower flow threshold to Q5, the post-project peak flows shall not exceed pre-development peak flows. For flow rates from Q5 to Q10, post-project peak flows may exceed pre-development flows by up to 10 percent for a 1-year frequency interval. For example, post-project flows could exceed pre-development flows by up to 10 percent for the interval from Q9 to Q10 or from Q5.5 to Q6.5, but not from Q8 to Q10.

B.     BMPs implemented to comply with this section shall provide hydrologic control for runoff from the development project and shall be located onsite, except as otherwise allowed by section 16.60.250.

C.     Each priority development project shall avoid critical coarse sediment yield areas identified in the Watershed Management Area Analysis or implement measures that allow critical coarse sediment to be discharged to receiving waters, such that there is no net impact to the receiving water.

D.    At the discretion of the City Engineer/Director of Public Works, the City may exempt a priority development project from the hydromodification management BMP performance requirements described in this section where the project discharges storm water runoff to:

1.     Existing underground storm drains discharging directly to water storage reservoirs, lakes, enclosed embayments, or the Pacific Ocean;

2.     Conveyance channels whose bed and bank are concrete lined all the way from the point of discharge to water storage reservoirs, lakes, enclosed embayments, or the Pacific Ocean; or

3.     Forester Creek or conveyances that are concrete-lined from the point of discharge from the project area to the point of discharge to Forester Creek, and any other areas identified by the Copermittees as appropriate for an exemption by the optional Watershed Management Area Analysis and listed in a Water Quality Improvement Plan. No exemption listed in the Watershed Management Area Analysis may be granted until the Water Quality Improvement Plan containing the exemption has been accepted by the San Diego RWQCB.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.250 Alternative compliance.
        The City may, at the discretion of the City Engineer/Director of Public Works, allow an applicant to implement an applicant-implemented alternative compliance project to meet the requirements of sections 16.60.230 and 16.60.240, as applicable, in lieu of complying solely using onsite BMPs that treat runoff generated by the development project.

A.    Applicant-Implemented Alternative Compliance Projects: Applicant-implemented alternative compliance projects may propose using onsite BMPs to treat run-on from offsite using onsite BMPs or implementing offsite BMPs. For either type of applicant-implemented alternative compliance, the applicant is fully responsible for the alternative compliance project design, construction, and long-term operation and maintenance. BMPs proposed may be, but are not required to be, selected from candidate projects listed in the Watershed Management Area Analysis included in the Water Quality Improvement Plan. Applicant-implemented alternative compliance projects must also satisfy all of the following requirements:

1.     The design shall be prepared in accordance with the Water Quality Equivalency (WQE) standards approved by the San Diego RWQCB.

2.     The applicant shall provide evidence of an operation and maintenance mechanism that will ensure the operation and maintenance of the proposed BMPs in perpetuity.

3.     All proposed BMPs included in the design, including offsite BMPs, if proposed, must be completed and operational before completion of the proposed development project.

B.     Alternative compliance projects shall not be authorized by the City prior to acceptance of WQE standards by the San Diego RWQCB.

C.     No regionally-accepted credit system has been established, alternative compliance via payments of in-lieu fees or the equivalent is not a compliance option for projects in the City of El Cajon.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.260 Structural BMPs—Restrictions on use of infiltration BMPs.
        Infiltration devices shall comply with the criteria establish in the El Cajon BMP Design Manual, as amended, that is incorporated by reference as part of this chapter. These conditions do not apply to structural BMPs which allow incidental infiltration and are not designed to primarily function as infiltration devices (such as detention basins, bioretention areas, constructed wetlands, etc.). At a minimum, such infiltration BMPs must be in conformance with the design criteria listed below, unless the development project applicant demonstrates that one or more of the specific design criteria listed below are not necessary to protect groundwater quality. The design criteria listed below do not apply to small infiltration systems dispersed throughout a development project.

A.    Runoff shall undergo pretreatment to remove both physical and chemical contaminants, such as sedimentation or filtration, prior to infiltration.

B.     Pollution prevention and source control BMPs shall be implemented at a level appropriate to protect groundwater quality at sites where infiltration structural BMPs are to be used.

C.     Infiltration BMPs must be adequately maintained to remove pollutants in storm water to the MEP.

D.    The vertical distance from the base of any infiltration structural BMP to the seasonal high groundwater mark shall be at least ten feet or as determined on an individual, site-specific basis by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works. Where groundwater does not support beneficial uses, this vertical distance criterion may be reduced, provided groundwater quality is maintained.

E.     The soil through which infiltration is to occur shall have physical and chemical characteristics (such as appropriate cation exchange capacity, organic, clay content, and infiltration rate) that are adequate for proper infiltration durations and treatment of urban runoff for the protection of groundwater beneficial uses.

F.     Infiltration structural BMPs shall not be used for areas of industrial or light industrial activity and other high threat to water quality land uses and activities as designated by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works, unless source control BMPs are utilized to help prevent the exposure of high threat activities, or runoff from such activities is first treated or filtered to remove pollutants prior to infiltration.

G.    The horizontal distance between the base of any infiltration structural BMP and any water supply wells shall be 100 feet or as determined on an individual, site-specific basis by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.270 Shared and interim BMPs.
        The following requirements apply to shared and interim storm water BMPs:

A.    Shared storm water BMPs shall be operational prior to the use of any dependent development or phase of development. The shared BMPs shall only be required to treat the dependent developments or phases of development that are in use;

B.     Interim storm water BMPs that provide equivalent or greater treatment than is required for the permanent structural BMPs may be implemented by a dependent development until each shared BMP is operational. If interim BMPs are selected, the BMPs shall remain in use until permanent BMPs are operational.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.280 Maintenance mechanism to be in place before acceptance.
        Structural BMPs shall not be considered “effective,” and shall not be accepted as meeting the MEP standard, unless a mechanism is in place that will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural BMPs. As part of project review, if a project proponent is required to include interim or permanent structural BMPs in project plans, and if the City Engineer/Director of Public Works does not provide a mechanism for BMP maintenance, the project proponent shall provide verification of maintenance requirements through such means as may be appropriate, at the discretion of the City Engineer/Director of Public Works, including, but not limited to covenants, legal agreements, maintenance agreements, and/or conditional use permits. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.290 Maintenance mechanisms.
        Public equity maintenance. The City Council may approve a public or acceptable quasi-public entity (e.g., the County Flood Control District, or annex to an existing assessment district, an existing utility district, a state or federal resource agency, or a conservation conservancy) to assume responsibility for maintenance, repair and replacement of the BMP. Unless acceptable to the City Council, public entity maintenance agreements shall ensure estimated costs are front-funded or reliably guaranteed (e.g., through a trust fund, cash deposit, assessment district fees, bond, letter of credit or similar means). In addition, the City Council may seek protection from liability by appropriate releases and indemnities. The City Council shall have the authority to approve storm water BMPs proposed for transfer to any other public entity within its jurisdiction before installation. The City Council shall be involved in the negotiation of maintenance requirements with any other public entities accepting maintenance responsibilities within their respective jurisdictions, and in negotiations with the resource agencies responsible for issuing permits for the construction and/or maintenance of the facilities. The City Council must be identified as a third party beneficiary empowered to enforce any such maintenance agreement within their respective jurisdictions.

A.    Project proponent agreement to maintain storm water BMPs: The City Council may enter into a contract with the project proponent obliging the project proponent to maintain, repair and replace the storm water BMPs as necessary into perpetuity. Security may be required.

B.     Assessment districts: The City Council may approve an Assessment District or other funding mechanism created by the project proponent to provide funds for storm water BMP maintenance, repair and replacement on an ongoing basis. Any agreement with such a District shall be subject to the Public Entity Maintenance Provisions above.

C.     Lease provisions: In those cases where the City holds title to the land in question, and the land is being leased to another party for private or public use, the City Council may assure storm water BMP maintenance, repair and replacement through conditions in the lease.

D.    Conditional use permits: For discretionary projects only, the City Council may assure maintenance of storm water BMPs through the inclusion of maintenance conditions in the conditional use permit. Security may be required.

E.     Alternative mechanisms: The City Council may accept alternative maintenance mechanisms if such mechanisms are as protective as those listed above.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.300 Verification mechanisms.
        For discretionary projects, the City approved method of storm water BMP maintenance shall be incorporated into the project’s permit, and shall be consistent with permits issued by resource agencies, before City approval of discretionary permits. For projects requiring only ministerial permits, the approved method of storm water BMP maintenance shall be incorporated into the permit conditions before the issuance of any ministerial permits. In all instances, the project proponent shall provide proof of execution of an approved method of maintenance repair and replacement before the issuance of construction approvals. Public projects that are not required to obtain permits shall be responsible for ensuring that an approved method of storm water BMP maintenance repair and replacement is executed prior to the commencement of construction. For all properties, the verification mechanism will include the project proponent’s signed statement, as part of the project application, accepting responsibility for all structural treatment control BMP maintenance, repair and replacement, until a City-approved entity agrees to assume responsibility for structural treatment control BMP maintenance, repair and replacement. (Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

 

16.60.310 Maintenance requirements.
A.    Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Plan: An O&M plan, prepared by the project proponent shall be included in the SWMitP for all priority development projects. The O&M plan identifies the designated party(ies) responsible for maintaining storm water post-construction BMPs and describes typical maintenance activities and frequencies. Project proponents for all priority development projects shall also submit a completed Storm Water Facilities Maintenance Agreement to assure ongoing long-term maintenance of all proposed structural BMPs. The Storm Water Facilities Maintenance Agreement runs with the land. Parties responsible for the O&M plan shall retain records for at least five (5) years. These documents shall be made available to the City for inspection upon request at any time.

B.     Access Easement/Agreement: The City Engineer/Director of Public Works may require the project proponent to submit a copy of an executed access easement that shall be binding on the land throughout the life of the project, until such time that the storm water BMP requiring access is replaced, satisfactory to the City Engineer/Director of Public Works.

(Ord. 5034 § 2, 2015.)

Chapter 16.100 REPEALED
16.100.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.100.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.100.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.100.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.100.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.100.060 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.101 REPEALED
16.101.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.101.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.101.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.101.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.102 REPEALED
16.102.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.102.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.102.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.102.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.102.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.103 REPEALED
16.103.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.103.020 REPEALED
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.103.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.103.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.103.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.103.060 Alternative storm water BMPs.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.104 REPEALED
16.104.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.104.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.104.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.105 REPEALED
16.105.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.105.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.105.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.105.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.105.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.106 REPEALED
16.106.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.106.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.106.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.106.040 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.106.050 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.106.060 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.106.070 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.107 REPEALED
16.107.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.107.020 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.107.030 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

 

16.107.40 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

Chapter 16.108 REPEALED
16.108.010 REPEALED.
        (Repealed by Ord. 4908 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4717 § 3, 2002.)

TITLE 16 ENDNOTES

Title 17 ZONING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 5105. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 17.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 17.10 ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION, AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 17.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES, BOUNDARIES AND PREZONING
Chapter 17.20 AMENDMENTS
Chapter 17.25 PROCEDURES, HEARINGS, NOTICES AND FEES
Chapter 17.30 APPEALS
Chapter 17.35 EXPIRATIONS, TIME EXTENSIONS, AND PERMIT REVOCATION
Chapter 17.40 ADMINISTRATIVE ZONING PERMIT
Chapter 17.45 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.50 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
Chapter 17.55 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Chapter 17.57 MINOR AMENDMENT
Chapter 17.58 MINOR USE PERMIT
Chapter 17.60 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) PERMIT
Chapter 17.63 SUBSTANTIAL CONFORMANCE REVIEW
Chapter 17.65 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN PERMIT
Chapter 17.70 SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 17.75 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
Chapter 17.80 VARIANCE
Chapter 17.105 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.115 GENERAL LAND USE REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Chapter 17.120 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 17.125 GENERAL LOT REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.130 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 17.135 M-U (MIXED-USE) OVERLAY ZONE
Chapter 17.140 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Chapter 17.145 COMMERCIAL ZONES
Chapter 17.150 INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Chapter 17.155 O-S (OPEN SPACE) ZONE
Chapter 17.160 P (PARKING) ZONE
Chapter 17.165 PRD (PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT) ZONE
Chapter 17.170 H (HILLSIDE OVERLAY) ZONE
Chapter 17.175 MH (MOBILE HOME OVERLAY) ZONE
Chapter 17.180 ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES
Chapter 17.185 PARKING STANDARDS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 17.190 SIGNS
Chapter 17.195 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
Chapter 17.205 AGRICULTURE AND ANIMALS
Chapter 17.210 ALCOHOL SALES AND DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOL SALES REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.212 DEEMED APPROVED LODGING ESTABLISHMENT
Chapter 17.215 AUTOMOTIVE FUELING STATIONS
Chapter 17.220 DENSITY BONUS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
Chapter 17.225 MISCELLANEOUS SPECIAL USES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.230 MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
Chapter 17.235 PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITIES
Chapter 17.240 TOBACCO SHOPS, SMOKE SHOPS AND ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOPS
Chapter 17.243 PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA
Chapter 17.245 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Chapter 17.250 SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE STORES AND PAWN SHOPS
Chapter 17.255 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Chapter 17.260 AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE

Chapter 17.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Note
*       For statutory provisions pertaining to planning in general, see California Government Code § 65000 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to regulate the use of land and buildings, see California Government Code § 65850; for provisions requiring a city to adopt a general plan, see California Government Code § 65300.

 

17.05.010 Title.
This title shall be known as “the Zoning Code.” (Ord. 4984 § 3, 2013)

 

17.05.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to implement the general plan and to establish a set of development regulations that serve the public health, safety, and general welfare, and that provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.05.030 Provisions not affected by headings.
Section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any section hereof. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.05.040 Tenses.
The present tense includes the future, and the future the present. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.05.050 Number.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.05.060 Purchasing copies.
Copies of this title shall be available for purchase from the department of community development. The selling price of the copies shall be fixed by the city council. The funds received from the sale of the copies shall be credited to the general fund. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.10 ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION, AND ENFORCEMENT
17.10.010 Administration, interpretation, and enforcement.
The director of community development (director), or his or her designee, shall administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this title, including any ambiguities or omissions herein. In interpreting this title, the director shall gather and review all pertinent facts and make a determination based upon those facts. The director may consult standard references, such as the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), as such documents may be amended from time to time, when administering and interpreting this title. (Ord. 5081 § 3, 2019.)

 

17.10.020 Director’s determination.
In administering, interpreting, and enforcing this title, the director shall consider legal requirements, as well as the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the city. Upon request, the director shall document his or her determination in writing. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.10.030 Report to planning commission.
The director shall make a report to the planning commission describing the administrative determinations made pursuant to Section 17.10.020 above and Chapters 17.57 and 17.63. The report shall be submitted as a discussion item in July and January, for the preceding six (6) month period. No such report shall be required, if the director has not issued a director’s determination, substantial conformance review or minor amendment in the six (6) month period preceding the required reporting dates. (Ord. 4984 § 8, 2013)

 

17.10.040 Appeal of director’s determination.
Any decision or determination made by the director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.10.050 Certificates of occupancy.
To assure compliance with the provisions of this title, a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the building and fire safety division before:

 

 

A.    Any new building is initially occupied or used;

B.     Any change of type or class of use is made; or

C.     A change of use of any unimproved premises is made. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.10.060 Conflicts.
It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. However, when this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall govern.

Furthermore, all departments, officials or public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses where required by law shall conform to the provisions of this title. No such license or permit for uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be issued. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this title, shall be null and void. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.10.070 Penalties.
A.    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code.

B.     Each person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided above in Section 17.10.070(A). Any use, occupation or building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall constitute a public nuisance.

C.     In addition or in lieu of prosecuting a violation as an infraction or misdemeanor, the director is authorized to issue an administrative citation in accordance with Chapter 1.14, or initiate abatement proceedings pursuant to Chapter 15.16, and/or may commence an administrative proceeding under Chapter 15.18 to cause the assessment of a civil penalty pursuant to Section 1.24.020. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.10.080 Judicial review.
Any proceeding to seek judicial review in order to dispute, annul, contest or otherwise attack a decision of the city in any zoning or land use matter must be brought within 60 days of the date on which the disputed decision becomes final, unless otherwise provided for by statute. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.10.090 Compliance with CEQA time limits.
Whenever the timing and processing requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) require a longer time period for the processing of land use or development projects than the time periods stated in this title, the longer time periods and processing requirements required by CEQA shall prevail. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES, BOUNDARIES AND PREZONING
17.15.010 Establishment of zones by name.
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings, to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regulate the density of population, the following zoning districts are established:

 

Zoning Districts:

Descriptive Zoning District Name:

O-S

Open Space

H

Hillside Overlay

PRD

Planned Residential Development

RS-40

Residential, Single-family, 40,000 square-foot

RS-20

Residential, Single-family, 20,000 square-foot

RS-14

Residential, Single-family, 14,000 square-foot

RS-9

Residential, Single-family, 9,000 square-foot

RS-6

Residential, Single-family, 6,000 square-foot

RM-6000

Residential, Multi-family 6,000 square-foot

RM-4300

Residential, Multi-family 4,300 square-foot

RM-2500

Residential, Multi-family 2,500 square-foot

RM-2200

Residential, Multi-family 2,200 square-foot

RM-1450

Residential, Multi-family 1,450 square-foot

RM-HR

Residential, Multi-family, High-Rise

MH

Mobile Home Overlay

O-P

Office Professional

P

Parking

MU

Mixed-Use

C-N

Neighborhood Commercial

C-G

General Commercial

C-R

Regional Commercial

C-M

Heavy Commercial - Light Industrial

M

Manufacturing

(Ord. 5018 § 3, 2015)

 

17.15.020 Zoning restrictiveness.
In reviewing a request for zone reclassification pursuant to Chapter 17.20, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may approve an alternative zone or zones that is “more restrictive” than the zone requested in the application and publicly advertised. Zones are considered “more restrictive” in relation to their reverse order as listed in Section 17.15.010, with the exception of the hillside overlay zone (H), which does not contain any uses. For example, the RS-6 zone is “more restrictive” than the RM-2500 zone, but the RS-6 zone is “less restrictive” than the RS-40 zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.030 Establishment of zones by map.
The location and boundaries of the various zones are such as are shown and delineated on the zoning map as adopted originally by Ordinance No. 236 and as subsequently amended, which map, as amended from time to time, is by reference made a part of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.040 Division of zoning map.
The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such zoning map, be subdivided into units and such parts and units may be separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the zoning map. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.050 Changes in boundaries.
Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map or part of said map or unit of a part of said zoning map, which said amended maps or part or units of parts, when so adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and become a part of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.060 Uncertainty of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown upon a zoning map or any part or unit thereof, the following rules of construction shall apply:

A.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

B.     In the case of un-subdivided property, and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on said zoning map.

C.     Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated street or alley shall acquire the classification of the property to which it reverts.

D.    Areas of dedicated streets or alleys and railroad rights-of-way other than such as are designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title shall be deemed to be unclassified, and in the case of streets, permitted to be used only for purposes lawfully allowed and, in the case of railroad rights-of-way, permitted to be used solely for the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices and movement of rolling stock.

E.     Any property which for any reason is not designated on the zoning map as being classified in any of the zones established hereby shall be deemed to be classified in the RS-40 zone until the same shall have been otherwise classified in the manner set forth in Chapter 17.20. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.070 Limitation of land use.
Except as provided in this title, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose, except as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed in the same zone in which such building and land is located. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.080 Naming of zones.
The zones listed in Section 17.15.010 are named according to an orderly arrangement of letters and numbers. The letter designators indicate abbreviated words such as residential (R) and commercial (C). The abbreviated words are spelled out in the second column of the table in Section 17.15.010. The numbers represent the minimum lot size in the single-family zones, and the density (minimum lot area per dwelling unit) in the multiple-family zones. Both minimum lot size and minimum lot area are presented in square-feet units. (Ord. 4968 § 2, 2011)

 

17.15.090 Prezoning.
A.    Prior to the annexation of any property to the city, said property shall first be prezoned in the manner set forth in Chapter 17.20. The purpose of prezoning is to establish the zoning district that will apply to that property and be effective upon the annexation of the property to the city.

B.     The annexation of the property to the city shall be commenced within one year of the date of approval of the prezoning by the city council or the prezoning shall expire, unless extended pursuant to Chapter 17.35. The city may apply reasonable conditions to the approval of a prezoning request to ensure that the property will comply with the city’s ordinances and policies upon annexation. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.15.100 Urgency interim ordinance.
To protect the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may adopt an urgency interim ordinance, without a public hearing, which prohibits any uses which may be in conflict with a contemplated zoning proposal which the city council, planning commission, redevelopment agency or the planning division is considering or studying or intends to study within a reasonable time. Such urgency measure shall be adopted in accordance with Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4, Article 2, Section 65858 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.20 AMENDMENTS
17.20.010 Title may be amended.
The boundaries and areas of the zones established by this title and as depicted on the zoning map, the classification of land uses therein, or other provisions of this title may be amended whenever public necessity and convenience and general welfare require. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.020 Initiation.
Amendments of this title may be initiated by:

A.    Submittal of a completed application by the property owner, or the property owner’s agent, to the secretary of the planning commission. However, no application for a zone reclassification shall be accepted if a previous application for the same zone reclassification request, for the same property, was denied within the previous year; or

B.     A resolution of intention of the city council; or

C.     A resolution of intention of the planning commission; or

D.    City Council action.

E.     All amendments to this title which do not change any property from one zone to another, or do not impose any regulation listed in section 65800 of the California Government Code (the Planning and Zoning Law) not theretofore imposed, or which do not remove or modify any such regulation theretofore imposed, may be initiated and adopted as other ordinances are adopted by said city council. (Ord. 5072 § 5, 2018)

 

17.20.030 Commission to hold hearing on amendments.
Upon acceptance of a completed application, the secretary of the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.20.040 Commission to announce findings.
After close of the public hearing on an application for an amendment, the planning commission shall announce its decision by resolution filed with the city clerk. Said resolution shall either recommend that the amendment be approved by the city council, or it shall deny the proposed amendment. Should the planning commission fail to reach a decision on the application, the provisions of Section 2.12.080 of the El Cajon Municipal Code shall apply to any vote. The matter shall be referred to the city council together with the planning commission minutes and the complete record of the case. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.050 Required findings.
The planning commission may recommend and the city council may adopt any amendment to the Zoning Code, provided that it first makes the following findings:

A.    The proposed zoning amendment, including any changes proposed in the various land uses to be authorized, is compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs specified in the general plan.

B.     The proposed zoning amendment is consistent with any applicable specific plan governing development of the subject property.

C.     It is in the public necessity and convenience and/or general welfare that the zoning regulations governing the property be changed.

D.    When a reduction in residential density is proposed, the following additional finding shall be made: The remaining sites identified in the housing element are adequate to accommodate the city’s share of the regional housing need pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65584, and 65863. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.060 Notice of commission’s decision.
Within five (5) days of the passage of a resolution, the secretary to the planning commission shall cause all of the following to be done on the same day:

A.    Notify the applicant of its action by mailing a copy of such resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon the application;

B.     File a copy of such resolution with the city clerk; and

C.     Forward a copy of such resolution to the city council.

If the planning commission recommends adoption of an amendment, the complete record of the case shall also be forwarded to the city council. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.070 Commission action shall be final when denying application.
The action of the planning commission in denying an application for an amendment shall be final and conclusive, unless within 10 days of the planning commission’s action, a written appeal of the action is filed with the city clerk pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.080 Council public hearings on amendments.
The city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the city council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.25, upon receipt of a resolution from the planning commission recommending approval of a requested zoning amendment. The city clerk shall also schedule a public hearing before the city council in the event that a planning commission resolution denying a requested zoning amendment is appealed by any person in accordance with the provisions listed in Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.090 Council referral to planning commission.
The city council may approve, modify or deny the recommendation of the planning commission; provided that any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the city council not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing shall first be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation, but the planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the planning commission to report within 40 days after the referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed a positive recommendation of the proposed modification. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.100 Decision of city council.
The action by the city council on the application for amendment shall be by a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council and shall be final and conclusive. Denial of a zoning amendment request may be in the form of a resolution or a minute order. Approval of a Zoning Code amendment shall be in the form of an ordinance. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.20.110 Notice of council decision.
No later than 10 days following council action regarding a proposed zoning amendment, a copy of the ordinance, resolution, or minute order documenting the council’s action shall be mailed to the applicant and any other parties requesting notice of the action, and one copy shall be forwarded to the secretary of the planning commission. Furthermore, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65863.5, the city shall notify the county assessor of any approval that changes the zoning designation of a property in the city. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.25 PROCEDURES, HEARINGS, NOTICES AND FEES
17.25.010 Director to prescribe form of application and required information.
In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65940, the director of community development shall prescribe the form in which applications are made, and shall prescribe the information required to be submitted by the applicant with applications for planned residential developments, planned unit developments, signs, site development plans, specific plans, variances, conditional use permits, zoning amendments, adult entertainment permits, administrative zoning permits, substantial conformance reviews, minor amendments, and historic resource designations, and for any other planning applications for which submittal requirements are not specified within this title. No application shall be deemed complete, unless it complies with such requirements or the director specifically waives the requirement. (Ord. 4984 § 10, 2013)

 

17.25.020 Acceptability of signature on applications.
If signatures of persons other than the owners of property making the application are required or offered in support of, or in opposition to an application, they may be received as evidence of notice having been served upon them of the pending application, or as evidence of their opinion on the pending issue, but they shall in no case infringe upon the free exercise of the powers vested in the city as represented by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.030 Application to be part of permanent record.
Applications filed pursuant to this title shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing, and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the agency to which application is made, and there shall be attached thereto and permanently filed therewith, copies of all notices and actions with certificates or affidavits of posting, mailing or publications pertaining thereto. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.25.040 Filing fees.
The city council shall establish all planning and land use application filing fees by resolution. A copy of the resolution with a listing of the filing fees and their adoption date shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and the community development department. A hand-out reflecting the established fees shall be prepared and made available upon request. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.050 Exemption of state agencies.
Agencies and departments of the state, including school districts, shall be exempt from the payment of fees otherwise required herein. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.060 Setting hearings.
Whenever the provisions of this title require that a public hearing be held before the planning commission, the hearing shall be set by the secretary of the planning commission, and whenever the provisions of this title require that a public hearing be held before the city council, the hearing shall be set by the city clerk. Public hearings shall be conducted no later than such time as may be required by applicable state laws. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.070 Notices—Time and place.
Notice of time and place of a public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

A.    Notice of any public hearing upon a proposed amendment to this title, or to the map which is a part of this title, shall be given in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65090, 65091 and 65092, as applicable, and as may be amended from time to time. At a minimum, notice shall be given by at least one publication of said notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before the date of said public hearing.

B.     Notice of any public hearing to consider a variance, conditional use permit, or minor conditional use permit or any appeal of a decision made by the planning commission regarding same, shall be given in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65092, as may be amended from time to time. At a minimum, notice shall be given by mailing said notice of public hearing to the affected property owner, the applicant, and the owners of real property (as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll) within 300 feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing not less than ten days before the date of said hearing.

C.     Notice of any other public hearing required pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be given by mailing said notice of public hearing to the affected property owner, the applicant, and the owners of real property (as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll) within 300 feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing not less than ten days before the date of said hearing.

D.    When a development proposal involves more than one application request and the noticing requirements for the applications differ, the director may prepare and distribute a combined notice of public hearing that encompasses all applicable requirements.

E.     Neither the failure to actually receive notice nor the failure to receive notice in a timely manner shall be cause for the an appeal of any decision of the planning commission or the city council, so long as notice was mailed, published and/or posted as prescribed by this section. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.080 Required wording of notices.
Public hearing notices required pursuant to this title shall include a header which consists of the following words: “Notice of Proposed Zone Reclassification” or “Notice of Proposed Variance” or “Notice of Proposed Conditional Use Permit” or “Notice of Proposed Adult Entertainment Permit” or “Notice of Proposed Planned Residential Development,” etc. as the case may be. In addition, the notice shall set-forth the description of the property under consideration, the nature of the proposed change or use, the application number, the date, time and place at which the public hearing or hearings on the matter will be held, and the identity of the hearing body. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.090 Investigations.
The director shall cause to be made such investigation of facts bearing upon an application set for hearing, including an analysis of precedent cases as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure action on each case consistent with the purpose of this title and with previous amendments or variances. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.100 Permanent files to include summary of testimony.
A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at any public hearing held in connection with an application filed pursuant to this title, and the names of persons testifying shall be documented and made a part of the permanent files of the case. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.110 Withdrawal of application.
An applicant may at any time, prior to a decision being rendered, withdraw an application by submittal of a written notice of withdrawal to the director of community development. The written notice shall include the application number and type of application being withdrawn. The application will be considered withdrawn on the date the written notice of withdrawal is received by the director. If at the time of the withdraw, the application has been advertised for a public hearing with either the planning commission or the city council, the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk, as applicable, shall post a notice of cancellation of the public hearing at city hall and two additional conspicuous places, if time permits. If the withdraw is submitted at the planning commission or city council meeting at which the item was to be considered, the commission secretary or city clerk, as applicable, shall notify the respective decision making body of the withdraw at or prior to the action being scheduled to be heard. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.25.120 Notices of restriction on real property.
The city shall record with the county recorder or San Diego County all documents relating to real property in the city with respect to building, planning, zoning and engineering matters, if it is determined to be in the best interests of the City of El Cajon. The determination as to the necessity for recordation shall be made by the city council, planning commission, city manager, city clerk, director of community development, or city attorney, and such determination shall be conclusive.

Any fees charged by the recorder for recordation of the documents are to be borne by the property owner or developer. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.30 APPEALS
17.30.010 Appeal of director’s decision or determination.
Any written decision or determination of the director of the community development department in the interpretation and/or implementation of this title may be appealed to the planning commission. Such an appeal must be filed in writing with the secretary of the planning commission within 10 days of the date of the director’s decision or determination. In the event of an appeal, it shall be the duty of the secretary of the planning commission to forward all pertinent facts to the commission within 40 days of the filing of a written appeal. The commission shall conduct a public hearing pursuant to Chapter 17.25. At the public hearing the planning commission shall review the facts, and shall set forth its findings and its decision in a resolution of record. Thereafter, such decision shall govern, unless appealed to the city council. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.020 Appeal of planning commission action.
Any decision of the planning commission in granting or denying a variance or permit, or in interpreting a director’s action or determination shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in writing to the city council within 10 days of planning commission action. Furthermore, any action of the planning commission denying a proposed zoning amendment may be appealed in writing to the city council by any person within 10 days of planning commission action. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and the filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the planning commission action, until such time as the council has acted on the appeal. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.030 Council member’s request for review.
A member of the city council may file a written request for a review of any resolution approved or denied by the planning commission by filing a written request for review with the city clerk within 10 days of the planning commission action. There shall be no filing fee for the council member’s written request for review. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.040 Transmission of records.
Upon receipt of a written appeal filed with the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk, the director or the planning commission secretary, as applicable, shall transmit to the planning commission or the city council, as applicable, the director’s or planning commission’s complete record of the action or decision being appealed. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.050 Council to hold public hearing on appeal.
The city council shall conduct a public hearing as provided in Chapter 17.25 of this title within 40 days of the filing of a written appeal of a planning commission decision. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.060 Council recommendation and referral to planning commission.
The city council may approve, modify or disapprove any decision or action of the planning commission. Furthermore, the city council may refer any permit or variance request back to the planning commission for further consideration, if any modification is requested or required that was not previously considered by the planning commission.

The planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. However, failure of the planning commission to report within 40 days after the referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed a positive recommendation of the proposed modification. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.070 Council to announce findings and decision by resolution.
The city council shall announce its decision and findings by resolution within 40 days of receipt of a report from the planning commission or within 80 days from the date such matter was referred to the planning commission. Such resolution shall state findings supporting its decision upholding or denying the appeal. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.080 Decision of the council deemed final.
The action by the city council on appeals shall be by majority vote of the entire council and shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.30.090 Notice of council decision regarding appeals.
No later than 10 days following council action regarding an appeal, a copy of the resolution documenting the council’s action shall be mailed to the appellant, the applicant, and any other parties requesting notice of the action, and one copy of the resolution shall be forwarded to the secretary of the planning commission. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.35 EXPIRATIONS, TIME EXTENSIONS, AND PERMIT REVOCATION
17.35.010 Permit expiration.
A.    Any approved discretionary permit becomes null and void, if not legally exercised within the time specified in the approving letter or resolution or, if no specific expiration date is given in the approving letter or resolution, one (1) year from the date of the approving letter or resolution.

A discretionary permit is considered to be legally exercised, if a building permit necessary to construct the approved development, or establish the approved use has been issued prior to the expiration date, and work has progressed diligently toward the completion of the improvements authorized by the building permit and towards the establishment of the approved use. If no building permit is required, “legally exercised” shall mean that the approved use has been established and is operational and all required conditions of project approval are satisfied. Discretionary legislative actions, as defined in Chapter 17.105, are distinct from discretionary permits. The time limits established above for the timely implementation of approved discretionary permits do not apply to discretionary legislative actions.

B.     If a use is legally established under an administrative zoning permit, conditional use permit, minor conditional use permit, or adult entertainment permit, and the use is discontinued for any reason for a period of 12 consecutive months or more, the permit shall be deemed abandoned by the owner and given inactive status by the director, making it subject to revocation by reason of such inactivity. In the event that the permit is revoked, the use allowed under the permit may not be resumed without first obtaining a new administrative zoning permit, conditional use permit, minor conditional use permit, or adult entertainment permit, as applicable.

C.     Any specific plan or zone reclassification approved by the city council becomes null and void, if the conditions or requirements of approval are not met within the time specified in the approving ordinance or resolution, or, if no date is specified in the approving ordinance or resolution, within one (1) year from the date of approval by the city council. (Ord. 5018 § 5, 2015; Ord. 4984 § 12, 2013)

 

17.35.020 Time extensions.
Notwithstanding the expiration dates noted above in this chapter, and upon written request from the applicant prior to the expiration date, the decision-making body, as applicable, may extend the one (1) year time limit, or such other time restriction as specified in the letter or resolution approving the plan, permit, or variance. Such time extension may be approved by a letter in the case of an administrative zoning permit or site development plan; a resolution in the case of a conditional use permit, minor conditional use permit, adult entertainment permit, historic resource designation or variance; or a motion approved by the city council, in the case of a conditional approval of a specific plan or a zoning reclassification. Furthermore, the time extension may be approved without further public hearing. Such time extension may not exceed one (1) additional year, and may include such reasonable new conditions as the director or the planning commission, as applicable, may apply. No more than one (1) such extension may be granted. Decisions of the director and the planning commission regarding time extensions may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 4984 § 12, 2013)

 

17.35.030 Permit revocation.
After holding a public hearing in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.25, the planning commission may revoke or modify any approved discretionary permit for any of the following reasons:

A.    The approval was obtained by fraud;

B.     The approval is being, or has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation;

C.     The use for which the approval was granted is being, or has been, conducted in such a way as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 4984 § 12, 2013)

Chapter 17.40 ADMINISTRATIVE ZONING PERMIT
17.40.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of the administrative zoning permit is to establish a review process for development or uses that may have some limited impacts on surrounding properties and ensure that the proposed use or development applies with all applicable regulations. (Ord. 5018 § 7, 2015)

 

17.40.020 Applicability.
The following property improvements and land uses may be approved by an administrative zoning permit:

A.    Large family daycare homes in residential zones, in compliance with section 17.225.030.

B.     Outdoor dining areas in compliance with section 17.225.090.

C.     Fences, hedges, and walls that are higher than would otherwise be allowed, in instances where there is a legitimate need for a higher fence. In approving such fences, the director shall consider safety and sight distance requirements, in addition to aesthetics and input from affected adjoining property owners. Affected adjoining property owners shall be notified in writing at least ten days prior to the approval of any fence, hedge, or wall exceeding the height restrictions of the underlying zone.

D.    Roadside stands, in compliance with section 17.225.110.

E.     Kiosks, booths, and stands incompliance with section 17.130.250.

F.     A temporary shade structure, in compliance with section 17.225.160.

G.    Additional household pet or animal, in compliance with Chapter 17.205.

H.    Façade modifications for existing structures within the Downtown Master Plan Area. (Ord. 5072 § 7, 2018)

 

17.40.030 Application.
An application for an administrative zoning permit may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the property owner of the property for which the permit is requested, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.40.040 Authority to approve.
Administrative zoning permits and amendments thereto may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the director of community development. The director may, at his or her discretion, refer administrative zoning permits and amendments thereto to the planning commission, which may approve, conditionally approve, or deny such permits. Pursuant to Section 17.130.210, in no case shall a wall, fence or hedge be approved that would create a sight distance hazard. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.40.050 Notice of decision.
The applicant for an administrative zoning permit shall be notified in writing of the decision of the director to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit. In the event that the director refers the permit application to the planning commission, the applicant shall be notified in writing and the notice shall include the date and time of the planning commission meeting. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.40.060 Appeals.
The action of the director or the planning commission in approving, conditionally approving, or denying an administrative zoning permit may be appealed pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. Planning commission decisions shall include findings to support the issuance or denial of this permit consistent with Section 17.40.020. (Ord. 4984 § 14, 2013)

Chapter 17.45 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
17.45.010 Legislative findings.
The council makes the following legislative findings:

A.    The possession, display, exhibition, distribution and sale of books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities is a business that exists within the city.

B.     The operating and maintaining of places:

1.     Where parts of one person are treated or encountered by rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; or

2.     Presenting dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas are businesses that exist or may wish to locate within the city.

C.     When the activities detailed in subsections A and/or B are present in an area of the city, other activities tend to accompany them which are illegal, immoral or unhealthful, such as prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property, and these objectionable activities are recognized as particularly harmful when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas, including a decrease in property values, and an increase in urban blight and deterioration.

D.    When the activities detailed in subsections A and/or B are present in an area of the city in the vicinity of facilities frequented by minors, it is recognized that minors, because of their immaturity, will be exposed to adult entertainment material which may adversely affect them.

E.     The buildings and establishments in which these activities and business operations take place:

1.     Are conducive to and are often used for the commission of immoral, lewd, indecent or illegal acts; or

2.     Are often constructed, in part or in whole, of substandard materials or in disregard for the health and safety of patrons and customers.

F.     The business operations and activities mentioned in subsections A and B are commercial ventures, operated for the purpose of making a profit, and as such are proper subjects for regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment establishments within the city and more particularly:

A.    To protect property values;

B.     To prevent blight and the deterioration of the city’s neighborhoods;

C.     To enhance the quality of life in the city’s neighborhoods;

D.    To preserve and stabilize the city’s neighborhoods; and

E.     To decrease the incidents of crime and juvenile delinquency.

It is not the purpose of this chapter to establish community standards on obscenity. It is also not the purpose of this chapter to allow the establishment of adult entertainment activities, which are in violation of the laws of the state of California. These matters are preempted by the state and are subject to state regulation, and it is not the intent of the council to legislate with respect to preempted matters. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.030 Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the “Adult Entertainment Establishment Regulations Code.” (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.040 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Adult” means a person who has attained the age of at least eighteen years.

“Adult bookstore” means a use that devotes a regular and substantial portion of its business to the display and sale of the following:

Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, computer generated matter or other forms of visual or audio representations which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

An adult bookstore does not include an establishment that sells books, periodicals or films as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock-in-trade.

“Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, theater, restaurant or similar use which regularly features waiters, waitresses, bartenders, and/or live performers who expose specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons and/or regularly features live performances, or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic representations during which a substantial portion of the total performance or presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which has as its primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

“Adult drive-in theater” means an open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, and presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult entertainment activities” means:

1.     Adult bookstore;

2.     Adult cabaret;

3.     Adult drive-in theater;

4.     Adult gift shop;

5.     Adult hotel or motel;

6.     Adult mini-motion picture theater;

7.     Adult model studio;

8.     Adult motion picture arcade;

9.     Adult motion picture theater;

10.   Adult theater;

11.   Body painting studio;

12.   Sexual encounter studio or rap parlor; or

13.   Any establishment, other than those listed above in numbers 1 through 12, which offers its patrons services or entertainment, a substantial portion of which is devoted to the showing of material which has as its primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult entertainment establishment” means a place of business where one or more adult entertainment activities are conducted by an individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity.

“Adult gift shop” means a use that devotes a regular and substantial portion of its business to the display and sale of the following:    Instruments, devices, novelties, gifts or paraphernalia other than condoms, I.U.D.s, diaphragms or spermicidal foams, which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. An adult gift shop does not include a pharmacy licensed by the state of California.

“Adult hotel or motel” means a hotel, motel, inn or similar activity offering public accommodations, which does one or both of the following:

1.     Offers, for any form of consideration, closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction, illustration or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way or by means of off-premises advertising including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or television.

2.     Allows a tenant or occupant to rent a room for a period of less than ten hours.

“Adult model studio” means a use open to the public where, for any form of consideration, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons other than the proprietor. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established by the Education Code of the state of California for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized to issue and confer, a diploma.

“Adult motion picture theater” means an establishment, with a capacity of six or more persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown or maintained to be shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which has as its primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

“Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar activity, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Body painting studio” means a use, which regularly provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the human body, when specified anatomical areas of such body are exposed.

“Creation of an adult entertainment establishment” means:

1.     The opening or commencement of any such establishment as a new establishment;

2.     The conversion of an existing establishment, whether or not an adult entertainment establishment, to any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this chapter; or

3.     The relocation of any such establishment.

“Peep show arcade” means any establishment or portion of an establishment to which the public is permitted or invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated, electronic, electric or mechanical still picture machines, motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity.

“Public playground/park/recreation area” means an area to which the public, and particularly minors, come to participate in athletic or recreational activities, whether or not such activities are supervised or organized. Such areas include but are not limited to publicly owned and maintained parks, athletic fields, playgrounds, picnic areas, and minor-oriented recreation facilities such as the Boys’ and Girls’ Club, YMCA and YWCA.

“Religious facility” means an institution which people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term “religious facility” shall not carry a secular connotation, and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held.

“School” means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or which is maintained for preschool or day care services. This definition includes a day care center, nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university.

“Sexual encounter studio” or “rap parlor” mean an activity, other than a hotel, motel, inn or similar activity offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, regularly provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state of California engages in sexual therapy.

“Specified anatomical areas” mean:

1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitalia, pubic region, anus, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

2.     Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” mean:

1.     The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region, anus, or female breasts;

2.     Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, bestiality, or necrophilia;

3.     Masturbation, actual or simulated;

4.     Erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, masochism, mutilation, flagellation or the infliction of pain;

5.     Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the above activities.

“Substantial enlargement of an adult entertainment establishment” means an increase by more than fifty percent in the floor area occupied by the business as of the effective date of this section.

“Transfer of ownership or control of an adult entertainment establishment” means:

1.     The sale, lease or sublease of such establishment; or

2.     The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in such establishment, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

3.     The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of such establishment, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control.

(Ord. 4984 § 16, 2013; Ord. 4968 § 4, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.050 Adult entertainment permit required.
No person shall cause or permit the creation, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining and maintaining a valid, un-revoked adult entertainment permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.060 Adult entertainment permit.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the planning commission shall review the application to determine if the applicant has complied with the development standards set forth in this chapter. If the applicant has complied with such standards, the applicant shall be granted an adult entertainment permit. The required findings presented in Chapter 17.80 of this title relating to variances shall be of no force and effect when considering an application for an adult entertainment permit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.065 Administrative changes prohibited.
None of the provisions for a Minor Amendment in Chapter 17.57 or Substantial Conformance Review in Chapter 17.63 may be applied to an adult entertainment permit. (Ord. 4984 § 18, 2013)

 

17.45.070 Development standards—General and specific.
An application for an adult entertainment permit shall be granted by the planning commission upon a determination that all of the following standards have been met:

A.    The adult entertainment establishment shall be located within a permitted zone:

1.     Except as noted in subsection (A)(2), adult entertainment establishments may be located only within C-G zone and/or the C-R zone. No such establishment shall be permitted to locate in any area outside such zoning classifications.

2.     Adult bookstores may be located only within the C-G zone, the regional commercial C-R zone, and/or the C-N zone. No adult bookstore shall be permitted to locate in any area outside such zoning classifications.

B.     The adult entertainment establishment shall meet the following minimum spacing requirements:

1.     No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within one thousand feet of any other adult entertainment establishment.

2.     Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit an adult bookstore from providing an area where patrons may preview, at no charge, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes or records, as set forth in subsection (F)(2) below.

C.     The adult entertainment establishment shall meet the following minimum proximity requirements:

1.     No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within five hundred feet of any parcel of land zoned for residential use.

 

2.     No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within six hundred feet of any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land uses:

a.     Courthouse;

b.     Day nursery;

c.     Public playground/park/recreation area;

d.     Religious facility; or

e.     School.

 

3.     Nothing in this chapter prohibits the location of adult entertainment establishments within retail shopping centers in the above-specified commercial zones if such activities have their only frontage upon enclosed malls or malls isolated from direct view from public streets, parks, schools, religious facilities or residentially zoned property. However, the spacing requirements in subsection B above shall apply to adult businesses located within such a mall.

D.    The adult entertainment establishment shall be in substantial compliance with the requirements of all health and safety codes, including, but not limited to, the building code, fire code, electrical code, mechanical code and plumbing code. Unless delay is caused by refusal of applicant to schedule or permit timely inspection, substantial compliance shall be verified no later than 30 days following the application or the applicant shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with such requirements for the purposes of permit issuance.

E.     The adult entertainment establishment shall be in substantial compliance with the development standards for the commercial zone in which the establishment is to be located, and with the general provisions of Chapter 17.130 relating to development standards and of Chapter 17.190 relating to sign regulations, except that, to the extent that provisions of this chapter may conflict or be more restrictive, this chapter shall control.

F.     The adult entertainment establishment shall meet the following minimum specific standards:

1.     View of Interior From Public Way. All building openings, entries and windows in adult entertainment establishments shall be located, covered or screened to prevent an interior view from any public or semipublic area, including public sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways, of any material which has as its primary or dominant theme the depiction, illustration or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2.     Adult Peep Show Arcades—Adult Bookstores.

a.     If films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes and/or records are offered for sale, rent or viewing and if customers may preview, or view them while on the premises, all booths or rooms which are available for such use by customers shall conform to all of the following standards:

i.      All viewing areas must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure;

ii.     All viewing areas must contain sufficient chairs or other seating arrangements to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the area at one time;

iii.    No more than one person per 25 square feet of floor space shall be permitted within any booth or room; and

iv.    The number of persons who may occupy the booth or room at one time must be clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room, and no more than that number shall be permitted inside the booth or room at one time.

b.     No more than 20 percent of the total floor area of an adult bookstore may be used for booths or rooms described in subsection (a) of this section.

3.     Adult Gift Shops. The interior of adult gift shops shall be adequately lighted and constructed so that every portion of the premises is visible immediately upon entrance to the gift shop.

4.     Adult Cabarets. In addition to the standards in this chapter, each adult cabaret shall comply with each and every provision of Chapter 5.24 of this code. No person shall obtain an adult entertainment permit for an adult cabaret unless that person first or concurrently obtains a cabaret license under Chapter 5.24.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.080 Measure of distance.
Distance, without regard to intervening structures, shall be:

A.    A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any two adult entertainment establishments.

B.     A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of an adult entertainment establishment to the closest property line of a religious facility, courthouse, public playground/park/recreation area, school, or residential zone.

For the purposes of this section, the term “closest exterior structural wall” means the closest property line when applied to an adult drive-in theater or any other adult entertainment establishment without exterior structural walls. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.090 Abatement of nonconforming adult entertainment establishments.
A.    All adult entertainment establishments that were established prior to the adoption of this chapter that do not conform to all of the provisions of this chapter shall be brought into conformance or abated as provided in Chapter 17.120 (Non-conforming uses and structures) of this title.

B.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no adult entertainment establishment legally operating on May 12, 1981 shall be abated solely on the basis of its proximity to a parcel of land containing the following specific land uses:

1.     Residential;

2.     Religious facility;

3.     Courthouse;

4.     Public playground/park/recreation area;

5.     School;

6.     Another adult entertainment activity.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.100 Authority to approve.
The planning commission shall approve an adult entertainment permit for any use, business and/or activity which may involve the exercise of First Amendment rights, unless the use, business and/or activity is not in substantial compliance with the specific standards set forth in Section 17.45.070. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.110 Public hearing.
Within 14 days of the filing of an application for an adult entertainment permit by a property owner or his or her agent, or within 14 days of a determination by the planning commission that an adult entertainment permit should be modified, suspended, or revoked, the planning commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing pursuant to Chapter 17.25 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.120 Planning Commission—Findings and decision.
Within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall announce its findings and decision by resolution. Such resolution shall grant an application for an adult entertainment permit if the standards in Section 17.45.070 are met and shall deny an application for an adult entertainment permit if one or more of the standards in Section 17.45.070 are not met. Said resolution shall state the facts and findings supporting any modification, suspension or revocation of an existing adult entertainment permit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.130 Notice of decision.
Within five (5) days of the passage of a resolution as provided in Section 17.45.120, the secretary of the planning commission shall cause all of the following to be done on the same day:

A.    Notify the applicant of its action by mailing a copy of such resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon the application;

B.     File a copy of such resolution with the city clerk; and

C.     Forward a copy of such resolution to the city council. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.140 Adult entertainment permit—Grant or denial, modification, suspension or revocation.
The resolution of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.150 Hearing—Subpoena of witnesses.
The city clerk, at the request of the city manager, or upon his or her own initiative, or upon the written request of the applicant or permittee, shall issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses at an appeal hearing. Any person served with such subpoena shall attend such hearing. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.160 Hearing—Swearing of witnesses—Presentation of evidence.
At such hearing, the city council may, at its discretion, require witnesses to be sworn. The applicant or permittee, or his or her agent, may present evidence in support of the issuance or continuance of his or her permit. Any other person may, at the discretion of the city council, be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.170 Violation—Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.180 Violation—Each day deemed separate offense—Public nuisance.
Each person found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which a violation of any section of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable as provided above in Section 17.45.170. Any use or occupation of any building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.45.190 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason declared to be void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council hereby declares that it would have enacted this chapter regardless of the invalid or proscribed section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.50 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
17.50.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of a conditional use permit is:

A.    To ensure compatibility among existing and planned land uses in the vicinity of the proposed use;

B.     To recognize and compensate for potentially adverse impacts related to noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors and hazards or excessive concentration of traffic that may result from the establishment of the proposed use; and

C.     To ensure that the proposed use is in the best interest of public convenience and necessity, and not contrary to the public health or welfare. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.50.020 Permit required.
No use or structure listed in this title as requiring a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit shall be established, nor shall any building permit be issued that would facilitate the establishment of such a use or structure, until a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit is obtained by the owner of the property or building where such a use is proposed. In instances where the director determines that substantial research or analysis would not be required by staff to prepare the staff report and recommendation to the planning commission, the director may authorize a request for a use normally requiring a conditional use permit, to be processed as a minor conditional use permit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.50.030 Authority to apply.
An application for a conditional use permit may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the property owner of the property for which the conditional use permit is requested, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.50.040 Public hearing required.
Upon filing of a completed application, the secretary of the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.25 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.50.050 Authority to approve.
The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny conditional use permits and minor conditional use permits. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.50.060 Required findings.
Before any conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit may be approved, the decision-making body shall find that:

A.    The proposed use is consistent with applicable goals, policies, and programs of the general plan, and with any applicable specific plan;

B.     The proposed site plan and building design are consistent with all applicable use and development standards;

C.     The proposed use will be operated in a manner that is compatible with existing and planned land uses in the vicinity of the proposed use;

D.    The proposed use and project design will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare, including but not limited to matters of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, and hazards or excessive concentrations of traffic; and

E.     The proposed use is in the best interest of public convenience and necessity. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.50.070 Notice of decision.
After close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall announce its findings by resolution. Such resolution shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a conditional use permit. Said resolution shall state the facts and findings supporting such decision. Within five (5) of the passage of a resolution, the secretary of the planning commission shall cause all of the following to be done on the same day:

A.    Notify the applicant of the action taken, by mailing a copy of the resulting resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon the application;

B.     File a copy of such resolution with the city clerk;

C.     Forward a copy of such resolution to the city council; and

D.    Notify the county assessor as required by California Government Code Section 65863.5. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.50.080 Appeals.
The action of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.55 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
17.55.010 Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the “Historic Preservation Ordinance.” (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of reasonable and uniform regulations and procedures to allow for the identification and certification of appropriate historic resources within the city with the objective of preserving them whenever possible, and more particularly to preserve historic resources to:

A.    Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of historic resources that represent or reflect elements of the city’s cultural, social, architectural, political, and economic history;

B.     Preserve the heritage of the city by providing for the protection of its historic resources;

C.     Encourage public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the city’s history;

D.    Stabilize and improve property values and increase economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants;

E.     Foster civic pride in the character and accomplishments of the past;

 

F.     Promote the use of historic resources for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the city; and

G.    Strengthen the economy of the city by protecting and enhancing the city’s historic resources for residents, tourists, and visitors. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.030 Boundaries and scope of application.
This chapter applies to all resources, historic and potentially historic, publicly and privately owned, within the corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.040 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Alteration” means any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, of any historic resource including, but not limited to, exterior changes to or modification of a structure or any of its architectural details or visual characteristics, such as paint color and surface texture, and the placement or removal of any exterior objects such as signs, plaques and light fixtures substantially affecting the exterior historic qualities of the resource.

“Building” means a permanently located structure having a roof, including manufactured housing, but excluding all other forms of vehicles even though immobilized. Where these provisions require, or where special authority granted pursuant to this title requires that a use shall be entirely enclosed within a building, this definition shall be qualified by adding “and enclosed on all sides.”

“Certification of modification” means the permit granted after review by the historic preservation commission of applications to demolish, alter, relocate or remove a historic resource in accordance with and as provided by this chapter.

“Commission” means the historic preservation commission of the city of El Cajon established by this chapter.

“City council” or “council” means the city council of the city of El Cajon.

“Demolition” means an act or process that destroys or razes in whole or in part a building or structure or permanently impairs its structural integrity.

“Department staff” or “staff” means department of community development staff.

“Façade” means an exterior face or elevation of a building, often used to mean the front of the building, which may be distinguished from the other faces or elevations by elaboration of architectural or ornamental details.

“Fixture” means a decorative or functional device permanently affixed to a site or the exterior of a structure and contributing to its ability to meet historical designation criteria. Fixtures include, but are not limited to, lighting devices, murals, moldings, leaded glass or other decorative windows and decorative hardware.

“Historic resource” means any improvement, building, structure or feature, natural or manmade, that is historically significant to the cultural, social, architectural, political, and economic heritage of the city of El Cajon, the state of California, or the United States, and that has been designated as historically significant in the National Register of Historic Places, the state of California Register of Historical Resources, or this historic preservation ordinance.

“Historic resource preservation agreement” or “Mills Act agreement” means an agreement executed between the city and a property owner of an historic resource for a minimum ten-year term providing for property tax savings in exchange for preservation of a designated historic resource.

“Improvement” means any building or structure or other object affixed to and constituting a physical betterment of such property, or any part of such betterment.

“Inventory” means the Historic Preservation Inventory—El Cajon, California; prepared for the city in 1985 by SANDAG or any approved update thereof.

“Landscape feature” means any tree or other plant material that has been placed, planted or manipulated by man for cultural purposes.

“Owner” means the person or persons appearing on behalf of the resource and shown as the owner of the resource on the last equalized property tax assessment roll of the county of San Diego.

“Ordinary repairs and maintenance” means any:

1.     Work done on any improvement, building, or structure for which a certificate of modification is not needed.

2.     Replacement of any part of an improvement, building, or structure for which a permit issued by the building division is not required by law or where the purpose and effect of such work or replacement is to correct any deterioration, decay of, or damage to such improvement, building, or structure, or any part thereof, and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay, or damage.

“Person” means any individual, association, partnership, firm, corporation, public agency, or political subdivision.

“Preservation” means the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of historic resources.

“Removal” means the displacement from a historic resource of any device, feature, fixture, hardware, structural or decorative material contributing to the historic character of the resource or historic resource.

“Resource” means any improvement, building, structure or feature, natural or manmade that may have historic or cultural significance, but has not been so designated.

“Responsible party” means the individual who is doing the work or has hired the work done on a designated historical resource, particularly in the case when the department of community development does not require building permits for the work that is being done.

“Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation” means the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitations and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings by the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.050 Historic preservation commission.
Pursuant to this chapter, the planning commission shall sit as the historic preservation commission of the city. Items concerning historic preservation shall be placed on the planning commission’s regular agendas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.055 Powers and duties of the commission.
The commission shall have the power and duty to:

A.    Review and recommend action on the historic resource designation for an improvement, building, structure or feature;

B.     Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, an application for a certificate of modification regarding the demolition, alteration, or removal of a designated historic resource;

C.     Review and recommend action on requests for Mills Act agreements;

D.    Participate in the process of revising the historic element of the general plan of the city when necessary;

E.     Encourage cooperation between public and private historic preservation groups. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.060 Historic resource designation.
A.    Registration. The legal owner of any property, building, structure or improvement may request its designation as an historic resource by submitting an application for such designation to the department of community development in accordance with this chapter. The commission shall have the responsibility to review such requests at a public hearing and to make a recommendation to the city council as to whether the subject resource is historic or not. The commission shall prepare and transmit a report to the city council of the historical significance of the resource to be designated.

B.     Designation.

1.     Criteria. Criteria and standards for the designation of historic resources may include any or all of the following as applicable:

a.     Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, social, architectural, political, and economic history;

b.     Is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history;

c.     Embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period, or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship;

d.     Is representative of the notable work of an acclaimed builder, designer, or architect;

e.     Is identified with a person or persons or groups who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the city;

f.      Embodies elements of outstanding attention to architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship;

g.     Is found on the city’s historic preservation inventory (inventory); or

h.     Involves a structure, building or improvement constructed at least seventy-five years ago.

2.     Procedure. Historic resources shall be established in the following manner:

a.     Preparation. The application should be prepared by a qualified historic preservation specialist.

b.     Submit an Application. The commission, upon the submittal of an application from the legal property owner, may recommend the designation of any improvement, building, structure or feature, natural or manmade (resource) in the city as an historic resource. The historic resource designation application shall be submitted to the department of community development. It must include a minimum of the following items and information:

i.      Name and address of property owner;

ii.     Assessor’s parcel number and address of the site;

iii.    Chain of title and grant deed;

iv.    Description of the proposed resource, including special cultural, social, architectural, political, and economic value of a historic nature;

v.     Sketches, photographs or drawings and listing in the 1985 SANDAG Historic Preservation Survey for El Cajon;

vi.    Statement of condition of structures;

vii.   Explanation of any known threats to the improvement or the site;

viii.  Environmental information re-quested by department staff; and

ix.    Other information as requested or recommended by the department staff.

c.     Set the Date for a Public Hearing. When the application has been deemed complete by department staff, it will be placed on an agenda of the planning commission for a public hearing.

d.     Stop Construction Activity on the Subject Property. When the application (requesting consideration of a historic resource designation) has been accepted as complete and a public hearing date has been assigned (the filing date), the director of community development shall notify the building and fire safety division to accept no further applications for permits to construct, alter or demolish any building, structure, or improvement on the subject property nor to issue any permits that are based on applications made after the filing date, while proceedings are pending on such designation; provided, however, that after one hundred eighty days have elapsed from the date of the notice, if final action on such designation has not been completed, the permit application may be approved.

e.     Public Notice of the Public Hearing. Public notice shall be given, and a public hearing held pursuant to Chapter 17.25 of this title.

f.      Public Hearing. The commission shall provide an opportunity to be heard to each affected owner and other interested members of the public. The commission may, if necessary, continue the consideration of designation to its next regularly scheduled meeting.

g.     Report of Recommendations. The commission shall make its recommendation at the close of the hearing. The commission shall by resolution make a report and recommendation to the city council. If the commission determines that the improvement does not meet historic resource designation criteria, the process shall terminate and the commission shall notify the property owner and applicant of such termination in writing within 10 days of the commission’s determination. If the commission determines that the resource warrants historic resource designation and the property owner has consented to same in writing, then the commission shall adopt a resolution incorporating its reasons in support of the proposed designation and transmit the resolution, staff report and minutes to the city clerk.

h.     City Council Hearing. The city clerk, upon receipt of the resolution, shall set the matter for hearing by the city council within 30 days of the date of filing of the commission resolution and shall render its decision at the close of the hearing of the city council.

i.      Notice of Decision. Failure to send notice by mail to any affected owner where the address of such owner is not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. The commission and city council may also give such other notice, as they may deem desirable and practicable.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.070 Certificate of modification and permit procedures.
A.    Certificate of Modification. No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out on a designated historic resource any of the following activities without a certificate of modification: alteration to such buildings, structures, or improvements, or any part thereof, including construction, demolition, addition, or relocation.

1.     The director shall maintain a current record of designated historic resources and inventory. The department of community development shall require any building permit application on a designated historic resource to be accompanied by an application for a certificate of modification.

2.     If no permits are required by the department of community development to pursue work on a designated historic resource, the party who is doing the work or has hired the work to be done is the “responsible party” and is responsible for the work and its consequences to the designated historic resource. The responsible party shall apply for a certificate of modification prior to any work activity that would disturb said designated historic resource in any way (see Section 17.55.170(A) - Obligations and consequences upon alteration without a certificate of modification).

3.     It may be advisable to have a qualified historic preservation specialist involved in preparing the application. This will depend on the nature of the designated historic resource, the type and extent of the proposed work, and the applicant’s level of expertise in historic preservation.

4.     An application for a certificate of modification shall be filed with the department of community development. The application shall contain the following materials and information:

a.     A clear statement of the proposed work;

b.     Plans describing the size, height, and appearance of the proposed work;

c.     A site plan showing all existing buildings, improvements, landscape features and the proposed work;

d.     Other information deemed necessary by the department of community development.

B.     Exceptions to Requirements for a Certificate of Modification. The following items of construction, work or labor on a building, structure, or improvement shall not require a certificate of modification:

1.     Routine maintenance, which does not require a building permit.

2.     All alterations which are entirely interior and do not affect the exterior of the building, structure or improvement.

3.     Alterations in the interest of public health or safety as determined by the city manager or designee.

4.     Demolition in the interest of public health or safety as determined by the city manager or designee. Where it is determined by the city manager or designee, that demolition, removal or alteration of a designated historic resource is immediately necessary in the interest of the public health or safety, a demolition permit may be issued without the owner first obtaining a certificate of modification.

5.     Maintenance and Care.

a.     Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior feature of any designated historic resource that does not involve a change in design, material, color, or appearance thereof. Nothing in this article shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition of any such feature for which the building official shall certify is required for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.

b.     Affirmative Duty to Maintain. Every designated historic resource shall be maintained in good repair by the owner or such other person who has legal possession or control thereof, in order to preserve it against decay and deterioration to the extent practicable.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.080 Notice and public hearing upon application for a certificate of modification.
Within 30 days of the filing of a complete application for a certificate of modification or of a determination by the historic preservation commission that a certificate of modification should be modified, suspended, or revoked, a public hearing date shall be set, public notice shall be given, and a public hearing held by the commission pursuant to Chapter 17.25 of this title. The range of actions the historic preservation commission may take, as well as the criteria the commission must use, are listed below:

A.    The commission shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny each application in writing by resolution, stating the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision.

B.     The commission or the city council, upon appeal, shall issue a certification of modification for the proposed work if, and only if, it determines:

1.     The action proposed is consistent with the purposes of this chapter;

2.     The action proposed is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation; or

3.     The action proposed will not be detrimental to a structure or feature of significant historical value; or

4.     In the case of construction of a new improvement, building or structure, that the exterior of such improvements will not adversely affect and will be compatible with the external appearance of the building or structure; or

5.     The applicant has demonstrated that the action proposed is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.090 Historic preservation commission—Findings and decision.
Within 40 days of the close of the public hearing, the historic preservation commission shall announce its findings by resolution. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.100 Notice of decision of historic preservation commission.
Within 10 days of the passage of a resolution, as described in Section 17.55.090, by the historic preservation commission, the commission shall on the same date:

A.    Notify the applicant of the commission’s action by mailing a copy of the resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon the application; and

B.     File a copy of the resolution with the city clerk. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.110 Appeal of historic preservation commission decision.
The resolution of the historic preservation commission shall be final and conclusive, unless a written appeal is filed with the city clerk no later than 10 days after the actions required in Section 17.55.100 are satisfied, or a written request for review of such action is filed with the city clerk by a member of the city council. The filing of an appeal or request for review shall stay the effective date of such determination or order until such time as the council has acted on the appeal as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.120 Transmission of historic preservation commission’s record to council.
Upon receipt of a written appeal filed with the city clerk as provided herein, or filing of a written request for review by a member of the city council, the complete historic preservation commission record of the case shall be transmitted to the city clerk. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.130 Council to hold public hearing on appeal.
The city council shall conduct a public hearing as provided in Chapter 17.25 of this title within 40 days of the occurrence of any of the following:

A.    The filing of a written appeal from a resolution of the historic preservation commission granting, denying or modifying an application for a certificate of modification; or

B.     The filing of a written request for review by a member of the city council of a resolution of the historic preservation commission granting, denying or modifying a certificate of modification. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.140 Council recommendation—Referral to historic preservation commission.
The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the historic preservation commission, provided that any modification of the proposed certificate of modification by the city council not previously considered by the historic preservation commission during its hearing may be referred to the commission for report and recommendation, but the commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the commission to report within 40 days after the date of the referral shall be deemed to be a positive recommendation of the proposed modification. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.150 Council to announce findings and decision by resolution.
The city council shall announce its decision and findings by resolution within 30 days of the close of the hearing. Such resolution shall state findings supporting the council’s decision granting, denying, modifying, suspending or revoking such certificate of modification. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.160 Decision of the council deemed final.
The action by the city council on appeals shall be by majority vote of the entire council and shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.170 Enforcement and penalties.
A.    Obligations and Consequences Upon Alteration Without a Certificate of Modification.

1.     Demolition, relocation, significant alteration, or removal of any building, structure, or improvement subject to the provisions of this chapter without first obtaining a certificate of modification may result in the charge of an infraction or a misdemeanor, subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010. Such action is further expressly declared to be a nuisance, and shall be abated by reconstructing or restoring the property to its original condition prior to the performance of work in violation of this article whenever possible. The owner of the property, within 30 days of notice from the director of community development that demolition, relocation, significant alteration, or removal has been performed in violation of this chapter, shall execute and record a covenant in favor of the city to do such reconstruction or restoration within one (1) year of the date of such notice. The form of the covenant shall be subject to approval by the city attorney, and shall run with the land. Upon application to the commission for a certificate of modification, the commission may extend the time for correction, if the owner shows the work cannot reasonably be performed within one (1) year.

2.     For purposes of this section, the demolition shall be presumed to have occurred on the date the city has actual knowledge of the demolition, and the owner shall have the burden of proving an earlier date, if entitlement to an earlier date is claimed.

3.     The director shall cause notice of the applicability of this section to be sent by certified mail to the person shown as the owner on the rolls of the latest equalized assessment roll of the county assessor, and to any other person known to have an interest in the property, as soon as practicable after having knowledge that the provisions of this section are applicable to the property. The date the city first had actual knowledge of the demolition shall be stated in the notice.

B.     Consequences for Failure to Maintain. If the owner refuses upon 30 days’ written notice from the city to correct or undertake the maintenance of a building, structure, or improvement, then the city may cause such repair or work to be done, and the owner shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred in doing such work. The cost of the work performed by the city shall constitute a lien against the property on which the work is performed. Restoration or reconstruction may only be required when plans or other evidence is available to effect the reconstruction or restoration to the satisfaction of the director of community development.

C.     Appeal of Decision. The decision of the director that this section is applicable to property may be appealed by the affected owner to the commission, which shall hold a hearing and render a decision on such appeal within 30 days of its filing with the department of community development. The decision of the commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedures for appeal of a denial of a certificate of modification in Section 17.55.110.

D.    Remedies are Cumulative. The remedies available to the city are cumulative. The city’s exercise of civil remedies shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal prosecution and penalty. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.180 Certificate of modification revocation.
The historic preservation commission shall, after a public hearing held in the manner prescribed in Sections 17.55.080 through 17.55.160 of this chapter, modify, suspend or revoke any certificate of modification if it is being or recently has been, exercised contrary to its terms or conditions, or in violation of this or any other title of this code, or in violation of any other ordinance of the city. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.190 Historic resource preservation (Mills Act) agreement procedures.
To make historic preservation incentives available to El Cajon residents, the city council authorizes the use of contracts pursuant to California Government Code Section 50280 et seq., alternately known as “Historical Property Contracts” or the “Mills Act”. Such contracts may be entered into at the sole discretion of the city council based on the recommendations of the historic preservation commission in a form to be approved by the city attorney. The intent of such contracts shall be the continued preservation of historical resources.

A.    Prior to submitting an application for a historic resource preservation agreement, the owner shall schedule a pre-application review conference with the department of community development. The purpose of the pre-application review conference is to ensure that mandatory terms of the agreement are understood and that the minimum submittal requirements are met.

B.     Once an application has been determined to be complete, the staff shall forward it to the historic preservation commission to review at a noticed public hearing pursuant to Section 17.55.080. The historic preservation commission shall consider the proposed list of improvements, make recommendations for amendments to the list, and shall make a recommendation to the city council regarding the proposed list of improvements.

C.     Following receipt of the historic preservation commission recommendation, the city council shall consider the historic resource preservation agreement along with the list of recommended improvements at a noticed public hearing. The city council will be provided with information regarding the estimated fiscal impact as a result of the Mills Act designation.

D.    After conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the request.

E.     Once the historic preservation agreement has been approved by the city council, the agreement shall be executed by the property owner(s) and the city. No later than 30 days after the agreement is properly executed, the city clerk shall forward the agreement to the county recorder’s office for recording. The recorded copy will be returned to the city for submission to the county tax assessor’s office for implementation. In accordance with said law, no properly executed Mills Act agreement may take effect until it has been recorded and submitted to the county tax assessor’s office. All approved agreements must be executed on or before December 1st of each year in order to take effect for the following property tax year.

F.     The Mills Act agreements shall be administered as set forth in Sections 50280 et seq., of the California Government Code and Sections 439.2 et seq., of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.55.200 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason declared to be void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council hereby declares that it would have enacted this chapter regardless of the invalid or proscribed section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.57 MINOR AMENDMENT
17.57.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of the minor amendment review process is to accommodate minor changes exceeding a level of refinement but less than that which would benefit from public review or a full administrative review process to provide reasonable flexibility in responding to changing markets and regulations. (Ord. 4984 § 19, 2013)

 

17.57.020 Definition.
A minor amendment means an administrative process to accommodate minor physical changes to an existing project, provided that proposed changes do not raise significant new issues or create significant effects, and, cumulatively, the changes would not result in a substantial alteration and are offset by substantial, alternative benefits. These changes must be consistent with the intent and character of the approved project entitlement plan. (Ord. 4984 § 19, 2013)

 

17.57.025 Thresholds, guidelines and measuring criteria.
A.    An increase in floor area up to 10 percent of the entitled building area or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less, may be approved.

B.     A reduction in the minimum required parking up to 10 percent may be approved, provided that an equivalent amount of parking is available along the project’s frontage of a public street, and if the reduction is offset by a substantial alternative benefit in project quality.

C.     A reduction in required landscape area up to 10 percent may be approved, provided remaining landscape areas are substantially enhanced and water use reduction measures implemented, if the reduction is offset by a substantial, alternative benefit in project quality.

D.    No increase nor decrease in housing density may be approved.

E.     Other changes may be approved if minor in scope as determined by the director.

F.     The director of community development shall prepare guidelines and measuring criteria to provide the framework within which to establish applicability, eligibility and decision-making guidance in administering the minor amendment process. The director shall forward the guidelines and measuring criteria to the Planning Commission as information and input upon initial preparation. Any changes thereafter shall be presented and reviewed pursuant to Section 17.10.030. (Ord. 5018 § 11, 2015)

17.57.030 Authority to apply.
An application for a minor amendment may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the property owner for which the development entitlement is applicable, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4984 § 19, 2013)

 

17.57.040 Authority to approve.
Minor Amendments may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the director of community development. The director may, at his or her discretion, decide that the minor amendment warrants a formal amendment of the governing entitlement. (Ord. 4984 § 19, 2013)

 

17.57.050 Notice of decision.
The applicant for a minor amendment shall be notified in writing of the decision of the director to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit. In the event that the director decides that a formal amendment of the governing entitlement is warranted, the applicant shall also be notified in writing. (Ord. 4984 § 19, 2013)

 

17.57.060 Appeals.
The action of the director in approving, conditionally approving, or denying a minor amendment may be appealed pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4984 § 19, 2013)

Chapter 17.58 MINOR USE PERMIT
17.58.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent of a minor use permit is to allow for a non-public hearing permit review process for certain uses that do not have the level of intensity of use to warrant a formal public hearing, but does require discretionary review, findings to be made, and the application of conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.020 Guidelines and measuring criteria.
The director of community development shall prepare guidelines and measuring criteria to provide the framework within which to establish applicability, eligibility and decision-making guidance in administering the minor use permit process. The director shall forward the guidelines and measuring criteria to the Planning Commission as information and input upon initial preparation of the guidelines and criteria. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.030 Authority to apply.
An application for a minor use permit may be filed with the director of community development by the property owner, or property owner’s agent, for the property for which the minor use permit is requested. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.040 Authority to approve.
Minor use permits may be approved, denied or conditionally approved by the director of community development. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.050 Required findings.
Before any minor use permits may be approved or denied, the director of community development shall find that:

 

A.    The proposed use is consistent with applicable goals, policies, and programs of the general plan, and with any applicable specific plan;

B.     The proposed site plan and building design are consistent with all applicable use and development standards;

C.     The proposed use will be operated in a manner that is compatible with existing and planned land uses in the vicinity of the proposed use;

D.    The proposed use and project design will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare, including but not limited to matters of noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibrations, odors, and hazards or excessive concentrations of traffic; and

E.     The proposed use is in the best interest of public convenience and necessity. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.060 Notice required.
Ten (10) day public notice shall be mailed to all property owners within a 300-foot radius of the subject site. The notice shall include a map, brief description and other pertinent information. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.070 Notice of decision.
The applicant for a minor use permit shall be notified in writing of the decision of the director to approve, conditional approve or deny the minor use permit with reference to the findings. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.080 Conditions of approval.
The director may impose conditions of approval in order to ensure a proposed use is compatible with and to prevent it from becoming a nuisance. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.090 Appeals.
Any decision made by the director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

 

17.58.100 Permit revocation.
Any violations of the terms or conditions of approval of a minor use permit may be grounds for its immediate revocation upon notice to the applicant. (Ord. 5033 § 10, 2015)

Chapter 17.60 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) PERMIT
17.60.010 Intent and purpose.
It is intended that a planned unit development (PUD) permit will reflect comprehensively planned development and encourage imaginative planning and design elements that specifically relate to the topography and the natural characteristics of the site, as well as the scale, density, and type of development in the surrounding area. Greater flexibility in design and building relationships may be permitted in a PUD than would otherwise be permitted within the usual requirements of the zoning and subdivision titles of the municipal code. A PUD permit may be approved in any zone. All requirements of the underlying zone shall be satisfied, except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.020 Authority to apply.
An application for a PUD permit may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the property owner of the property for which the permit is requested, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.030 Permit application requirements.
At a minimum, the following items shall be submitted with a completed application for a planned unit development permit:

A.    The application shall include a site plan. The proposed site plan for a PUD shall accurately depict all proposed buildings, streets, drive ways, drive aisles, parking areas, landscaped areas, recreational areas and open spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to a standard engineering or architectural scale and shall include accurate dimensions. The information shown on the proposed PUD site plan shall be consistent with the information shown on the proposed tentative map. Any proposed phasing shall be indicated on the proposed site plan.

B.     The application shall include scaled building elevations and a building materials sample and color board. At least one set of building elevations shall be colored to indicate the proposed color scheme of the PUD.

C.     The application shall include scaled floor plans for all structures in the PUD. Multiple structures with identical floor plans may be depicted on the same set of floor plans.

D.    The application shall include copies of a tentative subdivision map or a tentative parcel map, as appropriate. The tentative map shall be filed concurrently with the proposed site plan for the PUD and shall comply with the State Subdivision Map Act and the city’s subdivision ordinance. The information shown on the proposed tentative map shall be consistent with the information shown on the proposed site plan. Any proposed phasing shall be indicated on the proposed tentative map. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.040 Permit processing.
Except as indicated in this chapter, PUD permits and amendments thereto, shall be processed in the same manner as described in Chapter 17.20 for a Zoning Code amendment. A noteworthy difference is that while a Zoning Code amendment is approved as an ordinance, a PUD permit is approved by a city council resolution. If a proposed PUD permit and tentative map are approved by the city council, a final revised PUD site plan shall be submitted to the planning division and shall reflect all required revisions and refinements of the approved PUD permit. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.050 Authority to approve.
The planning commission may recommend approval, or conditional approval of a PUD to the city council. Alternatively, the planning commission may deny a request for a PUD. The decision of the planning commission to deny a PUD is final, unless appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.30. The city council’s decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a proposed PUD is final. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.060 Required findings.
Before any PUD permit may be approved, the city council shall find that:

A.    The density of the proposed PUD is consistent with the general plan.

B.     The approval of any alternative development standards for the proposed PUD is in the public interest.

C.     The proposed PUD is compatible with surrounding development.

D.    The location of structures, private streets, driveways, and parking spaces on the proposed PUD site plan will not result in unauthorized parking which would block or hamper vehicular movement or unnecessarily affect visibility on the private street or driveway. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.070 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses.
Unless specifically prohibited elsewhere in this title, any use permitted or conditionally permitted in the underlying zone district may also be permitted or conditionally permitted in a PUD. A PUD does not change the underlying zone; it provides flexibility in the application of the usual development standards. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.080 District requirements.
There are no separate district requirements in a planned unit development. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.090 Lot requirements.
A.    Lots. The minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the underlying zone district shall apply to the overall PUD.

B.     Sublots. A PUD may contain sublots of any reasonable lot area, width, or configuration as determined in conjunction with approval of a PUD site plan.

C.     Subdivision Map. A tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map which covers the exact boundaries of the PUD and indicates all sublots shall be approved and a final map recorded pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision title of the city. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.100 Density.
A.    The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a PUD shall be determined by the density requirements of the underlying zone. This figure is determined by dividing the net lot area by the density factor of the underlying zone. The density factor is included in each zone and is stated as the amount of land area per dwelling unit. Any fractional number of dwelling units shall be rounded down to the next whole number.

 

B.     When a PUD consists of property in more than one underlying zone, the maximum number of dwelling units shall be the total of the dwelling units permitted by each of the underlying zones. The dwelling units in a PUD in more than one zone may be distributed without regard to the boundaries of the underlying zoning districts, if the city council makes the following findings:

1.     The density transfer is compatible with existing development in the surrounding area.

2.     The density transfer is consistent with the general plan.

C.     When calculating net lot area, all dedications for public streets along the exterior boundaries of the PUD shall be excluded. The rights-of-way of public or private streets and driveways within the PUD boundaries shall be included in the net lot area calculation. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.110 Setbacks.
A.    Building or portion of a building other than a front-entry garage or carport: a minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way of a public street or a private street or driveway. All other setbacks for a building or portion of a building, other than a front-entry garage or carport, may be established as part of project approval and which are based upon the California Building Code, project design and the relation of buildings to each other, to project topography and to surrounding development.

B.     Front-entry garage or carport (public street): a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way of a public street.

C.     Front-entry garage or carport (private street or driveway): a minimum of 20 feet from the edge of the private street or driveway, unless the city council finds that a reduction in the setback will not result in unauthorized parking behind the garage(s) or carport(s) which would block or hamper vehicular movement or unnecessarily affect visibility on the private street or driveway. The following issues shall be considered in making a determination to allow a reduced setback for front-entry garages or carports from a private street or driveway:

1.     The length of a private street or driveway;

2.     The overall project density and design;

3.     Whether the private street or driveway provides a direct connection between public streets or high traffic volume private streets;

4.     The provision for automatic garage door openers; and

5.     The provision of adequate space for the collection of individual trash and recycling containers that does not obstruct private streets, driveways, or garage entrances.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.120 Placement of buildings.
The regulations for the placement of buildings are as follows:

A.    Distance Between Buildings. The distance between any building used for human habitation and any other building on that same lot or sublot shall not be less than 10 feet.

B.     Combinations of Buildings Permitted. The city council, may allow two (2) or more buildings or portions of buildings to be attached without observing the usual building separation requirements as long

        as the resultant structure complies with the California Building Code and the California Fire Code. (Ord. 4984 § 21, 2013)

 

17.60.130 Lot coverage.
The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed the lot coverage limitations of the underlying zone, except in those zones where streets and driveways are usually counted as lot coverage, 100 percent of the area devoted to private driveways serving individual dwelling units and 50 percent of the area devoted to common driveways or streets, including public or private streets that are within the exterior boundaries of the PUD, shall not be counted in the lot coverage computations. If a PUD is in more than one underlying zone, the lot coverage limitations of each underlying zone shall be respected for the portions of the PUD in that zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.140 Building height.
The maximum building height shall not exceed the height limitations of the underlying zone. If a PUD is in more than one underlying zone, the building height limitations of each underlying zone shall be respected for the portions of the PUD in that zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.150 Parking.
A.    A minimum of two (2) covered parking spaces (garage or carport) shall be required for each dwelling unit in a residential zoning district.

B.     Such covered parking spaces (garage or carport) shall at all times be kept free, clear and unobstructed and used for only the purpose of parking motor vehicles. It is intended that such parking be available for only the use of the residents on the site. The conversion of required covered parking spaces (garage or carport) to any use other than the parking of motor vehicles shall be prohibited.

C.     Other Parking Requirements for Residential Units in All Residential Zoning Districts.

1.     Additional parking for residents and/or visitors shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) parking space for every dwelling unit. One (1) of the required additional parking spaces may be located in the private driveway providing access to the required covered parking spaces for an individual dwelling unit, if there is at least a 20-foot setback between the covered parking space and the right-of-way of a public street or the edge of the private street or driveway closest to the covered parking space. Any sidewalk located along a private street or driveway shall be counted as part of the private street for the purpose of measuring such a setback from a required covered parking space. In no case shall a parking space be allowed to overhang an adjacent walkway or sidewalk. All other parking spaces pursuant to this subsection must be located in parking areas that are conveniently located near the units they are intended to serve. The parking areas shall be located so as to not interfere with on-site circulation.

2.     Notwithstanding the above, these additional parking spaces may be provided as parallel parking spaces located on the private street or driveway in accordance with Section 17.60.200(B)(6).

 

3.     Supplemental parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of one-half parking space per dwelling unit with any fraction rounded up for all projects of up to 20 units. For those projects with more than 20 units, additional supplemental parking spaces at a ratio of one-quarter parking space per dwelling unit over 20 shall be provided and any fraction rounded up.

These spaces may be used for RVs, trailers, boats, additional resident or visitor parking, or a combination thereof, as approved in conjunction with a planned unit development.

Supplemental parking spaces shall be located in a parking area that is conveniently located. If the supplemental parking area or portion thereof is used for the storage of RVs, trailers, etc., it must be adequately screened from view by the use of view-obscuring fences, walls or landscaping. The location of all parking spaces shall be designated on the final site plan required by Section 17.60.200(F) and reflected in the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) required by Section 17.60.260 of this chapter.

D.    Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Parking as required by the underlying zone. (Ord. 5018 § 13, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.160 Trash collection.
The type of trash collection service (individual or common trash area) shall be determined at the time of project approval. If a common trash area is used, accommodation of recycling containers shall be provided. If individual trash collection service is provided, the applicant shall provide an area for the storage of individual trash containers at each unit and shall designate that location on the PUD site plan. The storage of individual trash containers may be permitted in private garages. However, the area dedicated to the storage of trash containers shall not be located within the area of the private garage that is required for vehicle parking. Furthermore, the area dedicated to the storage of individual trash containers shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and from all common areas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.170 Walls and fencing.
A.    Parking Areas. All open parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces that are not effectively screened from abutting residentially developed or residentially zoned property by permanent buildings or a 20-foot wide landscaped setback area, shall contain a six-foot-high solid masonry wall between the parking area and the residential property.

If the parking area is visible from a street, either public or private, it shall be screened from the street by a 42-inch high solid masonry wall that is at least 10 feet from the exterior property line or private street right-of-way or by the use of alternative screening methods as approved by the city council.

The screening wall for parking areas visible from a public or private street is not required, if the parking area is screened from the street with a landscaped area that is at least 20 feet in depth. No screening wall is required when the wall would be adjacent and parallel to the length of a parking space.

B.     Project Boundary Fence or Wall. The city council may require the construction of a six-foot high project boundary fence or wall. The intent of such a fence or wall is to provide separation from, or protection of, adjacent properties. The type of required fence or wall shall be determined in conjunction with the approval of the permit.

C.     Private Yard Fencing. The fencing of private yards may be required. The type and maximum height of such fencing will be determined in conjunction with site plan approval.

 

D.    Reduction in Height of Wall or Fence. Walls or fences shall not exceed 42 inches in height within the area corresponding to the required exterior yard setback of any abutting residentially zoned or residentially developed property or any commercially zoned property developed with a setback.

E.     Under no circumstances shall any fence, wall or hedge, regardless of its location, block pedestrian or vehicular visibility for safe circulation. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.180 Open space, recreational areas and landscaping.
A.    Residential Development.

1.     Common Open Space and Recreational Areas. Open space and recreational areas especially designed for common use, either for active recreational use or passive scenic view and which may include private front yards, which are part of a common landscape easement, but which may not include any other private yards, patios or distances between buildings, shall be provided based upon the density of the project as shown on the following table, and except as provided in subdivision (2) of this subsection.

Range of Dwelling Units per Net Acre

Amount of Common Open Space or Recreational Area

3 or less

1000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

4-10

400 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

11 or more

225 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

Recreational areas, meeting these requirements and designed for active recreational uses, may be placed upon roofs of buildings or structures. Recreational areas so placed shall not contribute to lot coverage requirements.

Active recreation area means an area that is dedicated to active play, including where turf may provide a playing surface. Examples of active recreation areas include sports fields, playground and play areas, swimming pools, skating rings, skate parks, outdoor theaters, gymnasiums, and similar. Specific examples include those such as basketball, volleyball, tennis, bocce ball courts, and tot-lots.

Passive recreation area means a landscaped recreational area where turf is present but does not provide an active playing surface. Examples of passive recreation areas include picnic and barbecue areas, and areas dedicated for outdoor relaxation and reflection.

2.     Private rear yards, for individual dwelling units in projects of 11 or more units and which have minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 10 feet (100 square feet minimum), may be counted as satisfying up to 50 percent of the common open space/recreational area required in subdivision (1) of this subsection. Private rear yards in projects of 10 units or less may satisfy 100 percent of the common open space/recreational area requirement, subject to the approval of the city council.

3.     The preservation of scenic natural areas, such as rock outcroppings, creeks, wooded areas, vistas or other features worthy of preservation, may be required in conjunction with approval of a planned unit development permit.

4.     Common open space and recreational areas shall be accessible to all dwelling units.

 

5.     Landscaping shall form a continuous area between and around all buildings and shall be permanently maintained, including a permanent underground irrigation system.

6.     At no time shall any open space or recreational area constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard or create a drainage problem.

B.     Nonresidential Development. In addition to the required landscaped and open space areas of the underlying zone district, additional landscaping shall be provided at a ratio of one square foot for each 10 square feet of gross building floor area as measured at the ground level only. It is intended that this ad-ditional landscaping be generally dispersed throughout the site, but where possible, it should be placed near each main entrance.

C.     Detailed landscaping and irrigation plans, prepared by a registered landscape architect, shall be required as a condition of approval for all projects, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.195 of this title. The landscaping and irrigation plans shall indicate the type, size, and number of all plants, and shall be designed to provide a permanent underground irrigation system, served by a dedicated water meter. (Ord. 5033 §§ 11, 12, 2015; Ord. 5018 § 15, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.190 Signs.
See Chapter 17.190 for sign provisions. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.200 Streets and driveways.
A.    Private streets and driveways may be permitted within a planned unit development provided that engineering calculations for the private street or driveway pavement section are submitted and approved and which justify:

1.     The proposed private street or driveway width and geometric design, which have been related to function, topography and density; and

2.     The proposed private street or driveway structural design, which is related to soils conditions and traffic volumes. Maintenance responsibilities for a private street or driveway must be assumed by a homeowner’s association.

B.     The following criteria shall be utilized to determine the widths of private streets and driveways:

1.     A private street or driveway serving no more than two (2) dwelling units shall have a minimum paved width of 16 feet, if the private street or driveway length is 150 feet or less, or shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet, if the private street or driveway length is greater than 150 feet.

2.     A private street or driveway serving from three (3) to five (5) dwelling units shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet, if the private street or driveway length is 150 feet or less, or shall have a minimum paved width of 22 feet, if the private street or driveway length is greater than 150 feet.

3.     A private street or driveway serving six (6) or more dwelling units shall have a minimum paved width of 22 feet, if the private street or driveway length is 150 feet or less, or shall have a minimum paved width of 24 feet, if the private street or driveway length is greater than 150 feet.

Note: The length of a private street or driveway shall be that distance measured from the exterior or front property line of the project to the parking space(s) that is (are) most distant and served by the private street or driveway. In the case of a circular or loop street, the length is the total distance along the center line of the circular or loop street from the exterior or front property line of the project.

4.     All private streets and driveways shall be unobstructed for their entire length and shall provide a minimum 13.5 feet of unobstructed vertical clearance.

5.     Any private street or driveway used as the backup or egress from any open/uncovered parking space(s) or covered (garage or carport) parking space(s) shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide for the entire width of the parking space(s) plus four (4) feet on either side of the entire width of the parking space(s).

6.     Parallel on-street visitor or guest parking spaces may be permitted on either or both sides of a private street or driveway 24 feet in width as long as the visitor parking spaces are staggered along the length of the private street or driveway so as to not be opposite one another and as long as the width of the private street or driveway is increased by four (4) feet for a minimum length of 35 feet for one visitor or guest parking space and 25 feet for each additional and adjacent visitor or guest parking space.

C.     Public streets shall be designed to comply with the city’s street improvement standards.

D.    Adequate on-site turnarounds shall be provided as determined by the fire department.

E.     Sanitary sewers and storm drains in private streets or driveways may be permitted, but shall be constructed to meet city standards. The maintenance of these private systems must be assumed by a homeowner’s association.

F.     The project engineer shall certify that the private streets or driveways have been constructed in accordance with the previously approved engineering design and calculations prior to the occupancy of any dwelling unit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.210 Pedestrian walkways.
A.    Concrete sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to all on-street parking areas, shall connect all building entrances, recreational buildings and parking, and shall have a minimum unobstructed width of four feet.

B.     The width of any planned hiking, equestrian and/or bicycle paths shall be determined in conjunction with the approval of the planned unit development site plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.220 Lighting.
An on-site lighting plan for all parking areas, pedestrian walkways and common open space/recreation areas shall be required. Such plan shall provide adequate lighting for pedestrian and vehicular safety and be sufficient to minimize security problems. However, in no case shall the lighting on one property create a nuisance on any other property. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.230 Utilities.
All utility distribution lines within a planned unit development (PUD) shall be placed underground. Those utility distribution lines along the perimeter of a PUD shall be undergrounded as required by the subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.240 Building construction requirements.
A.    Separation walls. All separation walls, floors and ceilings shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Code and California Fire Code.

B.     Utility system. Except as otherwise provided in the case of the conversion of an existing development to condominium, a stock cooperative, or other common interest development as described in sections 17.60.290 through 17.60.360, a separate utility system will be required for water, electric, gas, waste and vent services for each occupancy. The systems shall be installed and operated pursuant to the applicable requirements and procedures of each utility or agency providing the services. (Ord. 4968 § 6, 2011)

 

17.60.250 Architectural compatibility.
A.    The architecture and design of a PUD shall be compatible with the terrain and existing surrounding development and shall be evaluated for conformance with the guidelines provided in Chapter 17.180.

B.     The architecture and design will be considered along with the project site plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.260 Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs).
When a planned unit development includes any land or improvements intended for common ownership and/or common maintenance including streets, driveways, parking areas, landscaping, fences, walls, buildings, utilities, recreational facilities or open space, the applicant shall submit proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions which shall run with the land and which clearly set forth both the privileges and responsibilities involved in the common ownership and/or maintenance. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and the director of community development prior to the issuance of a building permit. A recorded copy of the approved covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be submitted to the city prior to the sale of any unit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.270 Guarantee of performance of required private and public improvements.
A.    Private improvements in single-phase projects. The developer of a planned unit development shall complete the installation of all private improvements and any other private work required by the city in accordance with the final site plan prior to final occupancy clearance of all units when the project is developed in a single phase or when all building permits are issued simultaneously.

B.     Private improvements in multi-phased projects. If a project consists of more than one phase, or if all building permits are not issued simultaneously, or if a single-phase project is changed to more than one phase, the developer of the planned unit development shall enter into an agreement with the city to guarantee the installation and completion of all private improvements and any other private work required by the city in accordance with the final site plan. The agreement shall be in the form of either:

1.     Bonding. A bond guaranteeing faithful performance of the agreement and guaranteeing payment for labor and materials; or

2.     Trust agreement. A trust agreement evidencing that the estimated cost of the work or improvements has been deposited with an approved trustee.

C.     In order to determine the amount of the bond or trust agreement, the developer shall submit separate cost estimates for each of the following private improvements:

1.     Street and driveway paving, curbs, sidewalks, drainage structures and improvements, sewers, lighting, street signs;

2.     All landscaping, including irrigation systems;

3.     Undergrounding of utilities;

4.     Visitor parking areas; and

5.     Common recreational facilities.

 

D.    Public Improvements in All Projects. The developer of a planned unit development shall enter into an agreement with the city whereby, in consideration of approval by the city, the developer agrees to complete the installation of certain public improvements and other work required by the city in accordance with the final site plan. All of the installation and any other work shall be completed within the time specified in the agreement. To assure the city that this work shall be completed and lien holders paid, the developer shall furnish the city with either:

1.     Bonding. A bond guaranteeing faithful performance of the agreement and guaranteeing payment for labor and materials; or

2.     Trust Agreement. A trust agreement evidencing that the estimated cost of the worker improvements has been deposited with an approved trustee.

E.     In order to determine the amount of bond or trust agreement, the developer shall submit separate cost estimates for the following public improvements:

1.     Improvements to be made within the public streets such as curbs, sidewalks, street paving, drainage structures, sewers, street lights, traffic-control devices, monuments and street signs;

2.     Improvements to be made within an easement to be dedicated to the city such as sewer or drainage structures;

3.     Earthwork and slope planting in public areas; and

4.     Undergrounding of utilities in public rights-of-way.

The amount of such bond or cash deposited shall be determined by the city engineer and approved by the city council as to amount and adequacy.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.280 Final subdivision map.
A final parcel or subdivision map shall be recorded in conformance with the approved tentative parcel or subdivision map prior to the issuance of any building permits. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.290 Conversion of existing development—Procedures.
Except as specifically noted in this chapter, the conversion of any existing development, that is a development which has received final occupancy clearance, to a condominium, a stock cooperative, a community apartment project or similar common interest subdivision shall comply with all requirements contained in this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.300 Conversion of existing development—Subdivision map.
A.    A tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map as appropriate shall be filed concurrently with the proposed site plan for the proposed conversion project and shall comply with the State Subdivision Map Act and the city’s subdivision title.

B.     A final parcel or subdivision map shall be recorded in conformance with the approved tentative parcel or subdivision map prior to the issuance of any building permits. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.310 Conversion of existing development—Standards.
The standards of development for the conversion of any existing development to a common interest subdivision shall be those required in the underlying zoning district, with the following exceptions:

A.    Parking. The number of off-street parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zoning district, except that for residential development, a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided. These spaces may be covered or uncovered.

Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in this subsection, but only until February 25, 2015, the number of off-street parking spaces for residential development shall not be greater than the number of parking spaces existing for the subject property at the time of approval of the tentative parcel or subdivision map required for conversion. On and after February 26, 2015, this paragraph of this subsection shall be of no force and effect.

B.     Common Recreational Areas. All residential developments shall include at least one form of common recreational or open space areas such as a swimming pool, tennis court or similar recreational activity or it may be for a more passive use such as a picnic or barbecue area. The passive use area should be of sufficient size and appropriate location so that it could be converted to an active recreation area at some later time. Private yard space with minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 10 feet (100 square feet) may also be considered in satisfying part of this requirement.

C.     Building Construction Requirements. All separation walls, floors and ceilings shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Code and California Fire Code.

D.    Utility Systems. Prior to the sale of any residential unit, a separate utility system shall be provided for each unit for electricity, gas and venting services. At a minimum there shall be one water meter provided for all residential units, although there may be installed one or more separate water meters for the exterior uses. A separate sewer lateral or water meter for each residential unit is not required.

E.     Landscaping. Prior to the sale of any unit, all existing or proposed landscaped areas shall be provided with a combination of ground cover, shrubs and trees and a permanent, underground irrigation system in accordance with an approved landscape plan.

F.     Trash Collection. Prior to the sale of any unit, the type of trash collection service (individual or common trash area) shall be determined and any necessary trash enclosures constructed. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.320 Conversion of existing development—Covenants, conditions and restrictions and homeowner’s association.
A.    Prior to the sale of any unit, the applicant shall submit proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) for any land or improvements intended for common ownership and/or common maintenance including streets, driveways, parking areas, landscaping, fences, walls, buildings, utilities, recreational facilities or open space. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall include the creation of a homeowner’s association, which is intended to manage and maintain all common facilities.

B.     The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and the director. A recorded copy of the approved covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be submitted to the city prior to the sale of any unit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.330 Conversion of existing development—Time limit to convert.
No existing residential development may be converted to a common interest subdivision, unless it fully complies with all provisions of Sections 17.60.010 through 17.60.280, or unless a period of five (5) years has elapsed from the date of the certificate of occupancy or final inspection from the building division, until the date of the submittal of the application for conversion. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.340 Conversion of existing development—Physical elements reports.
A.    At the time of the submittal of an application to convert any existing development to a common interest subdivision, the applicant shall submit a physical elements report on the status of the health and safety aspects of the project including: building foundations and walls, roofs, electrical systems, plumbing systems, mechanical systems, recreational facilities, parking and other paved areas and drainage facilities. These reports shall be prepared by California-licensed structural or civil engineers or contractors and they shall include a detailed evaluation of the existing physical elements, a recommendation on their status (including any necessary repairs or replacement, either immediate or in the future) and a signed certification of the findings.

B.     The planning commission and city council shall use this information to determine the need to repair or replace any existing physical elements as a condition of approving the proposed conversion. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.350 Conversion of existing development—Tenant notification and right to purchase.
A.    The conversion of an existing residential development to a common interest subdivision shall include all tenant notifications required by Section 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     In addition, each of the tenants in an existing residential development shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or on terms more favorable to the tenant. This right shall run for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention to not exercise the right. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.60.360 Conversion of existing development—Tenant relocation assistance.
A.    Each eligible tenant of a unit in an existing residential development being converted to a common interest subdivision shall be paid by the applicant the equivalent of one month’s rent as relocation assistance.

B.     For the purpose of this section the term, “eligible tenant,” shall be defined as a tenant in good standing of the existing residential development at the time that the owner of the development gives notice to terminate the tenancy in accordance with applicable law.

C.     The payment of relocation assistance by the applicant shall occur on or before: (1) the date of termination of tenancy provided in the notice described in subsection B, or (2) the date that the eligible tenant vacates the unit, whichever shall first occur, but in either event without regard to the date that the conversion occurs.

D.    No conversion shall be completed until the applicant has provided proof to the city of payment of all relocation assistance as required in subsection A, above. In the event that the payment of relocation assistance to an eligible resident is prevented by the voluntary termination of tenancy prior to the required payment date described above in subsection C, and also in the event that the applicant cannot locate the eligible tenant after a reasonable investigation, the applicant shall deposit any unpaid relocation assistance funds with the city. An administrative fee that is equal to ten percent of the total deposited funds shall accompany the deposited funds. The city shall hold the deposited funds (less the administrative fee) for the benefit of those eligible tenants who did not receive payment of relocation assistance. Upon proof of eligibility and entitlement, the city shall pay the relocation assistance to eligible tenants, without interest, at any time for a period of 36 months following deposit of the funds. At the end of the 36 month period, any funds on deposit shall be forfeited and released to the city, free and clear of any trust for the benefit of, or obligation to, eligible tenants. These forfeited funds shall be used by the city for the purpose of providing safe and affordable housing to persons of low- and moderate-income. Following the release of such funds to the city, any eligible tenant who claims any right to the forfeited and released relocation assistance shall be required to file a claim under the California Government Code as an unsecured creditor.

E.     The applicant shall give each eligible tenant notice of his or her right to relocation assistance at the same time that the notice required by Section 17.60.350 is given to tenants of the existing residential development. Such notice shall include a copy of this section, in effect at the time notice is given, and shall provide the name and a telephone number of the applicant’s representative, which will allow for messages outside of normal business hours, for the tenants to obtain further information relative to the relocation assistance available to them, and the timing of the payment of relocation assistance for their project. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.63 SUBSTANTIAL CONFORMANCE REVIEW
17.63.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of substantial conformance review is to allow for the refinement of development projects, but does not result in any meaningful alteration of the project based upon the whole record. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

 

17.63.020 Definition.
Substantial conformance review means an administrative process for refining an existing project, provided that such physical refinements are consistent with and do not materially alter the intent, character, development, intensity, density or increase the environmental effects of the approved project entitlement plan. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

 

17.63.025 Guidelines and measuring criteria.
The director of community development shall prepare guidelines and measuring criteria to provide the framework within which to establish applicability, eligibility and decision-making guidance in administering the substantial conformance review process. The director shall forward the guidelines and measuring criteria to the Planning Commission as information and input upon initial preparation. Any changes thereafter shall be presented and reviewed pursuant to Section 17.10.030. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

 

17.63.030 Authority to apply.
An application for a substantial conformance review may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the property owner for which the development entitlement is applicable, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

 

17.63.040 Authority to approve.
Substantial conformance reviews may be approved or denied by the director of community development. The director may, at his or her discretion, decide that a substantial conformance review warrants a minor amendment or formal amendment of the governing entitlement. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

 

17.63.050 Notice of decision.
The applicant for a substantial conformance review shall be notified in writing of the decision of the director to approve or deny the substantial conformance review. In the event that the director decides that a minor amendment or formal amendment of the governing entitlement is warranted, the applicant shall also be notified in writing. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

 

17.63.060 Appeals.
The action of the director in approving or denying a substantial conformance review may be appealed pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4984 § 22, 2013)

Chapter 17.65 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN PERMIT
17.65.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of a site development plan permit, and the site development plan review process is:

A.    To ensure compliance with city ordinances and policies;

B.     To ensure the incorporation of sound design practices;

C.     To ensure that proper facilities are provided;

D.    To ensure compliance with storm water management requirements;

E.     To ensure that easements and rights-of-way are recognized and respected on development plans. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.65.020 Applicability.
A site development plan permit shall be required for all buildings or developments proposing four or more dwelling units, new commercial or industrial developments, and any expansions of existing commercial or industrial developments, when such expansions include increased floor area or building height, increased outdoor facilities or storage areas, or any other intensification of use. The director of community development may authorize minor expansions or alterations to existing developments without requiring site development plan permit approval in instances where the director determines that the requested expansion would be negligible and would not result in adverse effects to the subject property or surrounding properties.

Site development plan permits shall not be required for planned residential developments, residential subdivisions of single family lots, or for specific plans and conditional use permits authorizing development projects, when such other development permit processes include a site plan depicting the location and design of all proposed structures and facilities.

Notwithstanding the above, a site development plan permit may be required as part of the approval of any development request at the discretion of the director of community development. (Ord. 5072 § 9, 2018)

 

17.65.030 Authority to apply.
An application for a site development plan permit may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the owner of the property for which the permit is requested, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.65.040 Permit application requirements.
At a minimum, the following items shall be submitted with a completed application for a site development permit, unless otherwise waived by the director.

In addition to the other items listed as requirements on the application form, an application for a site development plan permit shall include a scaled site plan drawing. As a general rule, the site plan shall depict all the following items:

A.    All property lines;

B.     All existing and proposed structures and their dimensions;

C.     All existing and proposed outdoor facilities and equipment;

D.    All existing and proposed parking facilities and vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements including all driveway aisles and pedestrian walkways;

E.     All existing and proposed fences and walls;

F.     All existing and proposed freestanding signs;

G.    All existing and proposed trash and recycling enclosures;

H.    All existing and required public improvements, both on-site and in the public right-of-way adjacent to the subject property;

I.      All easements;

J.      Provisions for adequate drainage and compliance with the city’s storm water management requirements;

K.    Provisions for emergency vehicle access and circulation;

L.     Existing and proposed landscape improvements; and

M.    A “notes” section documenting: Gross and net lot area, number of proposed dwelling units (if applicable), lot coverage, area dedicated to landscaping, building floor areas, building footprint areas, and number of existing and proposed parking spaces. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.65.050 Authority to approve.
Site development plan permits and amendments thereto may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the director of community development. The director may, at his or her discretion, refer site development plan permits and amendments thereto to the planning commission or city council, as applicable, which may approve, conditionally approve, or deny such permits. (Ord. 5018 § 17, 2015)

 

17.65.060 Required findings.
Prior to the approval of a site development permit, or any amendment to a site development permit, the following findings must be made:

A.    The proposed project is consistent with applicable goals, policies and programs of the General Plan, any applicable specific plan or regional planning document;

B.     The proposed site plan and building design are consistent with all applicable city ordinances and policies;

C.     Easements and rights-of-way are recognized and respected on the site development plan; and

D.    Public improvements will be completed, maintained and upgraded in accordance with public improvement thresholds. (Ord. 5018 § 17, 2015)

 

17.65.070 Notice of decision.
The applicant for a site development plan permit shall be notified in writing of the decision of the director to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit. In the event that the director refers the permit application to the planning commission, the applicant shall be notified in writing and the notice shall include the date and time of the planning commission meeting. Any such decision shall be rendered within 60 calendar days of an application for a site development permit being deemed complete by the director pursuant to California Government Code Section 65943, unless additional time is deemed necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act as provided for in California Government Code Section 65950. (Ord. 5018 § 17, 2015)

 

17.65.080 Revised site development plan drawing.
After approval of the preliminary site development plan, the revised or “final” site development plan shall reflect all required changes and shall be submitted to the planning division prior to any request for building permits. After the final copy of the site development plan has been received and signed by the director, the applicant may request and obtain building permits from the building division. The approved site development plan shall be used as the site plan for obtaining such building permits. (Ord. 5018 § 17, 2015)

 

17.65.090 Appeals.
The action of the director or the planning commission in approving, conditionally approving, or denying a site development plan permit may be appealed pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. Planning commission decisions shall include findings to support the issuance or denial of this permit consistent with Section 17.65.020. (Ord. 5018 § 17, 2015)

Chapter 17.70 SPECIFIC PLAN
17.70.010 Intent and purpose.
A specific plan is a plan for a particular portion of the city where circumstances require a more detailed plan of development than the general plan, and/or more detailed standards than the general provisions of the Zoning Code. Such circumstances requiring specific plans may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

A.    Size and/or shape of property;

B.     Relation to surroundings;

C.     Drainage conditions;

D.    Unusual conditions pertaining to the property, requiring special consideration for access, utilities or fire protection;

E.     Necessity for street, highway and alley pattern; and

F.     Location of open spaces. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.020 Authority to approve.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65450, the planning commission may recommend approval and the city council may adopt or amend specific plans for the systematic implementation of the general plan. Such specific plans may be adopted by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 5033 § 14, 2015)

 

17.70.030 Initiation.
Specific plans and amendments thereto shall be adopted in the same manner as provided in this title for amendments to the Zoning Code and may be initiated by:

A.    Submittal of a completed application by the property owner, or the owner’s agent; or

B.     Resolution of intention of the city council; or

 

C.     Resolution of intention of the planning commission. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.040 Required findings.
The planning commission may recommend approval and the city council may adopt a specific plan, or specific plan amendment, provided that it first makes the following findings:

A.    The proposed specific plan or specific plan amendment serves the public interest.

B.     The proposed specific plan or specific plan amendment will systematically implement the city’s general plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.050 Scope of plans.
Specific plans may include any or all of the following:

A.    Regulations limiting the location of buildings and other improvements with respect to existing or planned rights-of-way;

B.     Regulations of the use of land and buildings, the height and bulk of buildings and the open spaces around buildings;

C.     Street and highway naming and numbering plans in order to establish the official names of streets and highways, to remove conflicts, duplication and uncertainty among such names and to provide an orderly system for the numbering of buildings and properties;

D.    Such other matters which will accomplish the purposes of this chapter, including procedures for the administration of such regulations;

E.     Such other measures as may be required to insure the execution of the general plan; and

F.     Regulations controlling the development of a single property in more than one zone in order to permit the reasonable development of the subject property which is compatible with the surrounding area and consistent with the goals and objectives of the general plan. In the case of residential development, the total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the total number permitted by the sum of each of the individual zones on the property. Within such specific plan areas flexibility may be accorded in the distribution of parking spaces, landscaping and other features of design. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.060 Application requirements.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65451, an application for specific plan shall include the following elements, in addition to any other requirements listed on the application or as determined by the director, in order to analyze the proposed plan:

A.    Text and diagrams indicating the distribution, location, and extent of land uses, including open space, within the proposed specific plan area.

B.     Text and diagrams indicating the distribution, location, extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewer, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the proposed specific plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan.

C.     Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable.

D.    A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to implement the requirements of the plan.

E.     A statement explaining the relation of the specific plan to the general plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.070 Variance.
Variance requests from the provisions of specific plans may be granted in the same manner as provided in this title for variance requests from the provisions of the Zoning Code. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.080 Conformance to plan.
After adoption of a specific plan, no building, structure or other improvement shall be located, erected or constructed within the area covered by such specific plan, and no use shall take place thereon, except as shown on the specific plan or an approved amendment thereof. Where a difference occurs between the provisions of an approved specific plan and the regulations of the underlying zone, the provisions of the specific plan shall apply. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.090 Enforcement by injunction.
The city council may enforce the provisions of this chapter and abate any violation thereof by injunction or other civil action in addition to the penalties as provided in Chapter 17.10 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.100 References to “precise plan” or “precise plans.”
All references in the existing ordinances of the city to “precise plan” or “precise plans” shall be hereafter deemed to refer to “specific plan” or “specific plans.” (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.110 Use control in reclassified specific plan.
Upon the adoption of a specific plan and a reclassification based on such plan, any properties shown therein classified for commercial or industrial purposes shall not be used for residential purposes, unless expressly so authorized by such specific plan. Special uses shown on such specific plan, including automobile parking, shall conform to such specific plan, even though such use or uses are not otherwise specifically classified by this chapter as permissible in any given zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.70.120 Minor administrative changes.
Each specific plan, regardless of when it was adopted and notwithstanding any language to the contrary, is eligible for the provisions contained in Chapters 17.57 and 17.63, for the purpose of minor changes afforded by the provisions of substantial conformance review and minor amendment. (Ord. 4984 § 27, 2013)

Chapter 17.75 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
17.75.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to list the process for temporary use permits under simplified headings. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.020 Applicability.
Some businesses and activities, intended by virtue of their nature to be established for a short duration, may be allowed in various zones with approval of a temporary use permit, as indicated in the land use tables in Chapters 17.140, 17.145, and 17.150. No temporary use permit is required for uses that have been authorized by conditional use permit. Temporary uses include the following:

A.    Seasonal outdoor businesses, such as Saint Valentine’s Day flower booths, Christmas tree lots, and Halloween pumpkin lots.

B.     Outdoor sales events, such as parking lot sales and outdoor arts and craft shows. Businesses in the city are limited to two outdoor parking lot sales per year, unless additional sales are authorized by conditional use permit. A single vendor may have no more than two outdoor sales events in the city per year, regardless of location unless approved by a conditional use permit.

C.     Traveling amusements, such as circuses and carnival conducted in the general commercial and regional commercial zones.

D.    Prefabricated storage containers used for short-term or seasonal storage.

E.     Vehicle storage lot for short-term storage, of excess inventory of new and used automobiles, when the dealership is operated on property of at least two (2) acres in size within the city. The duration may not exceed two (2) years, with a maximum of one administratively-authorized extension.

F.     Other similar temporary uses, as determined by the director. (Ord. 5033 § 16, 2015)

 

17.75.030 Application.
An application for a temporary use permit may be filed with the planning division by the owner of the property for which the permit is requested, or by the property owner’s agent. An application may also be filed by the operator of a temporary business, such as the operator of a seasonal business. However, the temporary use permit application must be signed by the owner of the property for which the permit is requested, or by the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.040 Authority to approve.
Temporary use permits and amendments thereto may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the director of community development. The director may, at his or her discretion, refer temporary use permits and amendments thereto to the planning commission, which may approve, conditionally approve, or deny such permits. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.050 Notice required.
A.    The applicant for a temporary use permit shall be notified in writing of the decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit.

B.     In the event that the director refers the permit application to the planning commission, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the meeting a minimum of 10 days prior to the meeting. The notice shall include the date and time of the planning commission meeting. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.060 Appeals.
The decision of the director to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit shall be final, unless a written appeal is submitted to the secretary of the planning commission within five (5) days of the director’s decision. Any decision of the planning commission is final, unless appealed to the city council within five (5) days of the commission’s decision. With the exception of the shortened (five-day) appeal period, such appeals shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.070 Permit processing times.
A completed application and filing fee shall be submitted to the director a minimum of 15 days before the temporary use activity is to commence. However, depending upon the nature of the requested use, additional time up to 30 days may be required to process a temporary use permit application. The applicant will be informed at the time of submittal if additional processing time is required. Within 10 days of the submittal of a completed application and the required filing fee, the director shall render a decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. If a longer review period is required as described above, the director shall render a decision within 21 days of the completed application submittal. Applications referred by the director to the planning commission shall be scheduled for consideration within 30 days of submittal of a completed application. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.080 Considerations.
The director shall consider the type of activity and its location, including proximity to sensitive uses, in rendering a decision. Furthermore, the director may refer any application for a temporary use permit to any other city department for review and comment and the director may require letters of support from directly affected businesses or residents. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.090 Approval period.
Each temporary permit is valid for only the time period, applicant, and use stipulated in the approval letter. Generally, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the conduct of individual outdoor sales events is limited to 72 hours, although additional time may be authorized for setting up and taking down the event. The director shall have the authority to extend the duration of any temporary use permit under unique or unusual circumstances. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.100 Conditions of approval.
The director may impose conditions of approval including, but not limited to: requirements for off-street parking, limitations on the hours of operation and/or the duration of the temporary use activity, requirements for liability insurance, coordination with other businesses and compliance with the city’s sign regulations. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.75.110 Permit revocation.
Any violations of the terms or conditions of approval of a temporary use permit may be grounds for its immediate revocation upon notice to the applicant. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.80 VARIANCE
17.80.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of a variance shall be to prevent discrimination and to allow flexibility in the application of development standards in instances where special circumstances deprive a property of a property development right enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zoning district. No variance shall be approved which would have the effect of granting a special privilege not shared by other properties in the same vicinity and zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.020 Permit required.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any improvements that do not conform to the development standards applicable to a property in the city, unless a variance is approved authorizing the deviation from such development standards. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.030 Authority to apply.
An application for a variance may be filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the property owner of the property for which the variance is requested, or the property owner’s agent. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.040 Public hearing required.
Upon filing of a completed application for variance, the secretary of the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.25 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.050 Authority to approve.
In instances where special circumstances and the strict and literal interpretation of the requirements in this title combine to deprive a property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone, the planning commission may approve a variance from the requirements of this title. The kinds of special circumstances that may be used to support the approval of a variance include circumstances relating to lot size, lot shape, topographic variations, the location of the property, and the surroundings of the property.

However, under no circumstances shall a variance be used to establish a use that is not otherwise allowed in the zone district in which the property is located. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.060 Required findings.
Before any variance may be approved, the decision making body shall find that:

A.    Because of special circumstances or conditions applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the Zoning Code deprives such property of a privilege enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone;

B.     The approval of such variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity and zone in which such property is situated;

C.     The approval of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and zone in which the property is located; and

D.    The approval of such variance will be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.070 Notice of decision.
After close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall announce its findings by resolution. Such resolution shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for variance. Said resolution shall state the facts and findings supporting such approval, conditional approval, or denial. Within five (5) days of the adoption of a resolution, the secretary of the planning commission shall cause all of the following to be done on the same day:

A.    Notify the applicant of the action taken, by mailing a copy of the resulting resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon the application;

B.     File a copy of such resolution with the city clerk;

C.     Forward a copy of such resolution to the city council;

D.    Notify the county assessor as required by California Government Code Section 65863.5. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.80.080 Appeals.
The action of the planning commission in approving, conditionally approving, or denying a request for variance shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in accordance with the provisions listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.105 DEFINITIONS
17.105.010 Interpretation.
Except where specifically defined in any chapter of this title, the definitions alphabetically listed below in Section 17.105.020, shall be used when interpreting this title. Refer to Chapter 17.10 of this title for provisions relating to the interpretation of ambiguity or omissions. For adult entertainment activities, see Section 17.45.040 of this title. (Ord. 5018 § 21, 2015)

 

17.105.020 Definitions.
“Accessory use” means a use that is subordinate to the primary use of the subject property, and of minor significance as compared to the primary use, and reasonably related to the primary use of the subject property. For the purposes of interpreting this title, the term “accessory use” shall have the same meaning as the terms “ancillary use” and “incidental use.”

“ADA” is an abbreviation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, which is a federal law that requires accommodations for disabled persons.

“Address” or “house number” for the purposes of this title is a number or combination of numbers and letters assigned by the city to a specific building or property. The individual numbers or letters of an address that is physically displayed on a structure must be uniform in height and appearance. The minimum height of address numbers is regulated by California Building and Fire Codes. An address may have numerals or letters up to 12 inches in height without being considered a sign.

“Advertising structure” means a structure of any kind or character, including statuary erected or maintained for outdoor advertising or attention calling purposes, on which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement, identification, or directions of any kind may be placed, including statuary which implies a message in itself or which calls attention to the premises on which it is constructed.

“Alternative lending” is defined as a category of business engaged in short-term non-traditional loans including anticipatory loans, payday loans, and auto title loans. Alternative lending does not include commercially available loans from banks, savings and loans, thrifts, and credit unions having a federal or state charter.

“ANSI” means the American National Standards Institute.

“Antenna” means a device or system of wires, poles, rods, dishes, discs or similar devices used for the transmission and/or receipt of electromagnetic energy.

“Antique shop” means a retail business, principally offering objects for sale to the general public, which are old as compared to the present age or time, which are of a bygone style or vintage, and which were crafted or manufactured at a much earlier period than the present time; and which, because of the passage of time, have taken on an intrinsic value greater than their original value. For purposes of this title, “antique shop” does not include the sale of secondhand merchandise.

 

“Arcade” means a covered pedestrian walkway along the front of a building, with supports for such arcade provided by such building on the interior side and columns or piers on the exterior side. (See also, “marquee.”)

“Athletic club” or “fitness center” means a training facility that includes exercise equipment for the purpose of physical exercise by human beings, and provides instruction in weight training, bodybuilding, and cardiovascular training, as well as general health and fitness instruction.

“Attached structure” means a structure such as a patio cover or carport, or a structural addition such as a bedroom or garage, that is physically attached to the primary structure on a lot. For the purposes of interpreting this ordinance, an attached structure must share a common wall at least four feet in width with the primary structure on the lot. The construction of a breezeway between otherwise unconnected structures shall not qualify as the required attachment.

“Auction house” means a fixed location where goods, wares, merchandise, or other items of personal property, new or used, are offered for sale at auction as an established business.

“Automobile” or “auto” means a motorized vehicle that is self-propelled. The term “automobile” includes all forms of passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motor homes and recreational vehicles. This definition shall exclude heavy equipment.

“Automobile wrecking” means the dismantling or wrecking of used autos and other motorized vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of one or more dismantled, non-operable or wrecked vehicles or their parts.

“Automotive body repair” means a business that conducts automobile painting and automobile body repair.

“Automotive fueling station” means a business engaged in the sale of motor fuel through dispensing devices.

“Automotive service and repair” means a business that conducts automobile repair and/or maintenance services ranging from diagnostic services to major engine and transmission repair, except automobile painting, and automotive body repairs.

“Awning” means a temporary shelter, which protrudes from, and is supported entirely by, the exterior wall of a building.

“Basement” means that portion of a building partially below the average level of the adjoining ground, with a ceiling no part of which is more than seven (7) feet above such level.

“Bed and breakfast establishment” means a transient occupancy establishment within a single-family residence, which is incidental to the single-family residence and offers sleeping facilities and breakfast to registered guests only. The single-family residence must have received at least a rating of “2” on the historic preservation survey completed for the city by SANDAG in 1985.

“Block” means all property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a railroad right-of-way, waterway, terminus or dead-end street or city boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street that it intercepts.

“Blood bank” means a place for the storage and processing of blood and blood-based products. Blood banks may also collect blood as an ancillary activity, but no monetary compensation may be provided to the blood donor.

“Blood donation facility” means a place where blood or blood plasma is collected from donors who receive no monetary compensation for donating their blood or plasma.

“Blood plasma center” means a place where blood or blood plasma is collected from donors who may receive monetary compensation for the donation of their blood or blood plasma.

“Boardinghouse” means a dwelling unit in which one or more rooms are rented out separately for extended periods of time to four (4) or more persons who do not meet the definition of “family.” The common parts of the house may be maintained, and some services, such as laundry, cleaning, and meals may be supplied. Common features of a boardinghouse are that individual tenants do not begin and terminate their tenancy at the same time, are not parties in common on a single rental or lease agreement, and usually have exclusive use of one or more rooms that are different rooms than those for which other tenants may have exclusive use. The property owner or a boardinghouse manager may or may not also reside in the dwelling.

“Building” means a permanently located structure having a roof, including manufactured housing, but excluding all other forms of vehicles even though immobilized. Where these provisions require, or where special authority granted pursuant to this title requires that a use shall be entirely enclosed within a building, this definition shall be qualified by adding “and enclosed on all sides.”

“Building, accessory” or “accessory building” means a detached building or structure which is subordinate and incidental to the main building, structure or use on the same lot.

“Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the building site covered by the building to the highest point of the building. Exception: Roof-top mechanical screens, elevator shafts, and stairwell enclosures, and clearstories, covering a combined total of less than 25% of the roof area of a building, and not exceeding a height of 20 feet, shall not be counted in building height calculations, for the purposes of implementing this title. Additionally, a basement shall not be considered as a story when computing the height of a building.

“Building, main” or “main building” means the principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted. Where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of multi-family dwellings in two or more buildings, each such permissible building on the lot shall be considered a main building.

“Building pad” means a relatively level site prepared by grading and upon which a building will be placed.

“Building site” means the ground area of one lot or the ground area of two (2) or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by this title.

“Bulk fuel storage and distribution facility” means a business location where at least one (1) storage tank of 30,000 gallons capacity but no more than four (4) such tanks with a maximum of 120,000 gallons aggregate capacity at any one (1) business location is/are used for the temporary storage of petroleum or petroleum products, such as gasoline, fuel oil, propane, and kerosene, and the subsequent off-site distribution of the petroleum or petroleum products to retail outlets or off-site directly to the actual user. This definition also includes bio-fuels and other combustible fuels that do not originate from petroleum.

“Canopy” means a roofed architectural feature that is open on at least three (3) sides and is used for vehicle or pedestrian passage. An awning is considered a canopy.

“Card room, non-gambling” shall mean any space, room or enclosure furnished or equipped with one or more tables, spaces, or other implements used or intended to be used as card tables or locations for the playing of cards and similar games, and the use of which is available to the public or any portion of the public. This term shall not apply to public parks and city community recreation centers, where visitors occasionally play cards and similar games for recreational purposes.

“Caretaker’s unit” means a single dwelling unit located on the same lot as an authorized commercial or industrial use. The occupant of the caretaker’s unit need not be an employee of the commercial or industrial use at the site.

“Cell” means the coverage area through which wireless receiving and transmitting equipment from a particular cell site successfully propagates.

“Cell site” means a parcel of real property on which a wireless communications facility is to be located.

“Chicken coop” means a small roofed structure used for the keeping of domesticated chickens, and which provides nests for the birds to roost at night.

“Chicken run” means a fully enclosed structure made of wire mesh which provides access to fresh air, soil, and sunshine for domesticated chickens, while ensuring that chickens remain confined to the area of the run.

“Child activity center” means a commercial establishment that provides indoor play areas and activities for children up to age 12 where the parents or legal guardians of the children are present at all times. The term “child activity center” does not include daycare services, video arcades, video game centers, or other forms of amusements intended for older children, or any activities where the parents are not present at all times.

Church. See “Religious facilities and religious activities.”

“Club” means an association of persons for some common purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.

“Clustered development area (CDA)” means that area described by an enclosed series of straight lines connecting the farthest points of the outermost lying buildings and parking areas, but excluding any improvements used solely for recreational purposes.

“Cocktail lounge” means a commercial establishment open to the general public that sells alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption as a primary use. The term “cocktail lounge” shall include bars, nightclubs, pubs, taverns, or any other commercial establishment that sells alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption as a primary use. A cocktail lounge may prepare and sell food for on-site consumption, but it is not considered a restaurant for the purposes of interpreting this title.

“Collocation facility” means the placement or installation of wireless facilities, including antennas and related equipment, on, or immediately adjacent to, a wireless telecommunications collocation facility.

“Commercial development” means one or more non-residential or non-institutional uses engaged in commerce on a parcel or on adjacent parcels of land which are planned, developed, or managed as a unit.

“Commission” means the planning commission of the city.

“Common interest development” is a type of development characterized by privately owned units, grouped together within a larger association or cluster of units that share amenities such as parking, recreational facilities, landscaping, and laundry facilities. In such developments the intervening and surrounding areas, which link and support the private units, are owned and maintained in common by all of the associated private property owners. Common interest developments are typically residential developments but they can also be established as commercial or industrial developments. A common interest development may be established as a planned residential development (PRD) or a planned unit development (PUD). All common interest developments require the approval of a subdivision map and the formation of an owners association whose responsibilities are recorded in a document containing covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

“Communications” means any transmission, emission, or reception of signals, images and sound or information of any nature by wire, radio, visual or electro-magnetic system that work on a “line-of-sight” principle.

“Community garden” means a property used for food crop cultivation by individuals or a collective group of individuals or organizations, which may be divided into multiple individual garden plots.

“Congregate care facility” means a multi-family residential development designed and devoted to housing persons of impaired physical and/or mental capacities, such as frail elderly and disabled persons, and offering limited 24-hour non-medical care. The facility contains small individual dwelling units of usually only one or two rooms with a small kitchen allowing for independent living, but also providing common dining, recreational and social facilities on site, and minimal convenience services such as housekeeping, and transportation services for the residents.

“Convenience market” means a commercial establishment that offers food and sundry items for sale, and is limited in size to no more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area.

“Cut” means a condition in which earth material is cut into, dug, removed, displaced, or uncovered, and the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Day care facility” means any type of state-licensed group child care program, elder care program, or program for the supervised care of disabled persons conducted during daytime and evening business hours. “Day care facility” includes nurseries for children of working parents, nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery schools, play groups for preschool children, senior activity and care groups, and groups that provide supervised care and activities for disabled persons, provided such establishments are institutional in character and licensed by the state or county, and conducted in accordance with state requirements. This definition shall include the term “commercial day care facility.” This definition shall not apply to family day care homes or to residential care facilities, which provide 24-hour care.

“Department store” means a retail establishment, with a gross floor area greater than 15,000 square-feet, which specializes in selling a wide range of products without a single predominant merchandise line. General merchandise retailers are included in this description.

“Director” means the director of community development, or his or her designee.

“Director’s determination” means an administrative land use and/or development decision made by the director of the community development department. Upon request, the director’s determination shall be documented in writing. The term “director’s determination” shall also apply to the resulting written and signed document. A director’s determination is not a “zoning letter” as defined in this title.

“Discretionary legislative action” means an action of the City Council to establish rules, policies or standards of general applicability. Discretionary legislative actions involve the exercise of discretion, and are governed by considerations of the public welfare. Examples of discretionary legislative actions include but are not limited to: General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans, Zone Reclassifications, Zoning Ordinance Amendments, Annexations, and Detachments.

“Discretionary permit” means a permit authorizing development activity or the establishment of a use in which the approving authority exercises its judgment prior to approval or denial. Depending on the specifics of a given application and its accompanying circumstances, discretionary permits may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. Examples of discretionary permits include but are not limited to: Conditional Use Permits, Site Development Plans, Variance, Administrative Zoning Permits, and Adult Entertainment Permits.

“District” means the same as “zone district.”

“Domesticated animal” means an animal, which has been adapted to life in association with and to the advantage of humans. For purposes of this code, domesticated animal shall include: horses, sheep, and goats. The term “domesticated animal” shall specifically exclude cattle and swine.

“Drive aisle” or “driving aisle” means an on-site pathway for vehicular circulation.

“Drive aisle, connecting” or “connecting drive aisle” means a drive aisle that connects a parking area to a driveway, and has no parking spaces that are adjacent and directly accessed from such a connecting drive aisle.

“Driveway” means the paved transition connecting a drive aisle or parking area to a public or private street. For the purposes of this title, the term driveway also means the paved area leading from a street to a covered garage or parking area at a single-family home, or individual dwelling unit within a Planned Unit Development or a Planned Residential Development.

“Dump” means an area devoted to the disposal of refuse, including incineration, reduction, or dumping of ashes, garbage, combustible or noncombustible refuse, offal or dead animals.

“Dwelling” means a building or portion of a building, or a mobile home, designed for permanent residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings, accessory dwelling units, and junior accessory dwelling units, but shall not include hotels, motels, or residential care facilities.

“Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building, or a portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, and containing three (3) or more dwelling units.

“Dwelling, single-family” or “single-family dwelling” means a detached building designed for occupancy by one (1) family and containing one (1) dwelling unit. Any single-family dwelling constructed or located within the city after July 1, 1981, shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.140.170.

“Dwelling, two-family” means a building designed for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other, and containing two (2) dwelling units. The term two-family dwelling shall have the same meaning as the term “duplex.”

“Dwelling unit” means one (1) or more rooms designed for occupancy by one (1) family for both living and sleeping purposes, and having only one (1) kitchen. This definition includes single-family homes, condominiums, townhomes, and apartments.

“Dwelling unit, accessory” means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following: (a) An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17.958.1 of Health and Safety Code; and (b) A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Dwelling unit, junior accessory” means a unit that is no more than 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family structure. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

 

“Educational institution” means elementary, junior high, high schools, colleges or universities, or other schools giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Education Code of the state of California. The term “educational institution” shall include private schools, charter schools, and parochial schools.

“Embankment” means a condition in which material is deposited, pushed, pulled, dumped, or moved to another location, and the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

 

“Establishment” means any non-residential use of land involving buildings or structures for which a building permit is required, or would be required if the building or structure were to be replaced.

“Excavation” means a condition in which earth material is cut into, dug, removed, displaced, or uncovered, and the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Façade-mounted antenna” means an antenna that is directly attached or affixed to any wall of a building.

“Family” means an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of unrelated individuals living together and bearing the generic character of a relatively permanent housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

“Family day care home” means a home which is licensed by the State pursuant to Chapter 3.4 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time, to regularly provide care, protection, and supervision of 14 or fewer children in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and includes the following: “Family day care home, large” or “large family day care home” means a home that provides family day care for up to 14 children, including children who reside at the home, as defined in the California Government Code. “Family day care home, small” or “small family day care home” means a home that provides family day care to eight (8) or fewer children, including children who reside at the home, as defined in the California Government Code. For purposes of this title, family day care homes shall be considered an accessory use to any permitted single-family use.

“Farmers’ market” means an outdoor market at a fixed location that is open to the general public where farmers and other vendors sell produce and other goods directly to consumers and where selling farm produce comprises at least fifty percent (50%) of the vendors.

“Farmworker housing” means housing for agricultural workers that is available to, and occupied by, only farmworkers and their households, limited to 12 units or 36 beds, as an accessory use to agricultural production only.

“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, and is the federal agency responsible for licensing and regulating wireless telecommunications providers. The agency has primary regulatory control over communications providers through its powers to control interstate commerce and to provide a comprehensive national system in accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

“Fill” means a condition in which material is deposited, pushed, pulled, dumped, or moved to another location, and the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Fixed wireless” service means a local wireless operation providing multiple services such as, telephone, internet, and fax, to end users. The associated equipment is in the form of a small panel or dish antenna attached to a home or building.

“Foster family home” means a state-licensed foster family residence in which 24-hour care is provided for not more than six (6) children, including children of the foster family.

“Foster family institution” means two (2) or more foster family homes, each on separate lots or parcels, which are located in close proximity to each other and are owned, operated, managed or leased by the same organization, group, corporation or other entity, or operated in any manner so that there are shared facilities, activities, or other coordinated events.

“Freestanding facility” means an antenna with its support structure placed directly on the ground.

“Freeway” means a highway declared to be a freeway in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the state, or a route for a freeway which has been adopted by the State Highway Commission and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the state.

“Game center” means a place of business where more than three (3) games of skill or amusement or more than one (1) game of skill or amusement for every 1,000 square feet of building floor area are available for play or use. A “game center” is not an “adult entertainment establishment” as defined in Chapter 17.45 of this title.

“Game of skill or amusement” means any machine, device or apparatus, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or placement of any coin, plate, disk, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any fee or fees for the purpose of or use as a game, contest or amusement of any description, the use or possession of which is not prohibited by any law of the state.

“Garage, private” or “private garage” means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building, enclosed on all sides and designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.

“Garage, public” or “public garage” means a building enclosed on all sides, other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipping of automobiles, or where such vehicles are stored, or kept for hire or sale.

“Garage sale,” also known as a “yard sale” or “estate sale” or “rummage sale” means a short-term event conducted on private residential property consisting of the sale of used or unwanted personal property such as used toys, recreational equipment, household items, clothing, tools, and furniture.

“Grade” means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or, when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building. Grades constructed for the purpose of increasing the average height of the grade adjacent to a building shall not be considered as meeting this definition.

“Grading” means the act of creating a new grade.

“Group residential” means shared living quarters without separate kitchen and bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes “boardinghouse,” dormitory, fraternity house, and sorority house.

“Gross floor area” means the total combined floor space in a building or buildings. Gross floor area includes all interior floor space in a building, including storage areas, stairwells, equipment rooms, mezzanines, etc.

“Hardware store” means a retail store that sells primarily hardware, tools, building materials, building supplies, and garden supplies. A hardware store may also provide services such as home improvement consulting, key making, tool sharpening, and engraving. “Home improvement center” is included in this definition.

“Headquarters office facility” means the corporate or regional offices of a business with multiple locations, which generally includes the chief operating officials, or regional managers, as well as clerical and payroll functions. A headquarters office facility may also include manufacturing, distribution and wholesale operations, as permitted in the underlying zone district.

“Heavy equipment sales” means an establishment that sells large, mechanized, construction or farming equipment generally characterized by the presence of hydraulic systems or other mechanical or electromechanical systems of force amplification designed to perform work on a large scale. Examples of heavy equipment include: bulldozers, skip loaders, compaction rollers, dump trucks, cranes, forklifts, rotary tillers, trenchers, and harvesters.

“Heavy manufacturing” or “heavy industry” means industrial activities that are generally more capital intensive and less consumer-oriented than light manufacturing. Heavy industry often involves the extraction and/or use of raw materials for the production of goods with a relatively low value-to-weight ratio. Moreover, heavy industry is typically characterized by more significant environmental impacts than light industry. Examples of heavy industry include, but are not limited to: mining, concrete production, steel production, ship building, heavy equipment and automobile manufacturing, petroleum refining, and the manufacture of pharmaceutical products and chemicals.

Home improvement center. See the definition for “Hardware store.”

“Home occupation” means an occupation lawfully conducted within a dwelling and meeting all the requirements of this title.

“Horticulture” means the science and art of gardening, cultivating, and propagating fruits, vegetables, flowers, and ornamental plants. The term horticulture shall include, but not be limited to: fruits and vegetables, field crops, seed crops, orchards, vineyards, pastures, plant farms, and tree farms.

“Hospital” means an institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to injured or infirm persons or patients, and which is licensed by the state of California to use the title “hospital” without a qualifying descriptive word.

“Hotel” means a building or group of buildings whose main function is to provide rooms for temporary lodging where access to at least 75 percent of such rooms is provided through interior hallways that are accessed through a completely enclosed lobby, foyer, entry hall, or similar interior entry feature. A hotel may also contain restaurants, conference rooms and personal service shops. The phrase “temporary lodging” refers to a rental period with a duration of generally less than 30 days.

“IEEE” means the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers.

“Individual commercial use” is a separate and distinct non-residential or non-institutional use engaged in commerce, which use is located in a freestanding commercial building.

“Kennel” means any lot or parcel of land or place where four (4) or more dogs or cats of four (4) months of age or older are confined, treated, boarded, housed or cared for. For the purposes of this title, the term “kennel” shall exclude veterinary offices, animal hospitals, and pet shops.

“Kiosk” is a small, freestanding, open or partly open structure, which may be permanent or temporary, and which is used to display and/or sell limited merchandise and/or services. For the purposes of this title, a “kiosk” includes the term “stand” but does not include term “outdoor vending machine.”

“Kitchen” means a room or portion of a room used for, or intended or designed for, cooking or the preparation of food. A kitchen shall contain at least a stove or oven.

“Landscaping” means living and/or nonliving decorative materials located in yards, parks, playgrounds, parking areas and other outdoor areas of the city. Landscaping may consist of the following items: trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf, flowers, and other living plant materials (except weeds), as well as artificial turf and decorative paving such as bricks and paving stones. Landscaping may also include: decorative water features, stones, boulders, bark, crushed decorative rock, and mulch. Landscaping shall not include driveways, drive aisles, or any required parking or loading areas.

“Large box retail” means the retail selling of manufactured or assembled goods that cannot easily be hand-carried or placed in a standard shopping cart. Examples of large box retail items include, but are not limited to: furniture, large appliances, carpeting and flooring, custom windows, and large office machines.

“Lattice tower” means an open steel frame structure used to support equipment that is part of a wireless communications facility.

“Light manufacturing” or “light industry” means industrial activities that are generally less capital intensive and more consumer-oriented than heavy manufacturing. Generally speaking, light manufacturing means the production of small, consumer goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, from partially processed raw materials. Light manufacturing facilities are typically characterized by less significant potential environmental impacts than heavy manufacturing facilities and processes. Examples of light manufacturing uses include: manufacturing of optical and other precision instruments, manufacturing of paper, plastic, glass, and ceramic products, manufacturing of furniture, manufacture and assembly of consumer electronics, manufacture and assembly of tools, and the manufacturing of textile goods and clothing.

“Liquor store” means a commercial establishment where the primary products on display and for sale are liquor, beer and wine, and which is required by the state to obtain and hold a Type 21 Retail Off-Sale General Liquor License.

“Lot” means a parcel legally created by a subdivision map, parcel map, lot split or certified to be legal by a certificate of compliance.

“Lot area” means the total surface area of a lot or parcel, as measured on a flat plane, within the boundary lines of the lot or parcel. For the purpose of determining area in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot and farthest removed from the front lot line and at right angles to the line representing the lot depth of such lot shall be used as the rear lot line.

“Lot area, net” or “net lot area” means the lot area remaining in a legal lot after any property required by the city to be dedicated for public street purposes.

“Lot, corner” or “corner lot” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, which streets have an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees.

“Lot depth” means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front lot line and at right angles to such line connecting with a line intersecting the midpoint of the rear lot line and parallel to the front lot line. In the case of a lot having a curved front line, the front lot line, for purposes of this section, shall be deemed to be a line tangent to the curve and parallel to a straight line connecting the points of intersection of the side lot lines of the lot with the front lot line.

“Lot, interior” or “interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.

“Lot, key” or “key lot” means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot and whether or not separated by an alley.

“Lot line, front” or “front lot line” means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street.

“Lot line, rear” or “rear lot line” means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the rear lot line of a triangular or trapezoidal lot, or of a lot the rear line of which is formed by two (2) or more lines, the following shall apply:

1.     For a triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot and farthest removed from the front lot line and at right angles to the lot depth line shall be used as the rear lot line;

2.     In the case of a trapezoidal lot, the rear line of which is not parallel to the front lot line, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line at right angles to the lot depth line and drawn through a point bisecting the recorded rear lot line; or

3.     In the case of a pentagonal lot, the rear boundary of which includes an angle formed by two lines, such angle shall be employed for determining the rear lot line in the same manner as prescribed for a triangular lot.

4.     In no case shall the application of the above be interpreted as permitting a main building to locate closer than five (5) feet to any property line.

“Lot line, side” or “side lot line” means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

“Lot, panhandle” or “flag lot” means a lot which has a strip of land having a width narrower than that of the lot designed for the purpose of providing access to the lot.

“Lot, reversed corner” or “reversed corner lot” means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which the rear of such corner lot abuts.

“Lot, through” or “through lot” means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth line at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

“Major street” means a public road that is indicated by the general plan as a primary thoroughfare and/or has an existing or proposed right-of-way dimension of at least 84 feet.

“Manufactured home” means a mobile home built since June 15, 1976, and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1975, installed on a permanent foundation and having surrendered to the community development department any state registration or certification pertaining to mobile homes.

“Market” means a retail store, with a gross floor area greater than 4,000 square feet and less than 15,000 square feet that sells primarily food items and household supplies. Small grocery stores, produce markets, and specialty food stores are included in this definition.

“Marquee” means a permanent roofed structure attached to a building and projecting over public property. (See also “Arcade.”)

“Martial arts facility” means a school and training facility that specializes in training and instructing students in the practice of hand-to-hand combat techniques, including the use of traditional weapons and excluding training in the use of firearms.

“Microbrewery” means a small beer manufacturing company that is licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to manufacture and sell alcoholic beverages for on-site as well as off-site consumption.

“Mobile home” means a vehicle designed as a movable or portable dwelling built on a chassis, connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation.

“Mobile home accessory building or structure” means any awning, cabana, ramada, storage cabinet, carport, fence, windbreak, or porch established for the use of the occupant of the mobile home. (Definitions of these terms are found in Section 5204 of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.)

“Mobile home lot” means any area or tract of land within a mobile home park which is designated or used for the occupancy of one (1) mobile home, and which complies with the standards and criteria of the city.

“Mobile home park” means an area or tract of land which has been developed in accordance with the standards and criteria of the city, and where one (1) or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or sold to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation.

“Mobile home subdivision” means an area or tract of land, which has been developed as a mobile home park in accordance with the standards and criteria of the city, and where each mobile home lot within the park has been legally subdivided in order to permit the sale of the lots to individual mobile home residents.

“Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire used to support equipment that is part of a wireless communications facility.

“Motel” means a building or group of buildings whose main function is to provide temporary lodging in separate rooms for transient auto travelers, in which at least 75 percent of such rooms are directly accessible from an outdoor parking area. The phrase “temporary lodging” refers to a rental period with a duration of generally less than 30 days.

“Nameplate” means a device indicating the name and address of the occupant of a residence or structure.

“Nonconforming structure” means a building, or portion thereof, which was lawfully erected or altered and maintained, but which, because of the application of this title, no longer conforms to the physical development standards for the zone in which it is located.

“Nonconforming use” means a use that was lawfully established and that has been continuously conducted at the same location, but which because of the application of this title, is no longer authorized at that location, or requires approval of a discretionary permit and has not obtained such discretionary permit approval.

“Office, administrative, business and/or professional” means an establishment engaged in the provision of executive, management, administrative, consulting, or professional services, such as architectural, design, engineering, real estate, information technology, and technological support, insurance, investments, legal, secretarial, accounting, graphic arts, desktop publishing, advertising, marketing, title insurance, collection, or personnel. This provision includes health administration, when no medical services are provided on site.

“Ordinary household pet” means any animal, which is normally domesticated and customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment in a residential zone. For purposes of this code, ordinary household pets shall include, but not be limited to: domesticated dogs, cats, small mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, and rodents. Not included in this definition are wild animals, domesticated livestock, poultry, and those animals whose ownership is prohibited by the state of California, the United States government, or other portions of this code.

“Outdoor retail sales” means any business that is permitted by this title to conduct retail sales outdoors and where such outdoor sales occupy a minimum of 50 percent of the total gross lot area of the site.

“Outdoor vending machine” means a self-contained or connected appliance, machine, or mechanical device located outside or in a non-enclosed space that is used to dispense a retail product or service. Examples of outdoor vending machines include but are not limited to: canned or bottled beverage dispensers, filtered water dispensers, coin-operated amusement rides, video rental machines, cages for the retail sale of propane gas cylinders, and coolers for the retail sale of bagged ice. Kiosks, newspaper racks, automatic teller machines, resource recovery centers, donation boxes, and pay phones are not considered or regulated as outdoor vending machines for the purpose of interpreting this title.

“Parking area” means an area not located in a public street or alley with facilities constructed to city standards and maintained exclusively for parking of one (1) or more vehicles and including associated aisles and driveways.

“Paving” or “pavement” means a minimum of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete over a prepared base, or an alternative surface approved by the director of public works, to be used as a driveway and/or parking area for automobiles. Paving does not include sidewalks or walkways.

“Pawn shop” means any business in which a pawnbroker is engaged in the business of receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan.

“Personal storage facility” means an establishment that provides for the storage of privately-owned household goods, personal property, business records, documents, and supplies within an enclosed building. Personal storage facilities are commonly referred to as “mini-storage” facilities. This classification is distinct from the use classification of “warehousing and distribution.”

“Pharmacy” means an establishment that dispenses prescription and non-prescription medications under the direction of a pharmacist. A pharmacy may also sell a wide range of retail products in a manner similar to department stores and supermarkets.

“Planned residential development” or “PRD” means a kind of common interest development consisting of a group of buildings, sublots, or sites for designated future buildings, together with the surrounding open spaces, comprehensively planned in relation to each other, with the necessary utilities and services, access ways, parking areas, recreation facilities, and other appurtenances designed for residential purposes. A planned residential development is a total development concept, rather than an aggregate of separate individual buildings on unrelated lots.

“Planned unit development” or “PUD” means a kind of common interest development consisting of a group of buildings, sublots, or sites for designated future buildings, together with the surrounding open spaces, comprehensively planned in relation to each other, with the necessary utilities and services, access ways, parking areas and other appurtenances. A planned unit development is a total development concept rather than an aggregate of separate individual buildings on unrelated lots. A planned unit development permit may be applied for in all zoning districts.

“Poolhall” or “billiard parlor” means a place of business where three (3) or more pool tables or three (3) or more billiard tables, or any combination thereof, are available for play or use.

“Porte cochere” means a roofed extension or projection of a building used for the shelter of passengers loading or unloading from vehicles.

“Potbellied pig” means a miniature pig not exceeding 22 inches at the shoulder or 125 pounds.

“Poultry” means chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, Guinea fowl, and other forms of domesticated fowl, excluding roosters.

“Public assembly” means a place of assembly, including but not limited to, stadiums, arenas, racetracks, amphitheaters, drive-in theaters, concert halls, playhouses, and banquet halls.

“Religious activities” means activities commonly conducted within religious facilities and may include worshipping, religious teaching and study, and the administration of the religious activities. Religious activities do not include such secular activities as the regular housing and feeding of the homeless, or the operation of elementary and secondary schools and colleges, and day care, or day nurseries, regardless of whether they might otherwise be conducted within religious facilities.

“Religious facilities” mean permanent buildings used as places for worship and may include assembly halls and rooms, libraries, kitchens, offices and similar spaces as well as up to one residence to be used by the religious leader or a caretaker.

“Residential care facility” means a residential home or facility providing 24-hour non-medical care for persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision, counseling, guidance, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This use classification only includes those facilities described above that are licensed by the State Department of Social Services, such as elder care facilities and sober living facilities.

“Restaurant” means any commercial establishment open to the general public that prepares and sells food for on-site consumption as a primary use. A restaurant has a kitchen, or other food preparation area, a menu of food items, and an indoor dining area. A “restaurant” includes, but is not limited to: a café, coffee shop, ice cream parlor, or similar uses where on-site dining facilities are provided. Accessory deli counters and areas for the sale of prepared food at convenience markets, markets, and supermarkets are not included in this definition.

“Restaurant, take-out” or “take-out restaurant” means a restaurant in which the products or menu of items prepared are intended exclusively for off-site consumption. A take-out restaurant shall be allowed a maximum of eight seats indoors for the convenience of customers who are waiting. No dining facilities (i.e., tables, booths, stools, benches, shelves, or bars) either indoors and/or outdoors, or service facilities (i.e., drive-through lane) shall be permitted.

“Roof-mounted” means anything directly attached or affixed to the roof of a building.

“Room” means any partitioned-off area used solely for human occupancy excluding areas used for bathrooms and storage purposes.

“Satellite antenna” means an accessory structure consisting of an electromagnetic wave (radio wave) reflector, along with the necessary receiving antenna parts and supporting structure, the purpose of which is to receive television signals broadcast from an earth-orbiting transmitter.

“Screening fence” or “screening wall” means a structure, which provides for the obstruction or impairment of visibility between properties, between one portion of a property and another portion of a property, or between public and private properties.

“Searchlight” is an apparatus for projecting a powerful beam of light and, for the purposes of this chapter, such light, whether stationary or moving, is intended to draw attention to a particular property or event.

“Seat” means a single chair, or a distance of 24 inches measured along the width of a bench, bleacher, or pew.

“Secondhand merchandise store or kiosk” means a business engaged in the purchase or purchase and resale of “Specified Secondhand Items.” For purposes of this use classification, “Specified Secondhand Items” includes gold, precious metals, gemstones, jewelry, or electronics. Electronics shall include but is not limited to wireless communication devices or computers. Businesses that purchase these secondhand items as and accessory use to a primary retail sales use are excluded.

“Security wire” means a type of fence material characterized by sharp edges or points arranged at intervals along strands or coils of the wire. Security wire is typically strung or coiled along the top of a fence and may also be called barbed wire, razor wire, or concertina wire.

“Service provider” means a “wireless telecommunications provider” as defined in Section 3 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and is a company or organization, or the agent of a company or organization that provides wireless communications services.

“Service road” means a street, drive, or alley that may be publicly or privately owned which is accessory to the primary frontage road and inter-connecting adjacent commercial properties. A service road may be on-site or may be adjacent to the site, but the side street along properties situated in intersections is not considered a service road.

“Setback line, exterior” or “exterior setback line” means the line as indicated in the various zoning districts that determines the required yards from any street frontage property line.

“Setback line, interior” or “interior setback line” means the line as indicated in the various zoning districts that determines the required yards from any property line that separates adjacent properties.

“Shopping center” means a commercial development encompassing a developed area of two (2) or more acres, which are planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, and which provide off-street parking for customers of the commercial establishments.

“Shopping center, regional” or “regional shopping center” means a shopping center which has a regional market area and which includes two (2) or more major department stores along with associated specialty retail stores, which altogether have a combined gross floor area of at least 500,000 square feet.

Sign. See Chapter 17.190 for all sign-related definitions.

“Skilled nursing facility” means a commercial establishment providing care on a 24-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgery or emergency medical services.

“Slope” means the inclined surface of an embankment, excavation, or natural terrain, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. Slope may also be expressed as a percentage. In calculating slope percentage, the vertical distance of the sloped surface (rise) is divided by the horizontal distance (run) and the resulting decimal number is multiplied by 100 to yield the slope percentage.

“Sound level” or “noise level in decibels (dB)” means the sound measured with the A weighting and slow response by a sound level meter.

“Sound level meter” means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels which satisfy the pertinent requirements in American Standard Specifications for sound level meters S1.4—1971 or any more recent revision thereof.

“Special training and schooling” means a facility for the conduct of instructional services outside the setting of educational institutions, vocational schools, and trade schools. Examples of special training and schooling include: arts and crafts instruction, martial arts, sports and recreational instruction, language instruction, automobile driving schools, and educational support services such as exam preparation and testing.

“Stand” means a small, freestanding, open or partly open structure, which may be permanent or temporary, and which is used to display and/or vend merchandise, money or services. For the purposes of this title a “stand” is the same as a “kiosk.”

“Stealth facility” means any communications facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, and is visually unobtrusive. Examples of stealth facilities may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, facade-mounted antennas painted and treated as architectural elements to blend with an existing building. Also known as a concealed telecommunications facility.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story. A basement shall not be considered as a story when computing the height of a building.

“Stove” or “oven” means a portable or fixed appliance that burns fuel or uses electricity to provide heat for cooking.

“Street” means a thoroughfare having a width not less than 30 feet, and dedicated to public use and which affords primary means of access to abutting property.

“Street line” means the boundary line between a street and the abutting property.

“Street, side” or “side street” means a street, which is adjacent to a corner lot and which extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot.

“Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences not more than six (6) feet in height.

“Sublot” means a designated portion or division of land, airspace, or combination thereof within the boundaries of a planned residential development or a planned unit development legally created through either the planned residential development or the planned unit development process. A sublot need not have frontage on a public or private street. A condominium lot is a sublot.

“Supermarket” means a retail store, with a gross floor area of no less than 15,000 square feet, which sells primarily food items and household supplies. Large grocery stores are included in this definition.

“Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by persons with disabilities, and families who are “homeless,” as that term is defined by Section 11302 of Title 42 of the United States Code, or who are “homeless youth,” as that term is defined by paragraph (2) of subdivision (e) of Section 11139.3 of the Government Code, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

“Swimming pool” means a structure or excavation intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water 18 inches or more deep. This definition includes in-ground, and above-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.

“Telecommunications Act of 1996” refers specifically to 47 U.S.C. Section 332.

“Temporary feeding area” means a fixed location outside of the public right-of-way which allows for the operation of mobile feeding facilities.

“Temporary use” means an activity that is conducted for a fixed, limited duration with the intent to discontinue the activity upon the expiration of the fixed time period.

“Thrift or resale store” means a business whose primary purpose is the resale of donated or purchased used items such as furniture, clothing or general household goods not defined elsewhere.

“Transitional housing” means housing with supportive services for up to 24 months that is exclusively designated and targeted for recently homeless persons. Transitional housing includes self-sufficiency development services, with the ultimate goal of moving recently homeless persons to permanent housing as quickly as possible, and limits rents and service fees to an ability-to-pay formula reasonably consistent with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development’s requirements for subsidized housing for low-income persons. Rents and service fees paid for transitional housing may be reserved, in whole or in part, to assist residents in moving to permanent housing.

“Transition service center” means a permanent facility designed and operated to provide direct, indirect, referral and/or counseling services to persons who have no permanent residence or who are in need of assistance.

“Use” means the purpose for which land or building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained.

“Use, retail” or “retail use” means trade uses that sell goods individually or in small quantities directly to the public. Typically, retail uses charge sales tax, and are at the end of the distribution chain for manufactured or processed goods.

“Use, trade and service” or “trade and service use” means a use that is primarily involved in the selling of goods and services to the general public and to other businesses. Trade uses may sell their goods in both retail and wholesale fashion. Service uses are not considered to be either retail or wholesale in nature.

“Utilities” means the operational facilities and associated equipment of a company or governmental entity that provides a public service subject to government regulation. For the purposes of interpreting this title, the term “utility” shall include facilities that provide: gas and/or electrical service, telephone service, cable television service, Internet service, waste disposal service, water service, and sewage treatment service. The term “utilities” shall not include the administrative offices of a utility company, nor shall it include minor and appurtenant equipment such as distribution lines, electrical transformers, and similar appurtenances necessary to distribute and connect the provided services to the end users.

“Veterinary and small animal hospital” or “pet clinic” means a place of business operated by a qualified veterinarian for the treatment of small domestic animals, where boarding, training and grooming of animals are only incidental to such treatment.

“Walking distance” means the total linear distance that a pedestrian must walk in order to safely travel from one property to another property without trespassing or violating any pedestrian laws such as the law prohibiting “jay-walking.” For the purposes of this title, walking distance between properties shall be measured from property line to property line.

“Wholesale use” means a trade use that sell goods in large quantities to other businesses, to professionals, and to retail establishments. Typically, wholesale uses involve the storage of large quantities of goods in warehouses, and may also involve the distribution of goods to retail establishments, professionals, and other end-users.

“Wild animal” means any animal which is not normally domesticated within the United States, and/or not normally allowed as a pet in California by the Department of Fish and Game, irrespective of its actual or asserted state of tameness or domestication.

“Wireless communications facility” means a land use facility supporting antennas, which sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. Wireless communications facilities include antennas and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals; telecommunication towers or similar structures built to support such equipment; equipment cabinets, base transceiver stations, and other accessory development. A wireless communications facility is also referred to as a telecommunication facility.

“Wireless facility support structure” means the electronic equipment housed in a cabinet or small building that, together with one or more antennas, comprises a personal communications services (PCS) facility or site. The cabinet or building typically includes an air conditioning unit, heating unit, electrical supply, telephone hook-up, and back-up power supply.

“Yard” means an open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title.

“Yard, exterior” or “exterior yard” means an area extending across the full width or depth of the lot lying between a street frontage property line and the required exterior side setback line, including any interior yards.

“Yard, front” or “front yard” means an area extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto, and having a distance between them equal to the required front yard depth as prescribed in each zone. Front yards shall be measured by a line at right angles to the front lot line, or by the radial line in the case of a curved front lot line. When a lot lies partially within a planned street indicated on a specific plan for such a street, and where such planned street is of the type that will afford legal access to such lot, the depth of the front yard shall be measured from the contiguous edge of such planned street in the manner prescribed in this definition.

“Yard, interior” or “interior yard” means an area extending across the full width or depth of the lot and lying between the interior property line and the interior setback line, including any exterior yards.

“Yard, rear” or “rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which yard shall be the minimum required distance as measured from the rear lot line toward the front lot line.

“Yard, rear line of required front” or “rear line of the required front yard” means a line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard, and extending across the full width of the lot.

“Yard, side” or “side yard” means a yard between the main building and the side lot lines extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear of the main building, the width of which side yard shall be measured horizontally from, and at right angles to, the nearest point of a side lot line towards the nearest part of a main building.

“Zone” means the same as “zoning district.”

“Zoning district” means the delineation of land into a zone as indicated on the land use zoning map, to which the regulations of this title apply.

“Zoning letter” means a document prepared by the director of the community development department, or the director’s designee, and is a written response to a request for a written description of the zoning, land use, development, code enforcement, or entitlement history of a specific property. A zoning letter is not the same as a “director’s determination” as defined in this title. (Ord. 5072 § 10, 2018; Ord. 5065 § 5, 2017; Ord. 5061 §§ 5, 7, 2017; Ord. 5038 § 2, 2016; Ord. 5033 § 18, 2015)

Chapter 17.115 GENERAL LAND USE REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.115.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to list general regulations relating to the permitting and conduct of land uses under simplified headings. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.020 Land use tables.
The authority to establish a specific land use within a specific zone is provided as indicated in the land use tables of this title. The tables list a broad range of standard residential, commercial, and industrial land uses typically found in urbanized areas. Within the land use tables, the land uses are listed as rows and the zone districts are listed as columns. The rows and columns combine to form matrices indicating specific land uses that may be established within a specific zone district. The cells within the tables contain letter designators indicating the permissibility of the various uses, and the form of any land use entitlements required to establish a particular use in a particular zone.

If a use is authorized in one zone, but not in other zones, then that use is specifically prohibited in those zones where it is not authorized. Furthermore, if a use is listed in one table, but is not listed in another table, then that use is specifically prohibited within the zones of table in which the use is not listed. If a use is listed in the tables as an accessory use, the use may not be established in the absence of an authorized primary use. The land use tables are located in the following chapters of this title:

A.    The residential land use table is provided in Chapter 17.140.

B.     The commercial land use table is provided in Chapter 17.145. This table also includes the specific commercial, manufacturing, and light industrial uses permitted in the commercial manufacturing (C-M) zone.

C.     The manufacturing and industrial land use table is provided in Chapter 17.150.

 

D.    Allowable land uses in the open space (O-S) zone are provided in Chapter 17.155. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.030 Keys to the land use tables.
The abbreviations used in the land use tables shall have the following meanings:

A     “A” means “adult entertainment permit”

C      “C” means “conditional use permit”

D     “D” means “director’s determination”

M     “M” means “minor conditional use permit”

P      “P” means “permitted use”

S      “S” means “site development plan permit”

T      “T” means “temporary use permit”

Z      “Z” means “administrative zoning permit”

X     “X” means “not permitted”

In addition to the abbreviated terms listed above, the land use tables incorporate endnotes, which are indicated by numerical designators in the final column of each table. The numerical designators correspond with written notes listed at the bottom of each table. The notes provide additional information and direct readers to other applicable sections of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.040 Airport land use compatibility.
The establishment of certain land uses is restricted by proximity to the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field airports. Land use restrictions in the vicinity of these airports are described in the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field Airport Land Use Compatibility Plans prepared by the San Diego County Regional Airport Authority Area. (Ord. 5033 § 20, 2015)

 

17.115.050 General rules of conduct.
No building or structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged except for the purposes permitted in the district in which such building or land is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law and ordinance. Furthermore, no uses or ancillary activities shall be conducted in such a way as to be considered obnoxious or offensive to persons residing, working, or conducting business in the city. All uses and operations within the city shall be subject to the performance standards specified in this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.060 Wholesale trade.
Wholesale trade is prohibited as a primary use within the O-P, C-N, C-G, and C-R zones. A business in the O-P, C-N, C-G, and C-R zones may conduct limited wholesale trade that is incidental to an otherwise permitted retail use. However, the wholesale component of the business shall not constitute more than 15% of the total receipts, nor shall the wholesale component of the business occupy more than 15% of the floor area available for the sale, merchandising and display of consumer products. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.070 Uses and activities permitted by conditional use permit.
In addition to those uses listed in the land use tables as requiring a conditional use permit, the following uses and activities shall be permitted in any zone (except as noted), provided a conditional use permit is granted:

A.    Outdoor public address systems or loudspeakers;

B.     Pyrotechnic displays (fireworks); or

C.     Flagpoles in excess of 55 feet in height. (Ord. 5018 § 24, 2015)

 

17.115.080 Unlisted uses.
In the event that a use is not specifically listed in this title, or if ambiguity arises in the nature or operational characteristics of any use, it shall be the responsibility of the director of community development to gather the pertinent facts related to the use and to make a determination regarding the ability to establish the use within any of the zones listed in this title. The director shall make a determination regarding the use in accordance with the procedures listed in Chapter 17.10 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.090 Temporary uses.
Temporary uses, as defined in Chapter 17.105, may be permitted subject to approval of a temporary use permit. Refer to Chapter 17.75 for regulations relating to temporary uses and temporary use permits. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.115.100 Outdoor uses.
A.    General regulations.

1.     Except as specifically permitted in this title, all commercial uses and associated storage shall only be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Exceptions exist for those uses that are customarily conducted outdoors, although such uses may require a conditional use permit or other permit approval as indicated in this title. Examples of uses that are customarily conducted outdoors in commercial zones include, but are not limited to: outdoor dining areas, vehicle sales lots, plant nurseries and garden centers, sports fields and courts, and outdoor amusements such as go-kart tracks and miniature golf.

2.     Certain outdoor commercial, industrial and manufacturing uses such as plant nurseries, garden centers, and outdoor storage areas may require screening measures. The requirement for screening as well as the methods, materials, and appearance of required screening for outdoor uses are subject to the discretion and approval of the director of community development, or in the case of a conditional use permit, the planning commission. The director or commission may require decorative screening materials in visually prominent or visually sensitive areas.

3.     Under no circumstances shall outdoor uses and activities be permitted which displace required off-street parking or landscaping improvements. For outdoor use and outdoor storage regulations in the M and C-M zones, refer to Section 17.150.050.

B.     Outdoor vending machines.

1.     Outdoor vending machines, as defined in Chapter 17.105 of this title, are permitted along the primary storefront (i.e., that elevation of the building that includes the primary business entrance) of the following principal land uses, when located outside the area governed by Specific Plan No. 182, and subject to the performance standards in subsection C below:

a.     Automotive fueling stations

b.     Convenience markets

c.     Liquor stores

d.     Markets (grocery store)

e.     Motels

f.      Pharmacies

g.     Supermarkets (grocery store)

h.     Transition service centers and/or emergency shelters

Where the “primary business entrance” is located at the corner of a building outdoor vending machines will be permitted on the side of the business that fronts the street from which the business takes its address.

2.     Notwithstanding subsection (B)(1) above, outdoor vending machines may be approved as an ancillary use to other uses, and within Specific Plan No. 182, where appropriate and compatible, (example: common recreation area of a residential project, or interior courtyard of a downtown motel), with approval of a Minor Conditional Use Permit, and subject to the performance standards listed in subsection C below, provided the outdoor vending machines are also sited in a location that prevents the machines from being visible from the public right-of-way. This requirement shall not be used to permit outdoor vending machines on the side or rear of a commercial establishment outside the view of employees within the business.

C.     Outdoor vending machine performance standards. When outdoor vending machines are permitted, they are subject to the following requirements:

1.     Outdoor vending machines shall not obstruct pedestrian pathways, driving aisles, parking spaces, or any areas necessary for proper vehicular circulation or loading activities. A clear path of travel at least four feet wide must be provided around outdoor vending machines.

2.     Outdoor vending machines shall comply with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (California Physical Access Laws).

3.     Outdoor vending machines shall comply with the requirements of the California Building and Fire Safety Codes.

4.     Outdoor vending machines shall not be located within four feet of the public right-of-way, or located in such a manner as to encourage or require customers to stand or park in the right-of-way in order to use the machine.

5.     The back of an outdoor vending machine may not be located more than 18 inches from an exterior wall of the primary structure on the lot.

6.     If exposed conduits or pipes are required (e.g., to supply the outdoor vending machine with power, coolant for refrigeration, or the product being dispensed), they shall be secured to the building and painted or otherwise screened to match the building exterior. Exposed conduits, pipes, and utility connections shall not bridge a span or gap greater than 18 inches.

7.     All outdoor vending machines shall be maintained in a clean and attractive condition. Any graffiti on an outdoor vending machine shall be removed within 24 hours. If the outdoor vending machine is removed, the area shall be cleaned and restored to its previous condition, including the removal of any abandoned pipes, conduits or other connecting hardware.

8.     In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, the following criteria shall apply to outdoor vending machines:

a.     Outdoor vending machines shall not block or visually obstruct the sales counter as viewed from outside the establishment.

b.     The area occupied by outdoor vending machines may not exceed 20% of the width of the building elevation along which they are located, nor shall the combined width of all vending machines at any one site exceed 30 feet.

c.     Sign copy on an outdoor vending machine shall be limited to that which fits on the exterior panels of the machine and shall only advertise the actual product or service provided by the machine.

d.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property in the M-U zone district. The approved specific plan associated with each M-U zoned property shall address outdoor vending machines on that property.

(Ord. 5018 § 26, 2015; Ord. 4972 § 5, 2011)

 

17.115.110 Accessory uses.
The operation of an “accessory use” as defined in Chapter 17.105 shall not be paramount to the primary use established at a property. The primary use of the subject property or tenant space shall dictate the required number of parking spaces for the accessory use. No accessory use may be established that would otherwise require the approval of a conditional use permit, unless a conditional use permit is approved.

Typically, an accessory use will not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area within the tenant space. Examples of an “accessory use” include, but are not limited to:

A.    A snack bar at a movie theater;

B.     An optometrist in a department store;

C.     A veterinarian service in a pet shop;

D.    A juice bar for clients in a yoga studio/fitness center; or

E.     A deli or sandwich counter in a market or supermarket. (Ord. 4968 § 14, 2011)

 

17.115.120 Special land use regulations.
Certain uses, because of their unique nature, shall be subject to special standards. These special uses and special standards are located in various chapters and subsections within this title. The table below lists such special uses and provides direction in locating applicable standards for those uses within this title:

 

Table 17.115.120
Special Land Use Regulations

 

Adult entertainment establishments

Chapter 17.45

Agriculture and animals

Chapter 17.205

Alcohol sales

Chapter 17.210

Automotive fueling stations

Chapter 17.215

Alternative lending

Chapter 17.215

Bed and breakfast establishments

Chapter 17.225

Family daycare homes

Chapter 17.225

Garage sales

Chapter 17.225

Home occupation business

Chapter 17.225

Kitchen facilities in hotels and motels

Chapter 17.225

Massage establishments

Chapter 17.225

Mobile home and temporary buildings uses as temporary offices

Chapter 17.225

Modified development standards for affordable housing

Chapter 17.220

Motion picture theatres

Chapter 17.230

Off-site outdoor automobile sales

Chapter 17.225

Outdoor dining areas

Chapter 17.225

Personal storage facilities

Chapter 17.235

Resource recovery centers

Chapter 17.225

Roadside stands

Chapter 17.225

Satellite antennas

Chapter 17.225

Second-family units in residential zones

Chapter 17.140

Secondhand merchandise stores and pawn shops

Chapter 17.250

(Ord. 5072 § 12, 2018; Ord. 5018 § 28, 2015)

 

17.115.130 Performance standards.
All uses and operations within the city shall be subject to the following minimum performance standards:

A.    Air quality.

1.     Smoke. In accordance with section 24242 of the California Health and Safety Code, a person shall not discharge smoke into the atmosphere for a period or periods aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour, which is:

a.     As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart, as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines; or

b.     Of such opacity as to obscure an observer’s view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke described above.

2.     Air pollution. Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, and other forms of air pollution, in accordance with section 24243 of the California Health and Safety Code. A person shall not discharge from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material which will cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public or which endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such persons or the public or which cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to animals, vegetation, business or property. In no event shall any emission from any chimney or other source, or any solid or liquid particles in concentration exceed 0.4 grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas at any point.

3.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the use from which such odor emits, or at the point of greatest concentration if further than the lot line. Any process that may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with an adequate secondary safeguard system of control, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. In no event shall odors, gases or other odorous matter be emitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in a ratio of one (1) volume of odorous air to four (4) volumes of clean air.

B.     Water quality.

1.     Wastes into surface runoff. Any discharge of liquid industrial wastes of any sort to surface streams, flood control channels, storm drains and subsurface pits shall be prohibited in conformance with applicable storm water regulations.

2.     Wastes into sanitary sewer. Any wastes discharged into the city sanitary sewer, which may require pretreatment, depending upon the type, concentration and volume of material being handled, shall conform to the requirements of Title 13 of the code of the city.

3.     Wastes disposed by hauling. Any industry hauling liquid wastes off-site for disposal shall obtain and conform to waste discharge requirements of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region, which will necessitate hauling such wastes to a Class 1 site for disposal.

C.     Noise.

1.     The sound level of any individual operation, land use, or activity other than rail, aircraft, street, or highway transportation, shall not exceed the sound levels indicated in the following table. For the purpose of determining compliance with these noise limitations, the sound levels shall be measured at the property lines of the property upon which the operation, land use, or activity is conducted.

 

Zones

Time of Day

One-Hour Average Sound Level Decibels

All residentially zoned properties

 

 

 

7 a.m.—7 p.m.

60

 

7 p.m.—10 p.m.

55

 

10 p.m.—7 a.m.

50

All M-U and commercially zoned properties

 

 

except the C-M zoned properties

7 a.m.—7 p.m.

65

 

7 p.m.—10 p.m.

60

 

10 p.m.—7 a.m.

55

All C-M and industrially zoned properties

Any time

75

 

Conditionally*

80

 

*       Where outdoor noise levels are higher, additional noise attenuation measures, i.e., earphones for workers, increased insulation, double-pane glass, etc., may make noise levels acceptable.

 

2.     For the purposes of this section, interior lease lines within a property or building shall comply with the same standards as lot lines. For noise inside a building, the sound level meter shall be placed at least three (3) feet distant from any wall, ceiling or partition, and the average measurement of at least three (3) different positions throughout the room shall be determined. The sound level limit at a location on a boundary between two (2) adjoining zoning districts shall be that of the more restrictive zone. When any sound level measurement is required it will be made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and shall be measured with a sound level meter.

3.     Equipment noise. It is unlawful for any person within any residential zone, or within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from any residential zone, to operate equipment or perform any outside construction, maintenance or repair work on buildings, structures, landscapes or related facilities, or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, power hoist, leaf blower, mower, or any other mechanical device, between the hours of 7 p.m. of one (1) day and 7 a.m. of the next day in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. This subsection shall also apply to any property in the Mixed-Use zone having one or more residential units. This restriction does not apply to emergency work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition, restore utility service, or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.

4.     Vehicle repairs.

a.     It is unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any automobile between the hours of 7 p.m. of one (1) day and 7 a.m. of the next day. This subsection shall also apply to any property in the Mixed-Use zone having one or more residential units.

b.     It is unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the city to repair, rebuild or test any automobile which is not registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles to a person residing at the address or to an immediate family member of a person residing at the address where such repairing, rebuilding or testing is being performed unless proof of exemption from such registration is provided which clearly demonstrates ownership by a resident at the subject address or an immediate family member of a resident at the subject address. This subsection shall also apply to any property in the Mixed-Use zone that includes one or more residential units.

c.     Under no circumstances is the operation of an automotive repair facility as a business permitted in any residential zone, or on a property in the Mixed-Use zone that includes one or more residential units on the property.

5.     Property upkeep.

a.     Exterior yards, including front yard setback areas in residential zones, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of garbage, debris, demolition waste, overgrown vegetation, scrap wood and metal, automotive or recreational vehicle parts and fluids, defective appliances or machinery, mattresses or other indoor furnishings, whether in a state of repair or not. This does not include firewood which is neatly stacked and maintained or outdoor furniture in good repair.

b.     Properties shall not harbor rodents or insect infestations.

6.     Refuse vehicles and parking lot sweepers. No person shall operate or permit to be operated a refuse compacting, processing or collection vehicle or parking lot sweeper between the hours of 7 p.m. of one (1) day and 7 a.m. of the next day in any residential zone.

7.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

a.     The level of the noise;

b.     The intensity of the noise;

c.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

d.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

e.     The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;

f.      The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

g.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

h.     The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

i.      The time of the day or night the noise occurs;

j.      The duration of the noise;

k.     Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and

l.      Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

8.     Specific exemptions. Special events of short duration, such as carnivals, fireworks displays, outdoor concerts, parades and sports activities, which are regulated by separate city approval such as a conditional use permit, are specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter. Noise regulations for such events, however, may be applied as a condition of such separate approval.

9.     Enforcement and penalties.

a.     It is a violation for any property owner(s) and/or person(s) in control of property to permit or cause a noise disturbance to be produced upon property owned by them or under their control.

b.     It is a violation for any person or persons to create or allow the making of noise disturbance as provided by this chapter at any location in the city.

c.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code.

d.     The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter which causes or creates sound levels or vibration exceeding the allowable limits as specified in this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Additionally, no provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause or action, or legal remedy of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from any other law.

D.    Vibrations. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration generated by such use is not harmful or injurious to the use or development of surrounding properties. No vibration shall be permitted which is perceptible without instruments at any use along the property line on which such use is located. For the purpose of this determination, the boundary of any lease agreement or operating unit or properties operating as a unit shall be considered the same as the property line.

E.     Radioactivity. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point.

F.     Electrical disturbance. No activity shall be permitted which causes electrical disturbances affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the property line of such activity.

G.    Other performance quality. Other uses not specifically noted above are required to conform to performance standards as set forth by the following provisions:

1.     No use shall be undertaken or maintained unless it conforms to the regulations set forth in this section. No land or building shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosion or other hazard, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, airborne sand, materials in suspension such as paint droplets or any other form of air pollution, heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other disturbance, glare, liquid or solid refuse or wastes, or other substance, condition or element in such a manner or in such an amount as to affect adversely the surrounding area or adjacent premises.

H.    Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning.

1.     All HVAC units must attenuate noise to acceptable levels through one of the following standards:

a.     The HVAC must be kept a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the property line; or

b.     The HVAC must be surrounded by walls or parapet walls that obstruct the line of sight to adjacent uses; or

c.     The HVAC must be kept in a mechanical room; or

d.     An alternative noise attenuation measure that would reduce the noise levels to less than the applicable noise level limits.

I.      Ground-Floor Transparency.

1.     All ground-floor windows shall be maintained transparent. If windows are to be obscured, no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the window area may be obscured.

(Ord. 5081 § 5, 2019.)

 

17.115.140 Procedure for applying performance standards.
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the performance standards procedure is to ensure that an objective, unbiased determination is made in those cases where there may be substantial doubt as to whether an individual land use or group of land uses comply with the performance standards of this chapter, and to formulate practical ways for the alleviation of such noncompliance.

B.     Determination of Compliance. Subsequent to a study of a proposed use, the director of community development may determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the proposed use may violate the performance standards set forth in this chapter and may initiate an investigation.

 

C.     Required Data. Following the initiation of an investigation, the director may require the owner or operator of any proposed use to submit such data and evidence as is needed to make an objective determination. Failure to submit data required by the director shall constitute grounds for denying a development or use permit for any use of land.

D.    Report by Expert Consultants. The director may require any person, firm or corporation to retain an expert consultant or consultants to study and report as to compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards, and to advise how a proposed use can be brought into compliance with the performance standards. Such consultants shall be fully qualified to give the required information and shall be persons or firms mutually agreeable to the director and to the owner or operator of the use in question. In the event of inability to select a mutually agreeable consultant, the planning commission shall select the consultant. The cost of the consultant’s services shall be borne by the owner or operator of such use.

E.     Planning Commission to Hear Appeal. The action with respect to the performance standards procedure may be appealed to the planning commission within ten days following such action. In the absence of such appeal, the director’s determination shall be final. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.120 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
17.120.010 Intent and purpose.
This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by regulating their enlargement, their reestablishment after abandonment, and the alteration or restoration after destruction of the structures they occupy. In addition, this chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming structures by prohibiting their being moved, altered, or enlarged in a manner that would increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this title. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.020 Maintenance.
Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a nonconforming structure or a conforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.030 Continuation of nonconforming uses and structures.
A.    Nonconforming use. Except as otherwise provided in this title, a nonconforming use may be continued subject to the provisions of this chapter, but shall not be expanded or increased in intensity or substantially changed. Furthermore, no sign advertising a nonconforming use may be expanded.

B.     Nonconforming structure used for nonconforming purposes. A nonconforming structure used for nonconforming purposes may continue subject to the provisions of this chapter, but shall not be expanded or restored except as provided in this chapter.

C.     Nonconforming structure used for conforming purposes. A nonconforming structure used for a conforming purpose may continue, but any modification or restoration to such structure shall be subject to the present standards, except as otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

 

17.120.040 Restoration of nonconforming structures and uses.
A.    A nonconforming structure, or a conforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged by fire, explosion or other casualty, to the extent of sixty percent (60%) or less of the structure’s replacement construction cost, may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that the restoration is started within one year, meets then current building codes, and is diligently pursued to completion.

B.     A nonconforming structure, or a conforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged by fire, explosion or other casualty, to the extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of the structure’s replacement construction cost, may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, subject to approval of a conditional use permit, provided that the restoration is started within one year, meets then current building codes, and is diligently pursued to completion.

C.     The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed as of the day prior to its damage or partial destruction. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the building official and shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the building code. Any decision made by the building official concerning the cost of reconstruction may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 17.30 of this title.

D.    Notwithstanding paragraph A through C above, any nonconforming multi-family housing development that is involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, other catastrophic event, or the public enemy, may be reconstructed to its previously approved configuration in accordance with California Government Code section 65852.25.

E.     Any unreinforced building, that is also nonconforming, may be demolished for the purpose of complying with State unreinforced building regulations, and subsequently replaced with a similar building, subject to approval of a conditional use permit, and provided that the restoration is started by 2020, started within one year of demolition, meets then current building codes, and is diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.050 Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures.
A.    Nonconforming structures occupied by conforming uses may be expanded in conformance with the development standards established within this title.

B.     Nonconforming single-family residences located in non-residential, or multi-family residential zones may be expanded in conformance with the development standards of the RS-6 zone.

C.     Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures occupied by nonconforming uses may be expanded on the same parcel, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. The planning commission may grant the request, grant the request with modification, or deny the request. The planning commission may require as a condition of approval that a specific termination date be set for the use and/or structure being expanded. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.060 Required findings.
Before approving a conditional use permit for the expansion, reconstruction or replacement of a nonconforming use or structure as provided for in this chapter, the planning commission shall make the following findings, which are in place of the findings typically required for approval of a conditional use permit:

A.    The strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulations within this section would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship.

B.     The approval of the conditional use permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. (Ord. 4984 § 36, 2013)

 

17.120.070 Termination of nonconforming use.
The nonconforming use of any property shall be terminated within three (3) years of the date such use, or structure became nonconforming, or within one (1) year from the date of formal notice of termination, whichever period is greater, if the planning commission holds a public hearing pursuant to Chapter 17.25 and finds the nonconforming use to be a nuisance which cannot be made to conform to all regulations which made the use nonconforming. The decision of the planning commission shall be referred to the city council for final action. The city council may extend the term within which the use must be terminated, upon a finding that the use cannot be terminated or made to conform within the statutory period. The city council action shall be in the form of a resolution. The resolution shall be mailed by the city clerk to the property owner at the last known address. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.080 Removal of nonconforming structure.
Nonconforming structures shall be completely removed or altered to structurally conform to the development standards of the zone in which they are located within 20 years, which time is measured from the date they became nonconforming or such longer time as may be granted. In no case shall this period of time be less than five (5) years from the date of formal notice by the city council. Such notification shall be in the form of a resolution and shall recite such facts as bear upon the nonconforming structure under the provisions of this chapter. The resolution shall be mailed by the city clerk to the property owner at the last known address. The period within which such structure must be removed or altered to structurally conform as required above may be extended by the city council upon a finding that the structure cannot be removed or made to conform within the statutory period. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.090 Change in status of nonconforming use.
If a nonconforming use is vacated and is succeeded by a conforming use, it is evidence that the nonconforming use was terminated and thereupon immediately lost any vested right as such. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.100 Discontinuance of nonconforming use.
In the event that any nonconforming use is discontinued on a property for a period of one (1) year or more, such discontinuance shall be presumed to be abandonment of the use by the property owner. At any time after any nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one (1) year or more, the director may notify the property owner in writing of the director’s determination of presumed abandonment of the nonconforming use. Pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this title, the property owner may appeal the director’s determination to the planning commission, which may overturn the director’s determination only upon making a finding that the evidence supports the property owner’s position that the nonconforming use was not discontinued for a period of one (1) year or more. When any legal nonconforming use is abandoned, any future use of such property or structure shall conform to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.110 Recordation of notice to terminate a nonconforming use and to remove a nonconforming structure.
The city clerk shall record with the office of the San Diego County Assessor/Recorder any notice to terminate a nonconforming use and notice to remove a nonconforming structure that is approved by the city council pursuant to this chapter. Said notice shall be recorded within 10 business days of city council action. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

 

17.120.120 Termination of a nonconforming use and removal of a nonconforming structure in less than statutory period.
Any nonconforming use or structure may be ordered terminated or removed, respectively, by the city council within a period of time less than provided above upon a finding that termination / removal can reasonably be accomplished. In no case, however, shall the period herein provided for notification be abrogated. It is the duty of the city council to provide a reasonable amortization period in the event of such a finding. (Ord. 4968 § 20, 2011)

Chapter 17.125 GENERAL LOT REQUIREMENTS
17.125.010 Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to list general lot requirements that are applicable in multiple zones under simplified headings. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.020 Lot consideration for zone reclassification.
An existing lot may be considered for reclassification to another zoning district even though the existing lot does not meet the lot requirements of the proposed zone. However, it may be reason for denial of a zone reclassification if it is determined that the subject lot is substandard in width or area for proper development in the proposed zone district. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.030 Reduction of lot area.
No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the lot area, yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this title, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations established by this title. Notwithstanding the above, lot area may be reduced below minimum requirements when such reduction results from partial acquisition or dedication for public use. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.040 Greater lot area may be required.
Greater lot areas than those prescribed in the various zones may be required when such greater areas are established by the adoption of a specific plan designating the location and size of such greater required areas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.050 Substandard lots.
When a lot has less than the minimum required area or width as set forth in any of the zones contained herein, or in an approved specific plan, and was of record on the effective date of this title, such lot shall be deemed to have complied with the minimum required lot area or width as set forth in any such zone or spe-cific plan. However, in the various residential zones, the area per dwelling unit shall remain as specified in each zone, except that in no instance shall this provision prevent the erecting of at least one single-family dwelling on any substandard lot. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.060 Construction of buildings across property lines.
No building or structure shall be constructed or erected across a property line unless it is approved as a part of a specific plan, planned unit development or planned residential development. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.070 Building site area required where portion taken for street.
If a portion of a legally existing lot or parcel of land in any zoning district is acquired for public use in any manner, including dedication, condemnation or purchase, the remainder of such lot or parcel shall be considered as having the required minimum building site area; provided:

A.    After all applicable front and side yard requirements are met, and after at least one-half of the applicable rear yard requirement is met, the remainder of such lot or parcel contains a rectangular space at least 30 feet by 40 feet in size which is usable for a main building.

B.     The remainder of such lot or parcel has an area of at least one-half of that required for a building site in the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located, except that in zoning districts requiring a building site area of 20,000 square feet or more, a building site of not less than 6,000 square feet shall be required.

C.     The remainder of such lot or parcel has frontage on a street. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.080 Lot frontage requirement.
Any new lot created in the city shall have frontage on a dedicated public street that allows a minimum of 15 feet of usable access. Alternative access may be approved through the PRD, PUD, specific plan, or common interest subdivision process as described elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 5068 § 3, 2017)

 

17.125.090 Development of landlocked residential property.
In the RS-40 and RS-20 zones, individual lots may be created and/or developed as described in this section. In the RS-14 zone, a maximum of four (4) lots may be created and/or developed as described in this section.

Upon satisfactory demonstration that it is impossible in a practical manner to otherwise serve an area with direct access to a public street, individual lots may be created and/or developed provided the following conditions are satisfied:

A.    The city shall adopt a specific plan delineating the nonpublic access ways. This specific plan shall meet the following criteria:

1.     Access to five (5) lots or less shall require a minimum 20 feet wide paved roadway.

2.     Access to six (6) or more lots shall require a minimum 22-feet wide paved roadway. A greater width may be required due to the number of lots served, natural slope gradient, and distance to public street intersection.

3.     Roadway grades shall not exceed 10 percent.

4.     Any nonpublic access way serving more than five (5) dwellings shall have access in at least two directions.

5.     The city engineer shall approve the drainage facilities required for such access ways.

6.     The fire department shall approve the adequacy of access and fire protection to each property served by such access way.

7.     Adequate and safe sight distance shall be maintained for all access ways and driveways.

B.     In addition to the standards required in the underlying zones, lots to be served by private access ways shall conform to the following additional criteria:

1.     Each lot shall be provided with at least two (2) additional parking spaces; these spaces may be provided by widening the access way.

2.     Padding for building sites in the RS-40 and RS-20 zones shall be held to an absolute minimum to preserve the natural amenities of the site.

3.     Public utilities including water, telephone and power shall be provided as per existing city regulations.

4.     A means to guarantee maintenance of access way shall be provided.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.100 Property abutting half-streets.
A building or structure shall not be erected or maintained on a lot which abuts a highway or street having only a portion of its required width dedicated, and where no part of such dedication would normally revert to such lot, if the highway were vacated. An exception exists, if the yards provided and maintained in connection with such building or structure have the required width or depth needed to complete the road width, plus the width or depth of the yard requirements on the lot. However, this provision does not require a yard of such width or depth as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot to less than 40 feet. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.125.110 Common Interest Developments.
A common interest development may be established in compliance with the standards in this section. A common interest development is reviewed and approved consistent with the approval process for the development and must be accompanied by a Tentative Parcel or Subdivision Map. The conversion of an existing development into a common interest development must comply with Chapter 17.160.

A.    Lots & Sublots

A common interest condominium development may contain sublots consisting of air space or of any reasonable lot area, width, or configuration. The minimum lot frontage requirement on a public street may apply to a private street or may apply to a condominium development in its entirety.

B.     Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs)

When a common interest development includes any land or improvements intended for common ownership and/or common maintenance including streets, driveways, parking areas, landscaping, fences, walls, buildings, utilities, recreational facilities or open space, the applicant shall submit proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions which shall run with the land and which clearly set forth both the privileges and responsibilities involved in the common ownership and/or maintenance. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and the director of community development prior to the issuance of a building permit. A recorded copy of the approved covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be submitted to the city prior to the sale of any unit.

C.     Private Street

A private street or drive aisle that provides access to more than one residence or unit shall be provided as a separate common lot to be held in common ownership. The private street shall be designed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Each residential unit shall have guaranteed vehicular and pedestrian access.

D.    Common Areas

All common facilities or amenities shall be held in common and maintained by the Homeowner’s Association. All common landscape areas including those common facilities and landscape areas which count toward the required common open space and recreational space requirements may be required to be included as part of a landscape easement which shall be guaranteed for maintenance enforceable by the City of El Cajon.

(Ord. 5068 § 3, 2017)

Chapter 17.130 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.130.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to list development regulations that are applicable across multiple zone districts, and to list regulations and development standards that are applicable under unique and/or specific circumstances. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.130.020 Applicability.
The development standards listed in this chapter are applicable to all new construction. Lawful nonconforming structures shall not be required to meet any new or revised standards, but any modification to such development shall be subject to the present standards, unless specifically stated otherwise in this chapter.

Nonconforming structures shall be regulated as described in Chapter 17.120. Any development or portion of a development meeting present standards but constructed prior to adoption of such standards shall be con-sidered conforming and shall not be permitted to revert to standards less restrictive than the present standards. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.030 Yards generally.
Except as provided elsewhere in this title, every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky and not contain any buildings, structures, or signs. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.040 Use of exterior yards in commercial and industrial zones.
Except as provided elsewhere in this title, only the following items shall be permitted in required exterior yard areas within commercial and industrial zones. Regardless of these provisions, nothing shall be placed or permitted to remain in such a position or location as to interfere with sight distance necessary for the safe passage of pedestrians and/or vehicles and emergency units along the public right-of-way, or to interfere with light and air penetration reasonably necessary for structures used for human occupancy.

A.    Driveways;

B.     Landscaping and irrigation equipment;

C.     Permitted signs;

D.    Utility equipment such as electrical transformer boxes, fire department connections and telephone junction boxes. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.050 Measurement of exterior yards.
Exterior yard requirements shall be measured from the exterior property line, or from the edge of an approved private street, or from the edge of a dedicated or planned future public street right-of-way. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.060 Setback requirements for through lots.
Through lots shall maintain the required front yard setback and/or the required exterior yard setbacks on all sides of the lot with frontage on a public street. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.070 Distance between buildings.
A.    There is no minimum distance required between non-residential buildings on the same lot. However, all such buildings are subject to building and fire safety code requirements including ADA requirements.

B.     Where two (2) or more buildings on the same lot are, by definition of this title, considered main buildings, then the front yard setback requirement shall apply only to the building closest to the front lot line. (Ord. 4984 § 38, 2013)

 

17.130.080 Buildings in relation to alleys.
Any building located on an alley and having an opening used as means of access from such alley shall maintain a distance of not less than five (5) feet from such alley; provided, however, that on alleys having a width of 24 feet or more, such setbacks shall not be required if:

A.    An acceptable trash and recycling area is provided inside the building or other acceptable location.

B.     All doors opening onto such alley from such buildings are recessed a distance of at least five feet from such alley. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.090 Vision clearance of corner lots.
All corner lots shall maintain a triangular area for safety purposes in which no sign, tree, fence, shrub or other physical obstruction higher than 42 inches above the estimated curb grade shall be permitted. The legs of such triangle shall be defined by intersecting 15-foot segments of the front and side lot lines, and a third line which connects the intersecting 15-foot segments at points opposite the aforementioned intersection. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.100 Yards for caretaker’s unit.
The yards required for a single-family home in a single-family residential zone shall not be required for a dwelling unit constructed as a caretakers unit at a commercial, industrial or institutional site. However, the setbacks of the underlying zone shall be maintained unless a specific plan is approved authorizing reduced setbacks. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.110 Projections into required yards.
No portion of any building or structure may project into a required yard, except as follows:

A.    Cornices, Eaves, etc., May Project Into Yards. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features may extend or project into the required side yard not closer than three (3) feet from the side property line. Such architectural features may extend or project into a required front or rear yard no more than three (3) feet, except that eaves or overhangs of the main building may extend or project a maximum distance of six (6) feet into the required front and/or rear yard area, provided the bottom of such eaves or overhangs is more than six (6) feet eight (8) inches above finish floor level of the first floor, and further provided, the distance from the front and/or rear property line is not less than seven (7) feet.

B.     Fireplaces May Project Into Side Yards. Fireplace structures not wider than eight (8) feet, measured in the general direction of the side lot line upon which it faces, and which are incorporated as a part of the main building, may project into the required side yard a distance of 18 inches, provided such extension of such fireplace does not reduce the remaining side yard to less than three (3) feet.

C.     Fire Escapes May Project Into Yards. A fire escape may extend or project into any front or side yard not more than four (4) feet.

D.    Uncovered Porches, Platforms or Landing Places May Project Into Yards. An uncovered porch, platform or landing place which does not exceed 30 inches in height from grade may extend or project into any required front or side yard not more than six (6) feet, provided such structure in a side yard shall not reduce the unobstructed pedestrian way or sidewalk on ground level to less than three (3) feet.

E.     Guard Railings May Project Into Yards. Guard railings for safety protection around depressed ramps, open-work fences, hedges or landscaped architectural features not more than 36 inches in height may be located in any front or side yard. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.115 Steeples, spires, clearstories and similar architectural projections.
Maximum building height is defined in Chapter 17.105, and is listed for the various zones of the City within tables contained in Chapters 17.140 through 17.170. Maximum building height shall not be exceeded except as provided elsewhere in this title, including as follows: Roof-top mechanical screens, architectural features such as steeples and spires, elevator shafts, stairwell enclosures, and clearstories, covering a combined total of less than 25% of the roof area of a building may exceed the maximum building height by up to 20 feet. A building may contain architectural features such as steeples, spires, or clearstories up to 40 feet above the maximum building height of the underlying zone, subject to approval of a minor conditional use permit. (Ord. 5033 § 22, 2015)

 

17.130.120 Screening of roof top mechanical equipment.
Rooftop mechanical equipment installed on buildings and structures shall be screened from public view by a parapet wall or decorative equipment screen that shall complement the overall architectural theme of the building. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.130 Parapet walls.
The height of parapet walls shall contribute to the permissible height of the building or structure. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.140 Flagpoles.
Freestanding flagpoles are limited to the height restrictions of the underlying zones, except freestanding flagpoles flying only the United States flag and/or state of California flag may have an overall height of 55 feet. Freestanding flagpoles that only fly the United States flag and/or state of California flag may exceed the 55-foot height limit with approval of a conditional use permit. In no event may any flagpole in the city violate Federal Aviation Agency standards for aeronautic safety. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.150 On-site lighting.
All developments except detached single-family residences shall provide adequate lighting for pedestrian and vehicular safety and be sufficient to minimize security problems. However, in no case shall lighting on one property create a nuisance on any other property. An on-site lighting plan for all parking areas, pedestrian walkways and common open space/recreation areas shall be required prior to the issuance of building permits for all projects except single-family residences unless the single-family residences are part of a planned unit development or a planned residential development. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

17.130.160 Trash and recycling areas.
Accessible, lighted, trash pickup and recycling areas shall be provided in conjunction with parking areas for all multiple-family residential, commercial, office, and industrial developments. Trash and recycling areas may be contained in a building, but such trash and recycling areas shall be accessible to the refuse contractor or be accessory to an outside trash and recycling area. Any trash and recycling area not contained within a building shall be enclosed by a solid six-foot-high masonry wall, have view-obscuring metal or metal frame gates six feet in height. If required to be covered, the enclosure shall include a solid metal roof element. The floor shall be concrete and shall slope toward the back of the enclosure, away from the entrance, at a 2% grade.

All new multi-family residential, commercial, office, and industrial developments shall provide double-binned enclosures with minimum interior dimensions of five feet by sixteen feet to accommodate trash and recycling containers. The director of community development may authorize a single-binned enclosure under certain circumstances. The minimum interior dimensions of a single-binned enclosure shall be five feet by eight feet. When considering authorization of a single-binned enclosure, the director shall consider the nature and scale of uses on the property as they relate to solid waste generation and the need for recycling facilities. The director may also consider the unique spatial features of the site in question.

Trash and recycling enclosures shall not be located within exterior yard setback areas or within five (5) feet of any alley. One trash and recycling enclosure shall be provided for each multiple-unit residential development of six (6) units or more, and one additional trash and recycling area shall be provided for each 30 dwelling units thereafter. Trash and recycling areas shall be used for the storage of disposable trash and recycling only, and shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary manner. All trash and recycling areas required by this title shall satisfy all applicable storm water regulations and all building and fire safety codes. (Ord. 4984 § 41, 2013)

 

17.130.170 Permitted fences, walls and hedges.
A wall, fence or hedge 42 inches in height may be situated and maintained on any part of a lot. A fence, wall or hedge not more than six (6) feet in height may be situated anywhere on a lot to the rear of the line of the required front yard, except in the case of a reverse corner lot, a fence, wall or hedge higher than 42 inches shall not be situated closer to the side exterior property line than 10 feet. Also, a wrought iron fence not more than six (6) feet in height may be situated anywhere on a residential lot provided such a fence is at least 90 percent open to view for that portion of the fence that is more than 42 inches in height. Where justified, the director of community development may approve walls or fences with a greater height, subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit as described in Section 17.40.020(C). (Ord. 4968 § 22, 2011)

 

17.130.180 Required walls.
A.    Residential Boundary Wall. A six-foot-high decorative masonry or concrete wall shall be provided along any interior property line separating a non-residential development from residentially zoned or residentially developed property, unless the adjacent residentially zoned property is developed with a non-residential use such as a religious facility. The height of such wall shall be reduced to 42 inches in the area corresponding to the required front or exterior side yard setback of the adjacent residential lot.

B.     Parking Area Screening Wall. A six-foot-high decorative masonry or concrete wall shall be provided along any property line separating a parking area with more than five (5) spaces from adjacent residentially zoned or developed property. Such a wall shall not be required in areas where an on-site structure or an alley acts to screen the parking area from the adjacent residential property. The height of such wall shall be reduced to 42 inches in the area corresponding to the required front or exterior side yard setback of the adjacent residential lot.

C.     Exemption from Wall Requirements. No new wall shall be required where an existing wall, meeting the provisions of this section, is already located. Furthermore, in instances where a significant grade differential exists between adjacent properties the requirement for a screening wall may be waived by the director of community development, the planning commission, or the city council, if it is determined that the grade differential acts to screen the non-residential development, or the parking area from adjacent residential areas as effectively as the required wall. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.190 Landscaping in lieu of required walls.
Landscaping may be substituted for a required wall in instances where the director of community development, the planning commission, or the city council has determined that a required wall would be ineffective as a screening device. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.200 Retaining walls.
A.    Where multiple retaining walls are required, a minimum horizontal separation distance of three feet is required between retaining walls. The director may approve an administrative zoning permit authorizing a combined wall and fence height greater than is normally permitted, subject to the written notice of all affected adjoining property owners.

B.     Where a retaining wall protects a cut below natural grade and is located on the line separating lots, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence, wall or hedge of the same height that would otherwise be permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed. Where a retaining wall contains a fill, the height of the retaining wall built to retain the fill shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence, solid wall or hedge; provided, that in any event a protective openwork fence or wall not more than 42 inches in height may be erected atop the retaining wall. An openwork fence means a fence in which the component solid portions are evenly distributed and constitute not more than 60 percent of the total surface area of the face of the fence. Where a fence or wall is erected on top of a retaining wall containing a fill, the director may approve an administrative zoning permit authorizing a combined wall and fence height greater than is normally permitted, subject to the written notice of all affected adjoining property owners. (Ord. 5033 § 24, 2015; Ord. 5018 § 30, 2015)

 

17.130.210 Visibility requirements for fences, walls, and hedges.
Under no circumstances shall any fence, wall or hedge required or permitted by this title, regardless of its location, block pedestrian or vehicular visibility for safe and easy circulation. In such circumstances, the director or the planning commission, or the city council, as applicable, shall determine the appropriate height of any required or permitted fence, wall or hedge. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.220 Security fencing.
A.    The use of barbed wire or razor wire or concertina wire is prohibited except under any of the following circumstances:

 

1.     When used to enclose livestock on property zoned to permit livestock.

2.     When used at least six (6) feet above the ground for security purposes on property in the C-M and M zones, except that the barbed, razor or concertina wire shall not overhang the outside of the fence it is attached to, if the fence is on a property line.

3.     When used at least six (6) feet above the ground for security purposes on property zoned for residential uses that also abuts a public alley and is located across the alley from property in the C-M and M zones.

4.     When used for security purposes around utility substations or public easements, as long as the wire does not overhang the outside of the fence it is attached to, if the fence is on a property line.

B.     The construction and use of electric theft deterrent devices shall be allowed in the C-M and M zones only as provided in this section, subject to the following standards:

1.     Definition. For the purpose of this section, an electric theft deterrence device is defined as any bare wire or conductor which is supported on insulators and is located outdoors within ten feet of the ground or a walking surface and is attached to a post, fence, wall, or structure, and which is capable of being energized from any electrical source. As used in this section, an “electric fence” or an “electric security fence” is an electric theft deterrence device.

2.     An administrative zoning permit processed in accordance with Chapter 17.40 of this title.

3.     In addition to meeting standard application submittal requirements for administrative zoning permits pursuant to Chapter 17.40 of this title, all applications shall include schematics and load calculations indicating and or displaying the location of the power source; materials used for the fence construction; location of the regulating and monitoring equipment, and location of emergency access, Key Box and cut-off switch.

4.     The following development standards shall apply to any electronic theft deterrent device:

a.     Electric fences shall be minimized from public view for properties located along major and primary streets as indicated on the most recently adopted Circulation Element, and for properties with freeway frontage. A method of visual screening shall be approved by the Director of Community Development.

b.     An electric fence may be installed on properties that do not touch, join at the edge or border, or share a common property line with an existing residential land use or a residential zoning district.

c.     Electric fences shall be installed behind an approved perimeter wall or fence with a minimum height of six feet.

d.     Electric security fence is not permitted within the exterior setback or street side yard setback.

e.     The electric security fence proposed adjacent to a sidewalk must be installed behind the side yard and exterior yard setback and a solid masonry wall.

5.     The following performance standards shall apply to any electric theft deterrent device:

a.     Electric fences shall have a maximum height of ten feet.

b.     Electric fencing shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the currently adopted edition of the California Building Code, California Electrical Code, and Cal-OSHA standards.

c.     The electric security fence is not permitted as a perimeter fence or wall.

d.     Electric fences shall be clearly identified with warning signs of a maximum of nine square feet, prepared in English, Arabic and Spanish that read: “Warning—Electric Fence” at intervals of not less than 60 feet.

e.     Warning signs shall be black typewritten text with a yellow or white background.

f.      Warning signs shall not advertise or provide contact information of the electric fence manufacturer.

g.     An emergency Knox Box or any other similarly approved device (e.g. Rapid Emergency Access Control Transmitter (REACT) System) must be installed at every gate providing access to a property secured by an electric fence to allow fire department, police department, and/or any other emergency responder access.

h.     In the event that emergency access by emergency responders (e.g. Police Department, Fire Department, etc.) to a property where a permitted electric fence has been installed and is operating, is required due to an emergency or urgent circumstances, and the Knox Box or other similarly approved device is absent or non-functional, and an owner, manager, employee, custodian or any other person with control over the property is not present to disable the electric fence, emergency responding personnel shall be authorized to disable the electric fence in order to gain access to the property. As a condition of permit issuance, all applicants issued permits to install or use an electric fence as provided herein agree to waive any and all claims for damages to the electric fence against emergency responding units and/or personnel under such circumstances.

i.      No Electric Fence shall be installed or operated with a power source other than a storage battery not exceeding twelve (12) volts direct current, charged primarily with a solar panel; provided, however, in case of inclement weather or other conditions that inhibit the ability of the solar panel to fully recharge the battery, a charging device may be utilized for such purpose, if connected in a manner that ensures that the charging device cannot provide a source of power directly to the fence. In no case shall an Electric Fence be connected to any other electric power source.

j.      AC current shall not be used to energize any electric fence.

10.   The following requirements for indemnification shall apply:

a.     The applicant or property owner agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of El Cajon or its agents, officers, and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the City of El Cajon, or its agents, officers, or employees resulting from the approval and installation of an electrical security fence. Prior to issuance of the administrative zoning permits required in this section the applicant or property owner shall execute such indemnification and hold harmless agreements reflecting the obligations required under this subdivision (6), in such form as approved by the City Attorney.

b.     The City of El Cajon shall promptly notify the applicant or property owner of any claim, action, or proceeding and the City of El Cajon shall cooperate fully in the defense.

 

c.     If the City of El Cajon fails to cooperate fully in the defense, the applicant shall not thereafter be responsible to defend, indemnify, or hold harmless the City of El Cajon.

11.   Prior to the approval of any request to install an electrical security fence within the City of El Cajon, and at all times that the permit is in force and effect, the owner of the electric fence and the property owner(s), if different, shall provide to the City a certificate of commercial general liability insurance covering third party liability risks in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage insurance with the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, and employees, named as an additional insureds on the policy or policies. Failure to maintain coverage as required by this paragraph 11 shall be the basis for the revocation of the administrative zoning permit.

12.   Addition of the electrical security fence shall in no way preclude the installation and maintenance of required landscaping.

C.     Chain link fencing shall be installed so that all pointed edges are facing downward unless the fence has been approved as a security fence as described above.

D.    It shall be unlawful, and a misdemeanor for any person to install, maintain or operate an electric fence in violation of these development standards. (Ord. 5016 § 3, 2014)

 

17.130.225 Security gates.
A.    Definition. For the purpose of this section, security gates shall be defined as any gate, door or other barrier that limits or restricts public access to or from a property. This definition does not include any barrier securing a pool area, and individual gate, private patio, yard or living area, etc. or similar areas not intended for general public access.

B.     Security gates shall conform to the provisions of the California Fire Code (current edition) section 503.

C.     Gate setback for local residential street. For any development located on a designated “local residential” street, a security gate across a vehicular driveway shall be setback from the existing or proposed curb face a minimum of 15 feet, except that, for an existing development, the setback may be reduced to a minimum of 12 feet if it is deemed necessary.

D.    Gate setback for residential collector street. For any development on a street designated as a “residential collector” or higher, a security gate across a vehicular driveway shall be setback from the existing or proposed curb face a minimum of 30 feet to accommodate emergency vehicles. Any change to the minimum setback length shall be approved by the City’s designated Fire Marshal. (Ord. 5072 § 16, 2018)

 

17.130.230 Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.
Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs, including associated equipment, shall not be located in any required front yard or exterior side yard, and shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from any rear or interior side property line. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.240 Access to rear yard areas.
A.    In all commercial zones and in the Manufacturing zone, if there is a rear yard requirement due to a property’s adjacency to a residential zone, access shall be provided to that rear yard area. Such access may be provided through a required side yard, from a dedicated public street or alley, from a private street approved by specific plan, or as part of a PUD. If a rear yard is required but there is no access as described above, such access to the rear yard area shall be provided as follows:

1.     Lots 100 feet wide or less at the rear property line shall have at least one (1) opening, with minimum dimensions of five (5) feet wide, by 10 feet high or up to the top of the first ground level story of the structure (whichever is greater).

2.     Lots over 100 feet in width at the rear property line shall have at least two (2) openings, with minimum dimensions of five (5) feet wide, by 10 feet high or up to the top of the first ground level story of the structure (whichever is greater).

3.     Such openings shall provide clear and unobstructed access from the front of the lot to the rear yard setback area. If such openings are fenced, the fence shall include a gate with a minimum width of three (3) feet.

B.     In all single-family residential zones, if there is no rear-yard vehicular access from the street, or alley, the lot must provide an unobstructed 10-foot setback on one side of the house for vehicular access. The 10-foot setback shall be completely unobstructed from the ground up to a height of 10 feet. The 10-foot setback is not required for existing and permitted houses that were constructed with a reduced setback.

C.     In all zones, where access to the rear yard is obtained solely through the side yard, fences from the building to the side yard shall include a gate with a minimum width of three (3) feet. (Ord. 5018 § 32, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.250 Kiosks.
A kiosk, stand or cart for the sale of flowers, food, newspapers, keys or similar merchandise or an automatic teller machine used for financial transactions may be permitted outdoors in commercial zones, subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit pursuant to Chapter 17.40. Such a kiosk shall satisfy all the development standards and use restrictions applicable to the underlying zone district, including architectural standards. Furthermore, the area of the kiosk shall be counted as additional floor space for the purpose of calculating off-street parking requirements. (Ord. 5018 § 34, 2015)

 

17.130.255 Storage space.
Additions to existing commercial buildings for the purpose of storage space only, without providing required additional off-street parking spaces, may be permitted subject to the granting of a minor use permit. In no event, however, shall such additions exceed thirty percent of the total gross floor area of the existing building or eight hundred (800) square feet, whichever is less. (Ord. 5072 § 16, 2018)

 

17.130.260 Development within designated floodways.
Any proposed new development or redevelopment of property located within a designated floodway is subject to the regulations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the provisions of Chapter 15.14 of the El Cajon Municipal Code (Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.) These regulations generally prohibit development within floodways, and require that any new development or substantial improvement of existing developments within floodways be raised above base flood elevations. Floodways and other flood zones are depicted on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) prepared and maintained by FEMA. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.130.265 Amateur radio antennas.
Amateur radio antennas may have an overall height of up to 55 feet. Amateur radio antennas may exceed the 55-foot height limit with the approval of a conditional use permit. In no event may any amateur radio antenna in the city violate Federal Aviation Agency standards for aeronautic safety. (Ord. 5018 § 35, 2015)

Chapter 17.135 M-U (MIXED-USE) OVERLAY ZONE
17.135.010 Intent and purpose.
The Mixed-Use Overlay Zone establishes zoning districts that are intended to provide for the orderly transition of certain areas of El Cajon into walkable districts that accommodate a mixture of retail, office, and residential uses, while protecting existing uses. It is further intended to protect the existing job base, develop mixed-use cores, provide transportation, pedestrian, and visual connectivity, and develop, safe, well-designed neighborhoods.

Moreover, the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone is designed to develop an urban framework to ensure the appearance, location, and scale of buildings complement the character of the area in which they are located, ensure compatibility between existing and proposed uses, and provide a mix of building and housing types allowing variety and choice.

The Mixed-Use Overlay Zone is an added layer of opportunity specifically designed to allow residential and mixed-use development options in existing commercial areas, and higher density residential developments in existing residential zones. Existing current underlying zoning designations remain unchanged.

The Residential Required (RR) sub-designation of the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone is intended to require residential uses as properties redevelop. The intent of the RR sub-designation is not to hinder an existing commercial property from continuing to be used for commercial purposes or from expanding the commercial building or enterprise. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.020 Authority to approve.
In conjunction with the associated planning permit application, the decision-making body may approve, conditionally approve, or deny such permits. Specifically, proposed developments that are contrary to the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone intent and purpose described in Section 17.135.010 will not be approved. Furthermore, the director of community development may, at his or her discretion, refer planning permits and amendments thereto to the next higher decision-making body, which may approve, conditionally approve, or deny such permits. (Ord. 5018 § 37, 2015)

 

17.135.030 Compatibility.
All proposed developments within the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. However, administrative relief may be approved from certain requirements subject to the provisions outlined below:

Administrative relief: Requests for administrative relief shall be considered by staff, by the Planning Commission, or by the city council in conjunction with the associated planning permit application for parking and other development standards. The decision to approve or deny a request is a discretionary action. In order for the decision-making body to approve administrative relief, except where noted in this section, the approval body shall find that:

A.    The request will not negatively impact the appearance of the project site or the surrounding properties.

B.     The proposed project will not adversely impact and will not place undue burden on adjacent uses.

C.     Supporting evidence provided by the applicant is acceptable and sufficient to approve the administrative relief, which may include but is not limited to a traffic impact study, parking study, or other study or analysis prepared by a certified expert licensed to prepare such work. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.040 Applicability.
The Mixed-Use Overlay Zone provides a development option for property owners and developers proposing projects designed to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter and shall be subject to the following permit application requirement:

A.    A Site Development Plan, pursuant to Chapter 17.65, shall be required for all proposed developments, including residential mixed-use and residential only projects with a density of up to 40 dwelling units per acre.

B.     A Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.50, shall be required for all proposed residential mixed-use and residential only projects with a density above 40 dwelling units per acre. The review of the residential density is subject to the findings of Chapter 17.50. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.045 Design Review.
Projects of 50 residential units or more shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for conformance with the Architectural Guidelines of Chapter 17.180 and any other applicable design policies or standards. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.050 Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall include residential and those identified as permitted in the underlying zone and any applicable specific plan governing uses on the property. (Ord. 5018 § 37, 2015)

 

17.135.060 Conditional uses.
Conditionally permitted uses shall include residential and those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the underlying zone and any applicable specific plan governing uses on the property. (Ord. 5018 § 37, 2015)

 

17.135.065 Residential Required (RR).
New development in an area identified with zoning sub-designation RR is required to dedicate 50% of the gross floor area of new buildings to residential uses. For this section, new development is defined as the development of a vacant property or the demolition of existing structures and construction of new structures. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.070 Development standards.
Development standards shall be those identified as applicable to all new, redeveloped, or expanded development projects:

A.    Lot requirements: There is no minimum lot requirement for commercial, residential mixed-use and residential only projects with a density of up to 40 dwelling units per acre. However, the minimum lot requirement for residential mixed-use and residential only projects with a density above 40 units per acre is 1.5 acres.

B.     Building height: Maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except for structures within 100 feet of an adjacent single-family residential zone shall be limited to a height of 35 feet. The distance shall be measured from the proposed building façade to the nearest residential building.

C.     Floor-to-ceiling height: All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 15 feet.

D.    Setbacks:

1.     The entire building façade must abut front and street side property lines or be located within 10 feet of such property lines.

a.     Commercial and residential mixed-use developments are encouraged to accommodate recessed store fronts, forecourts, plazas, outdoor dining areas, or other building frontage articulations.

b.     Residential developments shall provide a residential edge which may be articulated with individual entries, stoops, porches, balconies, overhangs and other architectural devices that articulate the façade.

2.     No interior side setbacks are required, except when the proposed development abuts R-zoned property, in which case the minimum side setback shall be the same as required for a residential use on the abutting R-zoned lot.

3.     The rear yard setback is not required except when abutting R-zoned property, in which case a minimum 10-foot rear yard setback shall be required.

E.     Ground-Floor Transparency.

1.     Non-residential developments: A minimum of 60 percent of the street-facing building façade between two feet and eight feet in height must be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas.

2.     Residential only developments: A minimum of 25 percent of each street-facing residential unit shall be comprised of clear, non-reflective windows.

F.     Open space/recreation area: In a residential mixed-use or residential only development, 225 square feet per unit of private and common recreational open space shall be provided. A common active recreational amenity shall be provided. The type of required recreational/open space shall be determined as part of the project review process.

G.    Trash and Recycling: Refer to Section 17.130.160 for general requirements.

H.    Residential:

1.     Residential disclosures: All planning permit applications for residential only or residential mixed use shall include a condition of approval for disclosure to residents clearly outlining the issues associated with living in a mixed-use environment. The language for this disclosure shall be as specified by the director of community development. Copies of each signed disclosure shall be made available for review upon written request by the city.

2.     Notice of Airport in Vicinity: For projects within the Gillespie Field Airport Overflight Notification Area the disclosure shall also include additional wording regarding proximity to Gillespie Field Airport, pursuant to Section 11010 of the Business and Professions Code, as follows: This property is presently located in the vicinity of an airport, within what is known as an airport influence area. For that reason, the property may be subject to some of the annoyances or inconveniences associated with proximity to airport operations (for example: noise, vibration, or odors). Individual sensitivities to those annoyances can vary from person to person. You may wish to consider what airport annoyances, if any, are associated with the property before you complete your purchase and determine whether they are acceptable to you. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.080 Off-street parking.
A.    Parking: Refer to Chapter 17.185 for general parking and circulation requirements.

B.     A residential project or residential component of a mixed-use project shall comply with the parking requirements of the RM-HR zone.

C.     In a mixed-use project, parking shall be provided separately for each use unless it is determined that a shared parking arrangement would be beneficial and is substantiated by a parking and use analysis. A shared parking plan shall be provided that indicates how the parking will be managed.

D.    Parking Location.

1.     Parking shall be located to the rear or interior side of the building and not along any public street frontage.

2.     Wayfinding signage directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic to parking facilities is required. (Ord. 5068 § 6, 2017)

 

17.135.090 On-site lighting.
An on-site lighting plan shall be required for all new or expanded developments. The lighting plan shall include the following three components:

A.    Safety: The plan shall provide adequate lighting for pedestrian and vehicular safety and be sufficient to minimize security problems throughout the project, especially along building façades. Pedestrian scaled lighting should emphasize buildings, parking and other points of entry into the project.

B.     Architectural: The plan shall incorporate lighting elements in concert with the overall project theme.

C.     Special: The plan may incorporate lighting for celebratory, seasonal and/or holiday lightings that occur on holidays and/or special event days. Lighted attachments with color scenarios are encouraged in commercial and active use areas. (Ord. 5018 § 37, 2015)

 

17.135.100 Rooftop screening.
All mechanical equipment, appurtenances, and access areas shall be intentionally grouped and architecturally screened within fully covered enclosures consistent with the overall composition of the building. Mechanical enclosures shall have a screened or louvered top to improve views from above and to provide required air circulation. (Ord. 5018 § 37, 2015)

 

17.135.110 Signs.
New residential only, residential mixed-use and commercial projects developed in accordance with the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone standards shall be subject to the following sign standards specified in this section and shall require approval of a sign permit prior to the placing, erecting, moving, or alteration of any sign, unless expressly exempted by this section.

A.    Wall signs: Except as provided below, building façade signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of two square feet of sign area per linear foot of building façade width.

B.     Projecting signs: Projecting signs may project a maximum of twenty-four inches from the building façade with a maximum sign area of ten square feet per face and are included in the calculation of the maximum allowable wall sign area. Projecting signs shall maintain a minimum ground or sidewalk clearance of eight feet.

C.     Suspended signs: Suspended signs under an arcade shall be limited to one in front of each entrance to the building, shall be no wider than sixty percent of the width of the arcade, with a maximum sign area of six square feet per face, and shall maintain a minimum ground or sidewalk clearance of eight feet. Signs suspended perpendicular to the building entrance shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum cumulative wall sign area. Signs suspended parallel to the street shall be included in the calculation of the maximum collative wall sign area.

D.    Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs shall be limited to monument signs, with one monument sign permitted for each street frontage of each development. The maximum height of a monument sign is eight feet, and the maximum sign area is one hundred twenty (120) square feet per face, and shall be subject to sight visibility requirements in Section 17.190.210(E)(2)(C).

E.     Window signs: Window signs shall be limited to fifteen percent of the total business window sign area and shall not be located more than four feet above the adjacent sidewalk. Window signs shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum cumulative wall sign area.

F.     Portable signs: One portable sign on a sign stand or sandwich board (A-frame) sign is allowed for each ground floor retail, restaurant, and personal service use (e.g. hair salons, barber shops, nail salon), and subject to the following standards:

1.     Maximum sign/structure dimensions shall be 20-inches wide and 42-inches high.

2.     Signs may be placed on public sidewalk, subject to issuance of an encroachment permit by the city. Sign placement must conform to Americans with Disability Act requirements at all times. Portable signs placed over a public sidewalk may only identify the business name, products, and services of the adjacent establishment for which the encroachment permit is granted. They may not include political or any other unrelated messages. Alcohol, tobacco and similar products regulated pursuant to Chapter 8.33 may not be included on signs located on the public sidewalk. A brand logo for the downtown adopted by the Property Based Improvement District or city may be included on the sign panel.

G.    Sign on outdoor dining fences: One sign panel measuring a maximum of eight square feet in size and a maximum of ½ inch in thickness may be affixed to an approved outdoor dining fence when the outdoor dining area for an adjacent restaurant is less than 60 feet or more in width. Such signs shall subject to the following standards:

1.     Sight lines may not be obstructed, as determined by the City Traffic Engineer.

2.     Sign panels on an approved outdoor dining fence shall not be included in the maximum allowable wall signs noted above.

3.     Sign panels shall be flush-mounted and made of rigid and durable materials such as metal, wood, or hard plastic. Sign panels shall be professionally printed, not hand-painted, and mounted with discreet or artistic hardware.

4.     Sign panels may encroach over the public sidewalk or Prescott Promenade, subject to issuance of an encroachment permit by the city. Sign panels over a public sidewalk or Prescott Promenade may only identify the restaurant name, products and events of the restaurant holding the license to the outdoor dining area. They may not include political or any other unrelated messages. Alcohol, tobacco and similar products regulated pursuant to Chapter 8.33 may not be included on signs located on the public sidewalk or Prescott Promenade. A brand logo for the downtown adopted by the PBID or city may be included on the sign panel.

H.    Menu boards/cases. Wall mounted restaurant menu boards/cases measuring four square feet or less shall not be included in the maximum square footage allowable for wall signs. Menu boards/cases shall be a maximum of three inches thick. Internal, non-animated illumination is permitted.

I.      Animated signs. Animated window signs shall be limited to five percent of the ground floor window area, up to a maximum of four square feet and 40 linear feet per business establishment, whichever is less. Animated signs shall be included in the 15 percent maximum window area signage allowance.

J.      No box or can signs, internally illuminated or not, shall be permitted. (Ord. 5018 § 37, 2015)

Chapter 17.140 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
17.140.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter to list regulations relating to residential zones and residential development under simplified headings. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.020 Residential zoning districts.
The table below lists the residential zoning districts discussed in this chapter.

 

Table 17.140.020
Residential Zone Table

 

Residential Zones:

Descriptive Zoning District Name:

O-S

Open space

PRD

Planned residential development

RS-40

Residential, single-family, 40,000 s.f.

RS-20

Residential, single-family, 20,000 s.f.

RS-14

Residential, single-family, 14,000 s.f.

RS-9

Residential, single-family, 9,000 s.f.

RS-6

Residential, single-family, 6,000 s.f.

 

RM-6000

Residential, multi-family, 6,000 s.f.

 

RM-4300

Residential, multi-family, 4,300 s.f.

 

RM-2500

Residential, multi-family, 2,500 s.f.

 

RM-2200

Residential, multi-family, 2,200 s.f.

 

RM-1450

Residential, multi-family, 1,450 s.f.

 

RM-HR

Residential, multi-family, high-rise

 

(Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.030 Intent of residential zones—Density and general plan consistency.
The General Plan designates residential land use classifications intended to accommodate various densities of residential development within the city. It is the intent of every residential zone established in this title to implement these goals and objectives. The various residential zones contain development standards intended to achieve General Plan goals and objectives by regulating residential development within specific density ranges. No residential subdivision or residential development shall be authorized which exceeds the density provisions of the underlying General Plan land use classification. See Chapter 17.220 for density bonus regulations related to affordable housing projects.

The following table indicates the allowable density in each of the city’s residential zones. Within single-family zoning districts (RS designated zones), only one primary dwelling unit is authorized per legally established lot. Multiple family zones (RM designated zones) may contain multiple dwelling units per lot, subject to the density limits described in the table below.

For the purpose of this title, residential density is expressed as dwelling units per square foot of net lot area. However, it may also be expressed as dwelling units per acre of net lot area. Net lot area is calculated by subtracting all portions of the lot, or lots, which have been proposed to be dedicated for public rights-of-way.

 

Table 17.140.030
Residential Density Table

 

Residential Zone:

Maximum Density:

O-S1

See Chapter 17.155

PRD

See Chapter 17.165

RS-401

1 unit/40,000 square foot lot

RS-201

1 unit/20,000 square foot lot

RS-141

1 unit/14,000 square foot lot

RS-91

1 unit/9,000 square foot lot

RS-61

1 unit/6,000 square foot lot

RM-60002, 3

1 unit/6,000 square feet of total lot area

RM-4300

1 unit/4,300 square feet of total lot area

RM-2500

1 unit/2,500 square feet of total lot area

RM-2200

1 unit/2,200 square feet of total lot area

RM-1450

1 unit/1,450 square feet of total lot area

RM-HR

No density limit in the RM-HR zone

 



1        Limited to one primary dwelling unit per lot, except in PUD developments.

2        In the event a lot was of record having at least 9,900 square feet of gross lot area before required and subsequent street dedications were made, but less than 12,000 square feet of gross lot area when the lot was incorporated into the City of El Cajon, a second dwelling may be constructed, provided all other requirements of this chapter are met. This provision shall apply to those qualifying lots identified in Ordinance 1177, effective April 20, 1960 as highlighted below.

3        The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed three per lot unless a project is approved in accordance with Chapter 17.60 of this title.

(Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.040 Special district requirements for the O-S and PRD zones.
The O-S zone and the PRD zone are subject to unique development standards and zone district requirements. See Chapter 17.155 for regulations relating to the O-S zone. See Chapter 17.165 for regulations relating to the PRD zone. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.050 General lot requirements.
For general provisions related to lots, including provisions for substandard lots, reductions in minimum lot area, construction across property lines, and development of lots subject to acquisition of land for public use, refer to Chapter 17.125. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.060 Residential lot requirements.
Table 17.140.060
Residential Lot Requirements

 

Residential Zone:

Lot Area:

Lot Width:

Lot Depth:

Flag Width:

O-S

See Chapter 17.155

See Chapter 17.155

See Chapter 17.155

See Chapter 17.155

PRD

See Chapter 17.165

See Chapter 17.165

See Chapter 17.165

See Chapter 17.165

RS-40

40,000 s.f.1

100 ft.

90 ft.4

20 ft.

RS-20

20,000 s.f.2

100 ft.

90 ft.4

20 ft.

RS-14

14,000 s.f.3

90 ft.

90 ft.4

20 ft.

RS-9

9,000 s.f.

70 ft.

90 ft.4

20 ft.

RS-6

6,000 s.f.

60 ft. interior

90 ft.4

20 ft.

70 ft. corner

RM-6000

6,000 s.f.

50 ft.

90 ft.4

n/a

RM-4300

6,500 s.f.

65 ft.

90 ft.4

n/a

RM-2500

7,000 s.f.

70 ft.

90 ft.4

n/a

RM-2200

7,000 s.f.

70 ft.

90 ft.4

n/a

RM-1450

7,000 s.f.

70 ft.

90 ft.4

n/a

RM-HR

20,000 s.f.

100 ft. interior

90 ft.4

n/a

110 ft. corner

1       The minimum required lot area shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet, except when two (2) or more lots are created by subdivision or parcel map, the total lot area of all lots, permanently reserved open space, and community recreation areas, not including street area, divided by the total number of residential building lots, shall not be less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet; at least one-half (1/2) of all residential building lots shall contain not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet; in no case shall a lot contain less than twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet.

2       The minimum required lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except when two (2) or more lots are created by subdivision or parcel map, the total lot area of all lots, permanently reserved open space, and community recreation areas, not including street area, divided by the total number of residential building lots, shall not be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; at least one-half (1/2) of all residential building lots shall contain not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; in no case shall a lot contain less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.

3       The minimum required lot area shall be fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet, except when two (2) or more lots are created by subdivision or parcel map, the total lot area of all lots, permanently reserved open space, and community recreation areas, not including street area, divided by the total number of residential building lots, shall not be less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet; at least one-half (1/2) of all residential building lots shall contain not less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet; in no case shall a lot contain less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet.

4       Unless specifically waived by the city council at the time of map approval, maximum lot depth is limited to three (3) times the average lot width.

(Ord. 5081 § 7, 2019.)

 

17.140.070 Panhandle and flag lots.
In single-family residential zones, panhandle or flag lots may be created by subdivision or parcel map provided that they include a projection with a minimum width of 20 feet connecting the lot to frontage on a public street. The projection shall be used as a driveway providing access to the panhandle or flag lot; however, the area of such projection shall not be included for the purposes of meeting the minimum lot area requirements of this title. The maximum length of such driveway projections shall be 300 feet. If the driveway is longer than 200 feet, the grade of the driveway shall not exceed ten percent, unless a steeper driveway is approved by the Fire Department. When two (2) flag lots are created side by side, and the length of the two (2) flag projections are abutting, and both property owners are guaranteed the right to use both adjacent driveways, the driveway width may be reduced to 15 feet for each individual adjacent lot, for a combined width of 30 feet for the shared driveway. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.080 Distance between residential buildings.
Except as provided elsewhere in this title, the distance between any detached buildings used for human habitation on the same lot shall not be less than 12 feet. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.090 Setbacks.
The following table lists the minimum setbacks for primary structures in residential zones. The areas subject to building setback restrictions are referred to as “yards.” In multiple family zones where two (2) or more residential buildings are, by definition of this title, considered main buildings, then the front yard requirement shall apply only to the building closest to the front lot line, the rear yard requirement shall only apply to the building closest to the rear lot line, and the side yards shall be maintained along both sides of the entire lot. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that modifies the information listed in the table’s matrix. See Section 17.140.120 for accessory structure setbacks.

Table 17.140.090
Setbacks

 

Residential Zone:

Front Yard Setback:

Cul-de-sac Front Yard Setback:

Exterior Side Yard Setback:

Interior Side Yard Setback:

Rear Yard Setback:

O-S

See Ch. 17.155

PRD

See Ch. 17.165

RS-40

30 ft.1

20 ft.2

15 ft.3

15 ft.

25 ft.5

RS-20

20 ft.1

10 ft.2, 3

12 ft.3

6 ft.—12 ft.4

25 ft.5

RS-14

20 ft.1

10 ft.2, 3

12 ft.3

6 ft.—12 ft.4

25 ft.5

RS-9

20 ft.1

10 ft.2, 3

10 ft.3

6 ft.—10 ft.4

25 ft.5

RS-6

20 ft.1

10 ft.2, 3

10 ft.3

5 ft.—10 ft.4

15 ft.5&6

RM-6000

20 ft.

20 ft.2

10 ft.3

5 ft.

10 ft.

RM-4300

20 ft.

20 ft.2

10 ft.3

6 ft.

12 ft.

RM-2500

20 ft.

20 ft.2

10 ft.3

6 ft.

12 ft.

RM-2200

10 ft.

10 ft.2, 3

10 ft.3

6 ft.

12 ft.

RM-1450

10 ft.

10 ft.2, 3

10 ft.3

5 ft.

10 ft.

RM-HR

20 ft.7

20 ft.7

20 ft.7

15 ft.7

15 ft.7

1        Side entry garages may be 20 ft. from the front property line in the RS-40 zone. They may be 15 ft. from property line in the RS-20, through RS-6 zones.

2        Distance to be measured on an arc parallel to the front property line. This modified front yard shall extend around the circumference of the cul-de-sac only to the points at which the projections of the required front yard on portions of the street not located on the cul-de-sac intersect the arc of the modified front yard.

3        Direct entry garages and carports shall maintain a 20 ft. setback.

4        As required in Section 17.130.240, if there is no rear-yard access from the street, or alley, the lot must provide an unobstructed 10 ft. setback on one side of the house for vehicular access. The 10 ft. setback is not required for existing and permitted houses that were constructed with a reduced setback.

5        Attached, open carport or patio may be 12 ft. from property line not to exceed 50% of lot width.

6        New patio covers may not be located within the setbacks. Existing and permitted covered patios may be enclosed and may be located as close as 12 ft. to the rear property line.

7        Except as modified by Specific Plan No. 182.

(Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.100 Building height.
The following table lists the maximum heights for primary structures in residential zones. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that modifies the information listed in the table’s matrix. See Section 17.140.120 for accessory structure height requirements.

 

Table 17.140.100
Building Height

 

O-S

See Chapter 17.155

PRD

See Chapter 17.165

RS-40

35 ft.

RS-20

35 ft.

RS-14

35 ft.

RS-9

35 ft.

RS-6

35 ft.

RM-6000

20 ft.

RM-4300

35 ft.

RM-2500

20 ft.

RM-2200

35 ft.

RM-1450

45 ft.

RM-HR

Subject to the provisions of Specific Plan No. 182

(Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.110 Lot coverage.
The following table lists the maximum lot coverage in residential zones. Lot coverage includes all covered structures including primary and accessory structures. Overhead lattices and trellises shall also contribute to lot coverage calculations. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that supplements the information listed in the table’s matrix.

 

Table 17.140.110
Lot Coverage

 

O-S

See Chapter 17.155

PRD

See Chapter 17.165

RS-40

30%

RS-20

40%

RS-14

40%

RS-9

40%

RS-6

40%

RM-6000

40%

RM-4300

50%1

RM-2500

55%1

RM-2200

55%1

RM-1450

60%1

RM-HR

50%1

1        Parking areas and driveway aisles count toward lot coverage.

(Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.120 Accessory structures.
Accessory structures such as detached garages, carports, workshops, game rooms, poolrooms, clubhouses, storage buildings, and sheds are permitted in residential zones, subject to the following provisions:

A.    Accessory structures shall not be used as dwelling units.

B.     Accessory structures shall not include kitchen facilities, except for approved common area buildings in multi-family complexes or common interest developments.

C.     The total combined floor area of all accessory and primary structures on a lot shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage of the underlying zones.

D.    Accessory structures, no greater than twelve (12) feet in height, are subject to a minimum three (3) foot setback from the interior side and rear yard property lines.

E.     Accessory structures, greater than twelve (12) feet in height, are subject to a minimum five (5) foot setback from the interior side and rear yard property lines.

F.     Accessory structures are limited to a height of twenty (20) feet.

G.    Accessory structures with a footprint greater than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet are subject to the approval of a minor use permit, in conformance with Chapter 17.58.

H.    Accessory structures may include electrical service, a sink, a water heater, and hookups for washers and dryers.

I.      Except for approved common area buildings in multi-family complexes and common interest developments, accessory structures may not include bathrooms, unless a minor conditional use permit is approved pursuant to Chapter 17.50.

J.      Accessory structures shall not be located closer than six (6) feet from any other structure in any single-family zone.

K.    Accessory structures shall not be located closer than twelve (12) feet from any structure used for human habitation in any multi-family zone. Accessory structures shall not be located closer than six (6) feet from any other accessory structure in any multi-family zone.

L.     Accessory structures shall be located to the rear of (behind) the front of the main buildings on the lot. In instances where the main structure(s) is/are located to the rear of the lot, the director may authorize accessory structures in front of the main building. However, in no instance may such accessory structures be located in any required setback area.

M.    Accessory structures located to the rear (behind) the front of the main buildings may be located as close as three (3) feet from interior side and rear property lines. However, no accessory structure may be located in any exterior side yard setback area.

N.    Accessory structures may not be located within five (5) feet of an alley.

O.    Detached garages and carports that are entered directly from a street shall maintain a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from the street property line. If such a structure is entered directly from an alley, it shall maintain a distance of five (5) feet from the alley.

P.     The roof of an accessory structure may project to within one and one-half (1-1/2) feet of an interior side or rear property line.

Q.    Accessory structures used for the keeping of animals are subject to the distance requirements listed in Chapter 17.205.

R.     Temporary structures, including structures made of metal, wood, canvas, vinyl, palm fronds, bamboo or similar materials are prohibited in all required exterior yards and in all areas between the public right-of-way and the front of the main structure on the lot. When located behind the front of the main structure on the lot, they are subject to all other provisions of this title.

S.     Notwithstanding other provisions of this section stated above, one (1) temporary shade structure may be allowed in front of the main structure, under the limited circumstances listed in section 17.225.160, and subject to the approval of an administrative zoning permit described in Chapter 17.40. (Ord. 5081 § 9, 2019.)

 

17.140.130 Parking and driveways.
For general residential parking requirements, including minimum driveway widths and parking area development standards, refer to Chapter 17.185. For parking requirements in a planned residential development, refer to Chapter 17.165. For parking requirements in a planned unit development, refer to Chapter 17.60. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.140 Landscaping and recreational open space.
Multi-family residential developments must provide 225 square feet of common recreational open space per dwelling unit. Private yards, for individual dwelling units in projects of 11 or more units and which have minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 10 feet (100 square feet minimum), may be counted as satisfying up to 50 percent of the recreational open space area requirement. Private yards in projects of 10 units or less may satisfy 100 percent of the recreational open space requirement with private yards which have minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 10 feet. For general landscaping requirements in residential zones, see Chapter 17.195. For landscaping requirements in a planned residential development, refer to Chapter 17.165. For landscaping requirements in a planned unit development, refer to Chapter 17.60. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.150 Fences, hedges, and walls.
For regulations pertaining to fences, walls, and hedges in residential zones, refer to Chapter 17.130. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.160 Use of exterior yard areas.
The following regulations shall apply to the use of all areas designated as front yard setback areas and all areas on corner lots, including reverse corner lots, designated as exterior side yard setback areas:

A.    The following classifications of objects and/or use shall be permitted, provided that they do not constitute a hazard to health or safety, are securely mounted or supported where required, and are properly maintained:

1.     Landscaping as defined in Chapter 17.195;

2.     Driveways and other paved parking areas not to exceed 50 percent of the required front yard setback area in single-family residential zones. However, single-family lots fronting on a cul-de-sac may exceed this limit, as necessary, to provide a paved driveway adequate in width to access garage parking;

3.     Patio furniture;

 

4.     Currently licensed automobiles, boats, trailers and unoccupied recreational vehicles, motorhomes, and campers may be parked or stored on designated paved parking areas. No automobile, boat, trailer, motor home or camper shall be repaired, dismantled or allowed to remain in a dismantled and/or inoperable condition for periods exceeding 72 hours in succession. No automobile, recreational vehicle, boat, motor home, trailer or camper may be parked on the required landscaped area;

5.     Building materials during periods of construction or remodeling on any lot or lots where a valid building permit has been issued and is in effect; and

6.     Subterranean shelters and storage rooms provided that there is no visual evidence of such facilities visible from the public right-of-way.

B.     A temporary shade structure, in compliance with Section 17.225.160, shall be permitted, subject to approval of an administrative zoning permit.

C.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, nothing shall be placed or permitted to remain in such a position or location as to interfere with sight distance necessary for the safe passage of pedestrians and/or vehicles and emergency units along the public ways, or interfere with light and air reasonably necessary for structures used for human occupancy. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.170 Single-family dwelling review procedures.
Any new building permit application for a single-family dwelling (including manufactured housing), an addition to a single-family dwelling, or a structure accessory to a single-family dwelling in the city shall be subject to the following provisions:

A.    The building plan elevations shall include notations specifying a minimum twelve-inch (12″) roof overhang (eave), and the type of material to be used for roofing and siding.

B.     Regardless of building material, all elevations shall include painted surfaces, weather-resistant enamel finishes or finished materials which are non-reflective.

C.     All additions to existing structures and all accessory structures larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet shall be designed and constructed to be aesthetically compatible with the existing primary structure.

D.    Structures shall meet the following design standards:

1.     Architectural design shall be represented on all elevations.

2.     Elevations shall not include blank wall faces and shall include multiple design features for each wall face greater than twelve (12) feet. Design features include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.     Functional glazing;

b.     Variation in building materials;

c.     Structural or decorative lintels or other window and doorway trim;

d.     Entryway lighting features;

e.     Shutters;

f.      Doors which include windows;

g.     Garage door panels which include windows; and

h.     Contrasting trim or molding.

3.     Accessory structures shall have comparable roof style to the primary structure.

4.     Roof and wall planes shall be different colors.

5.     No single wall plane may exceed thirty (30) feet in length. A single wall plane is defined as a surface without architectural relief or projection. Standards for architectural relief or projection are as follows:

a.     Shall be provided at a minimum eighteen (18) inches in depth; and

b.     Shall be provided at a minimum four (4) feet in width; and

c.     May be provided as a step-back or overhang of a second-story wall plain or as a structural design feature such as bay windows.

E.     Landscaping, placement of the structure and screening shall not be substituted for architecturally and aesthetically integrated design.

F.     Deviations from the standards in this section require approval of an administrative zoning permit, in conformance with chapter 17.40. (Ord. 5081 § 11, 2019.)

 

17.140.180 Accessory and junior accessory dwelling units.
The standards set forth in this section may be applied to any residentially zoned lot in the city that contains only one (1) single-family dwelling upon such lot. If any use beyond that of one (1) single-family dwelling exists upon a lot, then such lot is not qualified to receive an accessory or junior accessory unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no accessory or junior accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted in any approved planned unit development (PUD) or planned residential development (PRD).

A.    Permit Required. A building permit is required for any new accessory or junior accessory dwelling unit.

B.     Size.

1.     Each eligible lot, regardless of size, may include an accessory dwelling of up to six hundred forty (640) square feet;

2.     For each eligible lot in excess of six thousand four hundred (6,400) square feet, the maximum size of an accessory dwelling unit shall be not more than ten percent (10%) of the lot size and not more than fifty percent (50%) of the size of the primary residence (habitable space), to a maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet;

3.     No minimum size shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit. Minimum standards shall be applied through the building code; and

4.     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed an area of five hundred (500) square feet.

C.     Parking.

1.     Provision of one (1) additional paved off-street parking space. Such parking space may be tandem and/or located in the required front yard setback area if in compliance with the paved parking standards listed in section 17.140.160. No additional parking is required with any of the following;

a.     Unit is located within one-half (½) mile of public transit, including transit and bus stations;

b.     Unit is a junior accessory dwelling unit or is part of an existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure; or

c.     There is a car share program located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

D.    Standards of Development.

1.     Existing permitted structures converted to an accessory dwelling unit either attached or detached to the primary residence such as a garage or other accessory building shall meet the following requirements:

a.     Building and fire safety codes;

b.     Independent exterior access from existing residence;

c.     Sufficient side and rear setbacks for fire safety; and

d.     If a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, or converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the parking for the primary dwelling shall be replaced. Replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces.

2.     New detached structures for accessory dwelling units shall meet the following requirements:

a.     Conformance with all requirements of the zone in which the unit is located, except as identified herein;

b.     Limited to twenty (20) feet in height;

c.     Subject to a minimum five (5) foot rear and side setback;

d.     Subject to a minimum six (6) foot separation from the primary dwelling;

e.     In accordance with the California Health and Safety Code requirement, no fire sprinkler system is required unless provided for in the primary residence. If an accessory dwelling unit is attached to the primary single-family dwelling, the wall separating units shall be as required by the California Building Code and/or the California Residential Code;

f.      No minimum size shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit. Minimum standards will be applied through the building code;

g.     Limited in size in accordance with section B.1.d. above;

h.     Attached covered patios, porches and similar covered areas intended to be used by the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit, except for a garage or carport, shall be limited to a maximum ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the proposed unit; and

i.      The proposed accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed of similar building materials and with a similar architectural style to the primary dwelling unit.

3.     New attached structures for accessory dwelling units shall meet the requirements of the underlying zone.

4.     Junior accessory dwelling units shall meet the following requirements:

a.     Shall be created within the existing walls of the primary dwelling and include a bedroom;

b.     Shall include a separate exterior entry from the primary residence; and

c.     Shall include an efficiency kitchen that consists of:

i.      A sink with a maximum waste line diameter of one-and-a-half (1-1/2) inches;

ii.     A cooking facility with appliance which do not require electrical service greater than one-hundred-and-twenty (120) volts or natural or propane gas;

iii.    A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are reasonable to the size of the unit; and

d.     No additional parking shall be required for the junior accessory dwelling unit.

E.     Standards of Performance. Every accessory and junior accessory dwelling unit approved by this title shall meet the following standards of performance:

1.     The property owner must occupy one (1) of the units. Should this requirement not be honored by the property owner, it will be cause to have the accessory or junior accessory dwelling unit removed in accordance with appropriate procedures.

2.     A notice of restriction shall be recorded so that it appears in the chain of title for the property. A building permit will not be finalized without proof of recordation of the notice of restriction.

3.     The unit shall not be sold separate from the primary residence.

4.     Tenancy shall not be less than thirty (30) days.

F.     Special Exemption from City Standards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this title, the addition of an accessory or junior accessory dwelling unit on a lot as provided under this section of and by itself will not initiate requirements for any new or updated standards relating to the existing residential structure. Such standards or requirements that would otherwise apply will be deferred until the normal operation of those other city code sections come to apply to such property. Such deferral of new or updated standards will not be granted for any building or portion thereof that was constructed illegally, nor will such deferral be granted for required public improvements. It is the clear intent of this subsection that the existing standards which were legally provided on the existing residential structure may remain as they were prior to the construction of the second-family unit. (Ord. 5081 § 13, 2019.)

 

17.140.190 Planned unit developments.
A planned unit development (PUD) may be established in any residential zone and permits greater flexibility of development standards than provided in this chapter. Refer to Chapter 17.60 for regulations pertaining to PUDs. (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.200 Modified development standards for affordable housing.
Housing and related facilities that are formally restricted to occupancy by low- and very-low-income families and individuals (income restricted), including occupancy by elderly and disabled persons (age and disability restricted) and assisted by funding from and as defined by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or other affordable housing related funding sources approved by the city council may be permitted to deviate from the requirements and provisions of this title as specified in this section, provided that the specifics of any such deviations, including but not limited to parameters, conditions and findings, are subject to public hearing and are contained in a conditional use permit, specific plan, planned unit development or planned residential development, and where appropriate, that such specifics are recorded against the subject property.

A.    Age and disability restricted housing may be granted a reduction in the off-street parking requirements (parking requirements) of this title, which reduction shall not result in a ratio less than one (1) parking space for each two (2) dwelling units, provided that findings can be made that the proposed assisted housing project:

1.     Will not result in a parking problem on adjacent properties or public streets; and

2.     Shall be age and disability restricted for the life of the project.

B.     Income restricted housing may be granted up to a 30 percent reduction in required parking, provided that findings can be made that:

1.     The proposed income assisted housing project could meet all applicable development standards;

2.     The requested reduction in required parking will not result in parking problem(s) on adjacent properties or public streets;

3.     The requested reduction in required parking will result in expanded and improved on-site, outdoor common amenities; and

4.     The subject housing project shall remain income restricted at all times that the provided off-street parking does not meet the full parking requirements of this title, whether or not there is any federal, state or local government assistance to the project at the time.

Any reduced parking requirement authorized under this provision shall be determined by calculating the full parking requirement for the proposed housing project, applying the authorized reduction expressed as a percentage, with any fractional number rounded down to the nearest whole number.

C.     An increase in the permitted density in the RM-2500 and RM-2200 zones up to 50 dwelling units per net acre may be granted, provided the applicant for such conditional use permit as part of the approval agrees in writing to reconstruct, combine or otherwise convert the dwelling units to that density permitted in that zone should the development convert to other than facility for elderly or disabled. At such time the conditional use permit shall automatically terminate. (As an alternative, the property may be granted a density of up to 75 units per acre for Section 202 projects only if the city can be assured by recorded legal instrument that the project will continue as a facility exclusively for the elderly or disabled for the life of the structures in the project.) (Ord. 5018 § 39, 2015)

 

17.140.210 Residential land use table.
The following table lists uses that may be established in residential zones. The abbreviations used in the land use table shall have the following meanings:

 

A             “A” means “adult entertainment permit”

C              “C” means “conditional use permit”

D             “D” means “director’s determination”

MC          “MC” means “minor conditional use permit”

MUP                “MUP” means “minor use permit”

P              “P” means “permitted use”

S              “S” means “site development plan permit”

T              “T” means “temporary use permit”

Z              “Z” means “administrative zoning permit”

X             “X” means “not permitted”

 

In addition to the abbreviated terms listed above, the land use table incorporates endnotes, which are indicated by numerical designators in the final column of the table. The numerical designators correspond with written notes listed at the bottom of the table. The notes provide additional information and direct readers to other applicable sections of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

 

Table 17.140.210

Residential Land Use Table

Residential Zones

PRD

RS-40

RS-20

RS-14

RS-9

RS-6

RM-6000

RM-4300

RM-2500

RM-2200

RM-1450

RM-HR

Notes

Primary Residential Uses (subject to density restrictions)

Congregate care facility

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

 

Dwellings; attached duplex units or two detached dwelling units

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

P

1

Dwellings; up to three detached single-family homes on the same lot, including common interest developments

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

2

Dwellings; multi-family, attached or detached, including common interest developments

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

P

2

Dwelling; single-family detached

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

2

Farmworker housing

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

 

Foster family home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Foster family institution

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

C

 

Group residential

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

3

Manufactured home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Residential care facility for 6 or fewer

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Residential care facility for 7 or more

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

4

Supportive housing

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Transitional housing

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Accessory Residential Uses

Accessory structures

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

5

Accessory structures which include restrooms

X

MC

MC

MC

MC

MC

MC

X

X

X

X

X

5

Bed and breakfast

X

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

X

6

Family day care home, large

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

 

Family day care home, small

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Home occupation business

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

7

Keeping of bees for personal use

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

8

Keeping chickens for personal use

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

8

Keeping pet pot-bellied pigs

X

P

P

Z

Z

Z

Z

X

X

X

X

X

8

Keeping pet horses

Z

P

P

Z

Z

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

8

Keeping domesticated animals under 125 pounds for family use

X

P

P

Z

Z

Z

Z

X

X

X

X

X

8

Keeping rabbits and geese for family use

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

8

Accessory or Junior Accessory dwelling unit

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

9

Nonresidential Uses

Card room, non-gambling

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

16

Cemetery, crematory, and mausoleum

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Clubs: youth clubs, professional organizations, union halls, fraternal organizations, and similar uses

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Commercial agriculture including: field crops, orchards, vineyards, horticulture, and floriculture

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

8

Community gardens

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

8

Day care facility (commercial or non-profit including preschool)

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

10

Educational institutions

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Governmental buildings and service facilities

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

11

Heliport

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Marijuana cultivation, delivery, dispensary, manufac-turing, and storage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

 

Nonresidential parking areas in multi-family zones

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

12

Parks with recreation facilities; private, including non-profit

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Parks and playgrounds, public or private

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Prefabricated storage containers used for short-term storage

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

 

Religious facilities and non-profit service organizations devoted to serving the general public

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products

X

Z

Z

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

8

Seasonal outdoor businesses

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

T

13

Temporary feeding areas

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Wireless communication facilities

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

14

Other similar uses

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

15

1.      Legally created lots in the RM-4300 zone are entitled to at least two units, regardless of lot area.

2.      Subject to section 17.125.110 common interests developments. See Chapter 17.165 for PRD requirements. See Chapter 17.60 for PUD requirements.

3.      Must be separated at least three hundred (300) feet between structures measured at closest wall of each.

4.      Use prohibited in SP-182.

5.      Subject to the provisions of section 17.140.120 (accessory structures).

6.      Subject to the provision of section 17.225.020 (bed and breakfast establishments).

7.      Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.050 (home occupations).

8.      Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.205 (animals and agriculture).

9.      Subject to the provisions of section 17.140.180 (accessory and junior accessory dwelling units).

10.   A “day care facility” is not a “family day care home” as defined in Chapter 17.105.

11.   Excludes sewage disposal facilities.

12.   Must conform to the standards provided in section 17.185.200 (parking standards).

13.   As ancillary to an approved non-residential use, when activity not already covered by CUP.

14.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.245 (wireless communications facilities).

15.   As determined by the director of community development.

16.   May only be operated as an accessory use to a bona fide club, society, professional organization, union hall, fraternal organization, and similar use, with either all applicable discretionary permits, or nonconforming status pursuant to Chapter 17.120, for the primary use. Subject to additional card room regulations listed in Chapter 5.28 (Card Rooms) and Chapter 17.225 (Miscellaneous Special Uses and Regulations) of this Title.

(Ord. 5081 § 15, 2019.)

Chapter 17.145 COMMERCIAL ZONES
17.145.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to list regulations relating to commercial zones and commercial development under simplified headings. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.020 Commercial zones.
The table below lists the commercial zone districts established by this title. It should be noted the Heavy Commercial – Light Manufacturing, or “C-M” zone is considered both a commercial zone and an industrial/manufacturing zone. The C-M zone has special use provisions and development standards as indicated within the text of this title.

Table 17.145.020
Commercial Zone Table

 

Commercial Zones:

Descriptive Zoning District Name:

O-P

Office Professional

C-N

Neighborhood Commercial

C-G

General Commercial

C-R

Regional Commercial

C-M

Heavy Commercial—Light Manufacturing

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.145.030 Intent of commercial zones.
The intended purposes of the various commercial zone districts established by this title are listed below. The intent of a zone district shall be used when interpreting the land use tables, especially in instances where there is ambiguity or there are omissions within the land use tables. In addition to the information presented in the table below, it is the intent of every commercial zone in the city to implement the goals and objectives of the General Plan relating to commercial development.

A.    O-P (Office Professional) Zone. The O-P zone is intended to provide for professional and administrative office uses and certain limited retail uses normally associated with office uses. The O-P zone encourages the grouping of office uses and makes office development compatible with adjacent residentially zoned areas. The O-P zone is consistent with the “office/non-retail” and “neighborhood retail commercial” designations of the general plan.

B.     C-N (Neighborhood Commercial) Zone. The C-N zone is intended to provide shopping areas for daily convenience goods that are in close proximity to the residential areas they serve. A neighborhood commercial area may be a shopping center but it may also be an individual lot and building. Due to its proximity to residential areas, a C-N zoned area is designed to protect the nearby residential environment, insure safe traffic circulation and encourage pedestrian access. The C-N zone is consistent with the “neighborhood retail commercial” designation of the general plan.

C.     C-G (General Commercial) Zone. The C-G zone is intended to provide a full range of general commercial uses ranging from offices to retail to automotive services to tourist facilities. A general commercial area may be developed as a shopping center or as an individual lot and building or as a “strip commercial” development. A C-G zoned area may occur in close proximity to residential areas. Therefore, the compatibility of uses must be carefully considered, and reflected in site design and in some cases through the use of conditional use permits. In addition, safe traffic circulation and sufficient parking areas must be provided. The C-G zone is consistent with the “general retail commercial” designation and may be found consistent with the “neighborhood retail commercial” designation of the general plan.

D.    C-R (Regional Commercial) Zone. The C-R zone is intended to accommodate community and regional commercial centers and governmental facilities, which typically serve large areas of the city and surrounding community. In view of the extensive service areas of such developments, as well as their potentially significant impact on adjacent land uses and traffic circulation patterns, the C-R zone is limited to the downtown area and the area including and around the regional shopping mall that is regulated by Specific Plan No. 19. The development standards of the C-R zone seek to minimize any adverse effects of the developments on adjacent property and to encourage common access and parking. Joint-use developments of retail, office and residential uses are also encouraged in the downtown area. The C-R zone is consistent with the “regional retail commercial” designation of the general plan.

E.     C-M (Heavy Commercial—Light Manufacturing) Zone. The C-M zone is both a commercial zone and an industrial zone. It is intended to provide for light manufacturing and industrial uses with relatively minor impacts on the surrounding area, which are contained in buildings and consist of: light manufacturing, wholesale trade, processing, servicing, assembly and distribution. The C-M zone is also intended to provide for commercial trade uses consisting of wholesale and specific, listed retail uses, which combine aspects of commercial trade with light industrial operations, such that the retail commercial trade aspects occupy no more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the building or buildings which make up the business on the same site. The commercial trade may be retail or wholesale or a combination of the two. The C-M zone is also intended to provide for commercial trade uses which are limited to the sale and/or distribution of “large box” items such as furniture, appliances, carpeting, etc. and the incidental sales of items accessory to the “large box” items as long as the incidental sales do not exceed 15 percent of the total sales area. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.040 Conduct of use.
Refer to Chapter 17.115 for regulations relating to performance standards and the conduct of uses in commercial zones. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.050 Special district requirements for the C-M zone.
Each newly created C-M zone district shall contain a minimum area of one acre. Districts should be limited to primary thoroughfares as shown on the general plan circulation element within the light industrial land use designation. No new district shall be allowed on the opposite side of a primary thoroughfare from a residentially zoned area. Existing C-M zone districts may be expanded along primary thoroughfares as shown on the general plan circulation element with the light industrial land use designation by rezoning of adjacent properties. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.060 General lot requirements.
For general provisions related to lots, including provisions for substandard lots, reductions in minimum lot area, construction across property lines and development of lots subject to acquisition of land for public use, refer to Chapter 17.125. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.070 Commercial lot requirements.
There are no specific requirements for lot area, width, or depth in the C-N, C-G, and C-R zones. However, in reviewing a request for a zone reclassification or a subdivision map proposing the creation of new commercial lots, the director of community development, the planning commission, or the city council, as applicable, may require approval of a lot consolidation or a specific plan, as a condition of approval, in order to provide adequate street frontage and to avoid the creation of substandard commercial developments. The following table lists the minimum spatial requirements for the establishment of new commercial lots in the O-P and C-M zones.

 

Table 17.145.070
Commercial Lot Requirements

 

Commercial Zone

Lot Area

Lot Width

Lot Depth

O-P

7,000 square feet

70 feet of frontage on a dedicated public street

No requirement

C-M

10,000 square feet

65 feet of frontage on a dedicated public street

150 feet

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.080 General development standards.
Refer to Chapter 17.130 for general development standards in commercial zones, including: trash and recycling areas, fences and walls, on-site lighting, and rear yard access requirements. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.090 Commercial setbacks.
The table below lists the minimum building setback requirements in commercial zones. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that modifies the information listed in the table’s matrix.

 

Table 17.145.090
Commercial Setbacks

 

Zone District

Exterior Yard Setback

Setback From Residentially Zoned Property

O-P

10 feet1

10 feet2

C-N

10 feet1

10 feet2

C-G

10 feet1

10 feet2

C-R

10 feet1

10 feet2

C-M

20 feet

10 feet2

 

             1  Except as modified by Specific Plan No. 182.

             2  If the required setback is at the rear of the lot, access to the rear yard is required as indicated in Section 17.130.240.

(Ord. 4984 § 57, 2013)

 

17.145.100 Building height.
No commercial building may exceed a height of 35 feet, unless a greater height is allowed by specific plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.110 Lot coverage.
There are no lot coverage limitations in commercial zones other than the landscaping requirements listed in Chapter 17.195. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.120 Parking.
For commercial parking requirements, including minimum driveway widths and parking area development standards refer to Chapter 17.185. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.130 Landscaping.
For landscaping requirements in commercial zones, see Chapter 17.195. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.145.140 Signs.
For development regulations relating to signs, refer to Chapter 17.190. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.145.150 Commercial land use table.
The following table lists uses that may be established in commercial zones. The abbreviations used in the land use table shall have the following meanings:

 

A             “A” means “adult entertainment permit”

C              “C” means “conditional use permit”

D             “D” means “director’s determination”

MC          “MC” means “minor conditional use permit”

MUP                “MUP” means “minor use permit”

P              “P” means “permitted use”

S              “S” means “site development plan permit”

T              “T” means “temporary use permit”

Z              “Z” means “administrative zoning permit”

X             “X” means “not permitted”

 

In addition to the abbreviated terms listed above, the land use table incorporates endnotes, which are indicated by numerical designators in the final column of the table. The numerical designators correspond with written notes listed at the bottom of the table. The notes provide additional information and direct readers to other applicable sections of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

 

Table 17.145.150

Commercial Land Use Table

 

O-P

C-N

C-G

C-R

C-M

Notes

Commercial Uses

Adult book store, adult theater, and other adult entertainment activities

X

X

A

A

X

1, 2

Alternative lending including payday loans, anticipatory loans, and auto title lending, excludes federal or state chartered banks, savings and loans, thrifts, and credit unions

X

X

C

C

X

1, 32, 33

Amusement parks including miniature golf, go-cart tracks, mechanized rides, etc.

X

C

C

C

C

 

Animal grooming services

X

P

P

P

X

 

Antique sales

X

P

P

P

X

 

Appliance repair; large gas and electric appliances including heating and air conditioning systems, parts and supplies

X

X

X

X

P

1

Appliance sales; large gas and electric appliances including heating and air conditioning systems, parts and supplies

X

P

P

P

P

 

Appliance sales and repair of small electrical appliances

X

P

P

P

P

1

Art galleries, commercial retail

X

P

P

P

X

 

Artist studios and art restoration services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Athletic clubs and fitness centers

X

P

P

P

X

28

Auction house

X

X

C

C

P

1

Auto parts and accessories; new parts

X

X

P

P

X

1

Auto parts and accessories; used parts, excludes dismantling

X

X

X

X

P

1, 3

Auto rental including the rental of moving vans, trucks and trailers

X

X

C

X

C

1

Auto sales, including: autos, motorcycles, light trucks, and recreational vehicles

X

X

C

C

C

4

Automotive body repair

X

X

C

X

C

1

Automotive service and repair

X

X

C

C

C

1

Automotive fueling station

X

C

C

C

C

5

Auto washing and detailing, full service carwash

X

X

C

X

X

1

Auto washing, self-service carwash

X

C

C

X

X

1

Bail bonds office

P

P

P

P

P

1

Beauty salon, nail salon, barber shop, and day spa

P

P

P

P

X

6

Beauty supply and cosmetics sales

P

P

P

P

X

 

Billboard sign

P

P

P

P

P

7

Blood banks and blood donation facilities

P

P

P

P

X

1

Blood plasma centers

C

X

X

X

X

1

Boat sales including ancillary service and repair

X

X

P

X

C

 

Book store, including news copy and magazine sales

P

P

P

P

X

 

Bowling alley

X

X

C

C

X

 

Camera and photographic sales and related services

X

P

P

P

X

 

Card room, non-gambling

P

P

P

P

X

3, 26

Carpet and drapery cleaning and repair services

X

X

X

X

P

 

Cemetery, crematory, and mausoleum

C

C

C

C

C

 

Child activity centers

X

P

P

P

X

 

Circuses and carnivals

X

X

T

X

X

 

Clothing and apparel store, new

X

P

P

P

X

 

Clothing and costume rentals

X

P

P

P

X

 

Clubs: youth clubs, professional organizations, union halls, fraternal organizations, and similar uses

C

C

C

C

X

 

Cocktail lounge

X

C

C

C

X

8, 9

Community gardens

P

P

P

P

P

29

Consumer electronics retail sales with ancillary service

X

P

P

P

P

 

Contract construction services

X

X

X

X

P

 

Convenience market

X

P

P

P

X

8

Custodial and cleaning services including property management and building maintenance with associated vehicle, equipment, and supply storage

X

X

X

X

P

 

Dance studio

X

P

P

P

X

 

Day care facility

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Department store with general retail sales

X

P

P

P

X

 

Drive-through service accessory to an authorized land use

S

S

S

S

S

1

Employment services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Equipment rental with outdoor storage or display

X

X

C

C

C

1

Equipment rental without outdoor storage or display

X

P

P

P

P

1

Escort service

X

X

P

X

X

3

Fabric store

X

P

P

P

X

 

Farmers market

X

Z

Z

Z

X

34

Financial services and institutions

P

P

P

P

X

10

Firearm and ammunition sales, new and resale

X

P

P

P

X

3

Firing ranges, indoor ranges for fire arms or archery

X

X

C

C

C

1

Florist

P

P

P

P

X

 

Funeral parlor and mortuary

P

P

P

P

X

1

Furniture and home furnishing sales

X

P

P

P

P

 

Game center and video arcade

X

X

P

P

X

3

General retail sales

X

P

P

P

X

 

Gift shop, including novelties, souvenirs, greeting cards, etc.

X

P

P

P

X

 

Gunsmith

X

P

P

P

X

1

Hardware store, indoor (includes building materials and related services)

X

P

P

P

P

1

Hardware store with outdoor storage or display (includes building materials and related services)

X

X

C

C

C

1

Headquarters office facility

P

X

P

P

P

 

Heavy equipment sales including large trucks and tractor-trailer rigs

X

X

X

X

C

 

Hobby shop

P

P

P

P

X

 

Hotel and motel

X

X

C

C

X

 

Household accessories including bedding, linens, kitchen supplies, etc.

X

P

P

P

X

 

Kennel

X

X

X

X

C

 

Kiosk, booth, stand and food truck

X

Z

Z

Z

Z

11

Laundry and dry cleaning services, retail, including coin operated self-service laundry

X

P

P

P

X

 

Liquor store

X

C

C

C

X

1, 8

Live entertainment

X

X

C

C

X

3

Locksmith and related services

X

P

P

P

P

 

Manufactured housing sales including modular and mobile home sales

X

X

P

X

P

 

Market

X

P

P

P

X

 

Massage establishments, steam bath, and sauna room

X

X

C

C

X

1, 3, 6, 12

Massage services permitted as an accessory use to a permitted primary use

P

P

P

P

X

3, 6, 12

Medical and dental office, laboratories, and clinics open to the general public including acupuncture, chiropractic, and other state licensed health care practices

P

P

P

P

X

 

Medical and dental laboratory not open to the public

P

P

P

P

P

 

Marijuana cultivation, delivery, dispensary, manufacturing and storage

X

X

X

X

X

 

Modeling agency, talent agencies and entertainment booking services (office only)

P

P

P

P

X

 

Motion picture theatre (indoor)

X

X

C

C

X

13

Music lessons conducted indoors

P

P

P

P

X

 

Music store including the sale of musical instruments, sheet music, and recorded music

X

P

P

P

X

 

Office, administrative, business and professional

P

P

P

P

P

 

Office machine sales

X

P

P

P

P

 

Optical goods including eye glasses, contact lenses, and eye exams

P

P

P

P

X

 

Outdoor dining, accessory to authorized restaurant or cocktail lounge

X

Z

Z

Z

Z

14

Outdoor sales events at existing business developments

T

T

T

T

T

 

Parcel delivery and postal services (office only, does not include U.S. Postal Service offices)

P

P

P

P

X

 

Pawn shop or pawn broker

X

X

C

C

X

1, 3, 32, 33

Personal storage facility

X

X

C

X

C

15

Pest control services

X

X

X

X

P

 

Pet supply stores including pet sales and pet adoption services with accessory indoor veterinary and grooming services

X

P

P

P

X

 

Pharmacy

P

P

P

P

X

16

Photocopying and other retail office services for the general public

P

P

P

P

X

 

Photographic studio including ancillary photo finishing services

P

P

P

P

X

 

Plant nursery

X

X

P

P

P

1

Pool hall or billiards parlor

X

X

C

C

X

3

Prefabricated storage containers used for short term storage

T

T

T

T

T

 

Private security company with watch dogs

X

X

C

C

C

1, 3

Private security company without watch dogs

P

P

P

P

P

 

Public assembly

X

X

C

C

C

 

Recreational facility

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Resource recovery center

X

C

C

C

C

17

Restaurant

P

P

P

P

C

8, 9, 18

Restaurant, take-out only

P

P

P

P

C

19

Restaurant (full-service) with alcoholic beverage production use

P

X

C

C

X

8, 9

Seasonal outdoor businesses such as Christmas tree lots

T

T

T

T

T

 

Secondhand merchandise store or kiosk including buying of gold, precious metals, gemstones, jewelry, or electronics

X

X

C

C

X

1, 3, 32, 33

Service and repair of consumer electronics

X

P

P

P

X

 

Shoe sales and shoe repair

X

P

P

P

X

 

Single room occupancy (SRO) housing

X

X

C

X

X

 

Skilled nursing facility

C

C

C

C

C

1

Special training and schooling conducted indoors

P

P

P

P

P

 

Special training and schooling conducted outdoors

X

X

X

X

MC

 

Sporting goods, bicycles, and toy stores

X

P

P

P

X

 

Supermarket

X

P

P

P

X

 

Surplus store

X

P

P

P

X

1

Swap meet and flea market

X

X

X

C

X

1, 3

Tailoring, alteration, and sewing services

P

P

P

X

X

 

Tattoo and body piercing studio

X

X

P

P

X

1

Thrift or resale shop

X

P

P

P

X

1, 3

Ticket sales office

P

P

P

P

X

 

Tobacco and smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop

C

C

C

C

X

1, 20

Tool and equipment repair and sharpening services excluding heavy equipment repair

X

X

P

P

X

1

Trailer and camper sales, non-motorized

X

X

P

X

P

 

Travel agency

P

P

P

P

X

 

Vehicle storage lot

T

X

T

T

T

 

Veterinary and small animal hospital, indoors only

X

X

P

P

P

1

Video sales and rentals including video game sales and rentals

X

P

P

P

X

 

Vocational and trade school (conducted indoors)

X

P

P

P

P

9

Vocational and trade school (conducted outdoors)

X

X

X

X

C

9

Volume discount store (including 99¢ and closeout stores)

X

X

P

P

X

1

Watch, clock, and jewelry sales and repair

P

P

P

P

X

 

Other similar uses

D

D

D

D

D

21

Light Industrial Uses

Contract construction services

X

X

X

X

P

 

Direct selling organizations (baked goods, ice cream trucks, bottled water vendors, catering wagons, etc.)

X

X

X

X

P

 

Food and beverage processing

X

X

X

X

P

 

Heavy equipment service and repair

X

X

X

X

C

 

Laundry services, industrial, including linen, diaper, and uniform cleaning, alteration and repair services

X

X

X

X

P

 

Light manufacturing

X

X

X

X

P

 

Microbrewery

X

X

C

C

C

35

Printing and publishing services, non-retail and excluding contact with the general public

X

X

P

P

P

 

Recycling center for metal, cardboard, glass, e-waste, etc.

X

X

X

X

C

 

Scientific and commercial testing laboratories including product research and development

X

X

X

X

P

 

Service and repair of light machinery including vending machines, office machines, large household appliances, etc.

X

X

X

X

P

 

Service and repair of precision instruments including cameras, optical devices, medical devices and electronic testing equipment

X

X

X

X

P

 

Warehousing and distribution

X

X

X

X

P

 

Wholesale trade excluding explosives

X

X

X

X

P

 

Other similar uses

D

D

D

D

D

21

Transportation, Communication and Utilities

Ambulance service

C

C

C

C

P

1, 3

Bus passenger terminals, public or private charter

X

X

P

P

P

 

Bus parking and maintenance facility

X

X

X

X

P

 

Heliport

C

C

C

C

C

 

Limousine service

X

X

X

X

P

3

Media production including broadcasting studios, and audio and video recording studios

X

P

P

P

P

 

Parking lots and garages, short term

P

P

P

P

P

 

Radio, and/or television broadcasting

P

P

P

P

P

22

Solid waste disposal facility

C

C

C

C

C

1

Taxicab terminal

X

X

P

P

P

 

Towing services with vehicle storage

X

X

X

X

C

1, 3

Towing services without vehicle storage

X

X

C

X

C

1, 3

Trucking terminal for motor freight including parcel delivery service terminals

X

X

X

X

P

 

Utilities, excluding sewage treatment

C

C

C

C

C

 

Vehicle storage facility, long term, including lots and structures

X

X

X

X

MUP

1

Wireless communication facilities, freestanding

C

C

C

C

C

23

Wireless communication facilities, architecturally integrated or other stealth design

S

S

S

S

S

23

Other similar uses

D

D

D

D

D

21

Institutional and Charitable Uses

Botanical garden, and arboretum

P

P

P

P

X

 

Educational institution

C

C

C

C

C

 

Emergency shelters

X

X

C

C

S

1, 24

Governmental administrative offices (excluding services)

P

P

P

P

P

 

Governmental operation center and service facilities

C

C

C

C

C

 

Hospital

C

C

C

C

X

 

Library, public

P

P

P

P

X

 

Museum

P

P

P

P

X

 

Non-profit welfare and charitable organizations and services

X

X

C

C

X

1, 27

Parks and playgrounds, public or private

X

P

P

P

P

 

Amateur sports fields

X

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Religious facilities

C

P

P

P

C

9

Temporary feeding area

C

C

C

C

C

 

Transition service center

X

X

C

C

P

1, 24

WIC center

P

P

P

P

X

1

Other similar uses

D

D

D

D

D

21

Residential Uses

Caretaker’s unit

P

P

P

P

P

25

Residential care facility

C

C

C

C

X

1

 

1.      Prohibited in SP 182. However, automotive service and repair uses are permitted with approval of a CUP in the portion of SP 182 that is also a part of Special Development Area No. 10 and zoned C-M.

2.      Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.45 (adult entertainment establishments).

3.      Requires a Special Operations License for uses as described in ECMC Chapter 5.16. For towing services, only police towing services require a Special Operations License.

4.      Off-site outdoor automobile sales are subject to the provisions of section 17.225.190.

5.      Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.215 (automotive fueling stations).

6.      Subject to the provisions of Chapter 5.40 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

7.      Subject to the provisions of section 17.190.270 (billboard signs).

8.      Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.210 (alcohol sales).

9.      Subject to parking requirements listed in section 17.185.190.

10.   “Check cashing only” services are prohibited in SP 182.

11.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.40 (Administrative Zoning Permit), section 17.130.250 (kiosks) and section 17.225.240 (food trucks).

12.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.070 (massage establishments and services)

13.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.230 (motion picture theaters).

14.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.090 (outdoor dining areas).

15.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.235 (personal storage facilities).

16.   The retail display area shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area in the O-P zone.

17.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.100 (resource recovery centers).

18.   Restaurant size may be limited in the C-M zone.

19.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.130 (take-out only restaurants).

20.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.240 (tobacco, smoke shops, and electronic/vapor inhalation shops).

21.   As determined by the director of community development.

22.   Excludes wireless communications facilities as defined in Chapter 17.105.

23.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.245 (wireless communications facilities).

24.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.180 (transition service centers and emergency shelters).

25.   Only one caretaker’s unit permitted per lot in association with an authorized primary use occupying the same property. Must be attached to the primary structure on the lot, if such a structure exists.

26.   May only be operated as an ancillary use to 1) a bona fide non-profit club, society, professional organization, union hall, fraternal organization, and similar (non-profit) use, with a valid conditional use permit for the primary use, and 2) a restaurant. Subject to additional card room regulations listed in Chapter 5.28 (Card rooms) of Title 5 and Chapter 17.225 (Miscellaneous Special Uses and Regulations) of this Title. Non-profit status must be in place prior to application submittal, as applicable.

27.   Non-profit medical and dental clinics are permitted uses. They do not require a CUP and are not prohibited in SP 182.

28.   Subject to the parking requirements for places of assembly listed in Table 17.185.190.

29.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.205 (agriculture and animals).

30.   Excludes businesses purchasing items as an accessory use to a primary retail sales use.

31.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.200 (Alternative Lending).

32.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.250 (Secondhand Merchandise Stores and Pawn Shops).

33.   Prohibited in the boundaries of SP 462.

34.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.220 (Farmer’s Market).

35.   Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.230 (Microbrewery).

 

(Ord. 5081 § 17, 2019.)

Chapter 17.150 INDUSTRIAL ZONES
17.150.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter to list regulations relating to manufacturing and industrial development under simplified headings. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.020 Industrial zones established.
The city has one exclusively industrial zone, and it is designated as M-Zone or the manufacturing zone. It should be noted the C-M, or Heavy Commercial—Light zone, is considered both a commercial zone and an industrial zone. The C-M zone has special use provisions and development standards as indicated throughout the text of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.030 Intent of the industrial zones.
It is the intent of both the M zone and the C-M zone to implement the goals and objectives of the General Plan relating to manufacturing and industrial development. The intent of a zone district shall be used when interpreting the land use tables, especially in instances where there is ambiguity or there are omissions within the land use tables. Distinctions between the two zones are explained below.

A.    The M zone is intended provide for manufacturing, warehousing, and limited industrial uses as well as certain employment generating office and service uses characterized by: a lack of public contact, a non-retail orientation, limited traffic generation, and no need for advertising or retail signage.

B.     The C-M zone is both a commercial zone and an industrial zone. It is intended to provide for light manufacturing and industrial uses with relatively minor impacts on the surrounding area, which are contained in buildings and consist of: light manufacturing, wholesale trade, processing, servicing, assembly and distribution.

The C-M zone is also intended to provide for commercial trade uses consisting of wholesale and specifically listed retail uses, which combine aspects of commercial trade with light industrial operations, such that the retail commercial trade aspects occupy no more than fifty percent of the gross floor area of the building or buildings which make up the business on the same site.

The C-M zone is also intended to provide for commercial trade uses which are limited to the sale and/or distribution of “large box” items such as furniture, appliances, carpeting, etc. and the incidental sales of items accessory to the “large box” items as long as the incidental sales do not exceed 15 percent of the total floor area. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.040 Conduct of use.
Refer to Chapter 17.115 for general regulations relating to performance standards and the conduct of uses. Except as noted elsewhere in this chapter, all uses shall be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.

In the M zone, the incidental retail sales of products wholesaled or manufactured onsite is permitted but may not be advertised or identified with signage. In both the M and the C-M zones, the operation of headquarters and support facilities shall generally exclude on-premises contact with the general public. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.050 Outdoor uses and outdoor storage.
In the M and C-M zones all uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building except those uses that are customarily conducted outdoors, including, but not limited to: athletic fields, the parking of vehicles, and equipment storage for construction services. Regardless of whether or not a use is permitted by right, or conditionally permitted, all outdoor uses and all outdoor storage with the exception of athletic fields, authorized vehicle sales, and heavy equipment sales, shall be screened from the public right-of-way by a minimum six-foot-high, solid fence or wall. This fence or wall shall not encroach into any required exterior yard. With the exception of oversized vehicles and heavy construction equipment, outdoor storage shall not exceed the height of the wall or fence used to screen it from the public right-of-way.

The methods, materials, and appearance of required screening for outdoor storage areas are subject to the approval of the director, or in the case of a conditional use permit, the planning commission. The director or commission may require decorative screening materials in visually prominent or visually sensitive areas. Under no circumstances shall outdoor storage or outdoor activities be permitted which displace required off-street parking or landscaping improvements. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.060 Prefabricated structures.
The use of prefabricated structures, such as metal shipping containers which exceed 120 square feet in total aggregate floor area, shall require the approval of a minor conditional use permit processed in accordance with Chapter 17.50 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.070 Special district requirements for the M and C-M zones.
A.    Each newly created M zone district shall contain a minimum area of five acres. If approved by the city council, a dedicated public street may divide an M zone district.

B.     Each newly created C-M zone district shall contain a minimum area of one acre. Districts should be limited to primary thoroughfares as shown on the general plan circulation element within the light industrial land use designation. No new district shall be allowed on the opposite side of a primary thoroughfare from a residentially zoned area. Existing C-M zone districts may be expanded along primary thoroughfares as shown on the general plan circulation element with the light industrial land use designation by rezoning of adjacent properties. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.080 General lot requirements.
For general provisions related to lots, including provisions for substandard lots, reductions in minimum lot area, construction across property lines and development of lots, subject to acquisition of land for public use, refer to Chapter 17.125. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.090 Industrial lot requirements.
The following table lists the minimum spatial requirements for the establishment of new industrial lots in the M and C-M zones.

 

Table 17.150.090
Industrial Lot Requirements

 

Industrial Zone:

Lot Area

Lot Width

Lot Depth

M

20,000 square feet

150 feet of frontage on a dedicated public street

150 feet

C-M

10,000 square feet

65 feet of frontage on a dedicated public street

150 feet

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.100 General development standards.
Refer to Chapter 17.130 for general development standards in industrial zones, including: trash and recycling areas, fences and walls, on-site lighting, and rear yard access requirements. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.110 Setbacks.
The table below lists the minimum building setback requirements in industrial zones. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that supplements the information contained in the table’s matrix.

 

 

Table 17.150.110
Industrial Setbacks

 

Zone District:

Exterior Yard Setback:

Setback from Residential Zone Districts:

M

20 feet1

10 feet2

C-M

20 feet1

10 feet2

 

1                  Building setback is 20 feet. Parking setback is 10 feet.

2                  If the required setback is at the rear of the lot, access to the rear yard is required as indicated in Section 17.130.240.

             Overhead Doors. Any overhead doors facing and visible from the public right-of-way shall be set back a minimum of 65 feet from any exte-          rior property line.

(Ord. 4968 § 41, 2011)

 

17.150.120 Building height.
No building in the M or C-M zones may exceed a height of 35 feet unless a greater height is approved by specific plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.130 Lot coverage.
There are no lot coverage limitations in the M or C-M zones other than the landscaping requirements listed in Chapter 17.195. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.140 Parking and loading.
For parking and loading area requirements, including minimum driveway widths and parking area development standards refer to Chapter 17.185. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.150 Landscaping.
For landscaping requirements in commercial zones, see Chapter 17.195. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.160 Signs.
For development regulations relating to signs, refer to Chapter 17.190. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.150.170 Manufacturing zone land use table.
The following table lists uses that may be established in the manufacturing (M) zone. The abbreviations used in the land use table shall have the following meanings:

A             “A” means “adult entertainment permit”

C              “C” means “conditional use permit”

D             “D” means “director’s determination”

MC          “MC” means “minor conditional use permit”

MUP                “MUP” means “minor use permit”

P              “P” means “permitted use”

S              “S” means “site development plan permit”

T              “T” means “temporary use permit”

Z              “Z” means “administrative zoning permit”

X             “X” means “not permitted”

In addition to the abbreviated terms listed above, the land use table incorporates endnotes, which are indicated by numerical designators in the final column of the table. The numerical designators correspond with written notes listed at the bottom of the table. The notes provide additional information and direct readers to other applicable sections of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

 

Table 17.150.170
Manufacturing Zone Land Use Table

 

 

M

Notes

Advertising and public relations office

P

 

Agricultural processing, excluding animal slaughtering facility

P

 

Aircraft and aviation equipment sales

P

 

Alcoholic beverage production

P

12

Alcoholic beverage production with full-service restaurant

C

13

Animal slaughtering facility

C

 

Ambulance service

P

1

Ammunition manufacturing

P

2, 14

Amusement park, including miniature golf, go-cart track, mechanized rides, etc.

C

1

Aircraft and flying accessory sales

P

3

Art studio and art restoration service, excluding art galleries

P

 

Athletic field and courts

C

 

Auction house, indoor

P

 

Auction house, outdoor

C

 

Auto dismantling, salvage, and junk dealer, including the sale of used auto parts

C

1

Bus terminal, bus parking and maintenance facility, public or private charter

P

 

Carpet and drapery cleaning and repair service

P

 

Cemetery, crematory, and mausoleum

C

 

Chemical production and processing, excluding explosives

P

 

Computer programming, including web design, software engineering and other intellectual design and consulting services based upon digital computer technology

P

 

Concrete batch processing plant

C

 

Contract construction service

P

14

Credit reporting office

P

 

Custodial and cleaning service, including property management and maintenance with associated vehicle, equipment, and supply storage

P

 

Data storage facilities and server rooms, including internet service provider

P

 

Day care facility including adult day care with health services

MUP

 

Direct selling organization, including baked goods, ice cream truck, bottled water vendor, and catering wagon

P

 

Educational institutions

C

 

Emergency shelter

S

8

Equipment rental, with or without outdoor storage or display

P

 

Firing range, indoor range for firearms or archery

C

 

Firewood sales

C

 

Flight school

P

 

Food and beverage processing

P

 

Fuel storage and distribution, bulk fuel storage

P

 

Funeral parlor and mortuary

C

 

Governmental administrative office (not including services)

P

 

Governmental operation center and service facility

C

 

Hazardous waste treatment, storage, and transfer

C

 

Headquarters office facility

P

 

Heavy equipment sales, rental, and repair

P

 

Heliport

C

 

Insurance office

P

 

Kennel

C

 

Land development consulting offices, including: architecture, planning, engineering, and real estate services

P

 

Laundry services, industrial, including linen, diaper, and uniform cleaning, alteration, and repair services

P

 

Light manufacturing

P

3

Light rail terminal

P

 

Limousine service

P

1

Machine shop service, including milling and lathing

P

 

Mail order and internet based sales, excluding contact with the public

P

 

Marine craft sales and service

P

 

Media production, including broadcasting studio, and audio and video recording studio

P

 

Media distribution

P

 

Medical and dental laboratory

P

 

Messenger service

P

 

Metal industries, including steel manufacturing and smelting

P

 

Marijuana cultivation, delivery, dispensary, manufacturing, and storage

X

 

Mining activity, including barrow pits over three feet in depth

C

 

News agency, including newspaper office and web-based news outlets

P

 

Outdoor sales event at existing business developments

T

 

Parking lot and structure

P

 

Pest control service

P

 

Petroleum refining and processing of petroleum products

C

 

Photocopying, mailing, and other office services, excluding contact with the general public

P

 

Photographic service, excluding public contact

P

4

Prefabricated storage container used for permanent storage

C

 

Prefabricated storage container used for short term storage

T

 

Printing and publishing service

P

 

Private security company with watch dogs

C

1

Private security company without watch dogs

P

1

Railroad facilities, including switching stations, maintenance yards, rail freight and passenger terminals

P

 

Recreational facility—Commercial outdoors, including golf courses, driving ranges, radio controlled cars, skateboard parks, paintball facilities, and other similar uses

C

 

Recycling center for metal, cardboard, glass, e-waste, etc.

C

 

Religious facilities

C

 

Resource recovery center

C

 

Restaurant

C

5, 6, 7

Sawmill, including the processing and manufacturing of wood products

P

 

Scientific and commercial laboratories, including research, development, and testing services

P

 

Service and repair of light machinery, including vending machines, office machines, large household appliances, etc.

P

 

Solid waste processing facility

C

 

Special training and schooling (conducted indoors)

P

11

Special training and schooling (conducted outdoors)

MC

 

Sports assembly including stadium, arena, racetrack and other large sporting venue

C

 

Swimming pool, swimming school, and other aquatic recreation facilities

C

 

Temporary feeding area

C

 

Towing services with or without vehicle storage

C

1

Transition service center

P

8

Trucking terminal for motor freight, including parcel delivery service terminals

P

 

Truck sales and service (including large commercial trucks, vans, buses, and recreational vehicles)

P

 

United States Postal Service facilities; processing only

P

 

Utilities, including sewage treatment facilities

C

 

Vehicle storage facility - long term, including lots and structures

MUP

 

Vehicle storage lot - temporary

T

 

Veterinary service and animal hospital

C

 

Vocational or trade school; indoor or outdoor

P

7

Warehousing, including wholesale trade and distribution and excluding explosives

P

 

Welding and metal fabrication

P

 

Wireless communication facilities; freestanding

C

 

Wireless communication facilities; architecturally integrated or other stealth design

S

15

Other similar uses

D

9

Residential Uses

Caretaker’s unit accessory to an authorized land use

P

10

Residential care facility

C

 

 

1.      Requires a special operations license as described in ECMC Chapter 5.16. For towing services, only police towing services require a special operations license.

2.      Small arms ammunition only. Nothing larger than 30-caliber ammunition.

3.      Light manufacturing describes a wide range of manufacturing uses as defined in Chapter 17.105.

4.      Includes aerial photography, photo editing and finishing, service and repair of cameras and other optical devices.

5.      Restaurants may be limited in size.

6.      Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.210 (alcohol sales).

7.      Subject to the parking requirements listed in section 17.185.190.

8.      Subject to the provisions of section 17.225.180 (transition service centers and emergency shelters).

9.      As determined by the director of community development.

10.   Only one caretaker’s unit permitted per lot in association with an authorized primary use occupying the same property. Must be attached to the primary structure on the lot, if such a structure exists.

11.   If the school provides instruction to persons under the age of 18, then a minor conditional use permit is required.

12.   A tasting room not to exceed fifteen percent of the gross floor area of the production space is permitted as an accessory use to an alcoholic beverage production manufacturer subject to Chapter 17.210 and section 17.225.210.

13.   Subject to Chapter 17.210 Alcohol sales and deemed approved alcohol sales regulations.

14.   Limited explosives storage allowed as accessory to an authorized primary use and subject to the Fire Code provisions and all local, state, and federal laws including the National Fire Protection Association.

15.   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.245 (wireless communications facilities).

 

(Ord. 5072 § 22, 2018; Ord. 5065 § 11, 2017; Ord. 5038 § 5, 2016; Ord. 5033 § 32, 2015)

Chapter 17.155 O-S (OPEN SPACE) ZONE
17.155.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent of the O-S zone is to protect and preserve open space land as a limited and valuable resource, to permit a reasonable use of open space while at the same time preserving and protecting inherent open space characteristics, and to implement the open space provisions of the general plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the O-S zone:

A.    Single-family dwellings, subject to density restrictions.

B.     Planned unit developments, subject to density restrictions.

C.     Agriculture:

1.     Field and seed crops;

2.     Truck crops;

3.     Orchards and vineyards;

4.     Pasture and rangeland;

5.     Horticulture specialties;

6.     Tree farms;

7.     Keeping of bees.

D.    Home occupation businesses (see section 17.225.050).

 

E.     Family day care home; large family daycare requires approval of an administrative zoning permit (see Chapter 17.40).

F.     Residential care facility for six or less.

G.    Supportive housing.

H.    Transitional housing.

I.      Farmworker housing. (Ord. 5072 § 24, 2018)

 

17.155.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses may be established in the O-S zone, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.50 or an administrative zoning permit in accordance with the provision of Chapter 17.40.

A.    Wireless communications facilities;

B.     Public and private utilities;

C.     Historic and monument sites;

D.    Playground and athletic areas;

E.     Swimming areas;

F.     Firearms and archery;

G.    Camping areas;

H.    Picnicking areas;

I.      Resorts;

J.      Group or organized camps;

K.    Parks;

L.     Horses, subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.205;

M.    Fishing and related services. (Ord. 5018 § 47, 2015)

 

17.155.035 Prohibited use.
Other than personal cultivation of marijuana as defined in Chapter 17.243, marijuana cultivation, delivery, dispensary, manufacturing and storage are prohibited in the O-S zone. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment or use of such activities. (Ord. 5065 § 13, 2017)

 

17.155.040 District requirements.
District requirements are as follows:

A.    The minimum area of an O-S zone district shall be five acres.

B.     There is no street frontage requirement for an O-S zone district. However, access is required for the creation of panhandle and flag lots as described below in Section 17.155.070.

C.     All structures and parking areas shall be set back a minimum distance of 30 feet from any O-S zone district boundary. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

17.155.050 Lot area requirements.
The minimum required lot area for a single-family residence is two (2) acres exclusive of required driveway projections for panhandle or flag lots. All other developments shall have a minimum lot area of five (5) acres. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.060 Lot width requirements.
The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.070 Panhandle and flag lots.
Panhandle or flag lots may be created in the O-S zone by subdivision or parcel map provided that they include a projection with a minimum width of 20 feet connecting the lot to frontage on a public street. The projection shall be used as a driveway providing access to the panhandle or flag lot. The maximum length of such driveway projections shall be 300 feet. If the driveway is longer than 200 feet, the grade of the driveway shall not exceed 10 percent, unless a steeper driveway is approved by the fire department. When two flag lots are created side by side, and the length of the two flag projections are abutting, and both property owners are guaranteed the right to use both adjacent driveways, the driveway width may be reduced to 15 feet for each individual adjacent lot, for a combined width of 30 feet for the shared driveway. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.080 Density.
A.    Planned Unit Development. A density of one (1) unit per acre of total land area shall be allowed provided that all development be located within a clustered development area (CDA) which does not exceed 40 percent of the total land area.

B.     Single-Family Development. For single-family development not covered by a PUD, the density shall be one (1) unit per two (2) acres. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.090 Front yard.
Every lot shall maintain a front yard of not less than 30 feet, with the following exceptions:

A.    Where a specific plan provides a front yard setback other than 30 feet, a lot shall maintain a front yard not less than the setback shown on such specific plan. However, any garage or carport entered directly from the street shall maintain a setback of not less than 20 feet from the front property line.

B.     Attached Side Entrance Garage or Carport. The required front yard may be reduced to not less than 20 feet for an attached side entrance garage or carport only.

C.     Lots Fronting on a Cul-de-Sac. Every lot facing directly on the arc of a cul-de-sac street shall maintain a front yard of not less than 20 feet, measured on an arc parallel to the front property line. This modified front yard shall extend around the circumference of the cul-de-sac only to the points at which the projections of the required front yards on portions of the street not located on the cul-de-sac intersect the arc of the modified front yard. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.100 Side yards.
Side yard requirements shall be as follows:

A.    Interior Lots. Interior lots shall maintain side yards of not less than 15 feet.

B.     Corner Lots. Corner lots shall maintain side yards on each side of not less than 15 feet. However, any garage or carport entered directly from the side street shall maintain a setback of not less than 20 feet from the side street property line.

C.     Vehicular Access. Lots having no vehicular access to the rear yard by a public street or alley shall provide such access by maintaining a side yard or opening between buildings having a clear width of 10 feet at all heights up to 10 feet, into which no eave or other architectural feature shall project. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.110 Rear yard.
Every lot shall maintain a rear yard not less than 25 feet in depth; however, an attached carport or covered patio, open on at least two (2) sides and not greater than 50 percent of the width of the lot, may be constructed; provided such structure is not closer than 12 feet to the rear property line. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.120 Building height.
The maximum building height is 35 feet for primary structures. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.130 Accessory buildings.
See Section 17.140.120 for regulations relating to accessory buildings in residential zones. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.140 Lot coverage.
A.    Planned Unit Development. All buildings including accessory buildings and structures, parking areas and driveways and public and private street rights-of-way within the interior of a PUD shall not cover more than 40 percent of the PUD project area.

B.     Other Development. The maximum lot coverage is 10 percent; except for uses permitted by a conditional use permit, where a greater coverage may be permitted. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.150 Parking requirements and driveway widths.
For general residential parking requirements, including driveway widths and parking area development standards refer to Chapter 17.185. For parking requirements in a planned unit development, refer to Chapter 17.60. Parking for uses requiring approval of a conditional use permit shall be determined by the planning commission. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.155.160 Signs.
Refer to Chapter 17.190 for sign regulations. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.160 P (PARKING) ZONE
17.160.010 Intent and purpose.
The P zone is intended to provide for public and private parking facilities in areas where it is deemed desirable to have parking areas, but not necessarily the accompanying use or facilities. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.160.020 Permitted uses.
Permitted uses are as follows:

A.    No-fee open parking lots;

B.     Commercial open parking lots on a fee basis with a one-story building not exceeding 100 square feet for the use of the parking lot attendant. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.160.030 Conditional uses.
Conditionally permitted uses are as follows:

A.    Public parking structures.

B.     Commercial parking structures. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.160.040 Development standards, generally.
The following development standards apply to new parking facilities in the P- zone.

A.    There are no minimum lot size, lot width, or lot depth requirements in the P zone.

B.     For general development standards applicable in parking areas, including stall dimensions, drive aisle widths, back up space, and on-site lighting, refer to Chapter 17.180.

C.     There are no lot coverage requirements, except as necessary to meet landscape and setback requirements.

D.    Height requirements for parking structures shall be as specified by conditional use permit.

E.     There are no requirements for trash and recycling facilities, except that if they are provided, they shall be constructed in compliance with Section 17.130.160.

F.     Buildings shall set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from any exterior property line and from interior property lines that separate a P zone district from any residential zone district.

 

G.    Open parking areas shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from all exterior property lines. This 10-foot setback shall be landscaped.

H.    All required yards and setback areas are to be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.195. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.160.050 Walls required for open parking lots.
Walls required for open parking lots are as follows:

A.    District Boundary. A six-foot-high solid masonry wall shall be required along all interior property lines that form a district boundary with any residential zone district, except when the adjacent use is a non-residential use (such as a religious facility).

B.     Exterior Property Line. A 36-inch-high solid masonry wall shall be required at least 10 feet from the exterior property line. This wall is not required if the parking area is separated from the street with a landscaped area at least 20 feet in depth. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.160.060 Signs.
The following signs are permitted:

A.    Parking Lot Signing. One monument sign not exceeding 10 feet tall and 25 square feet per parking lot street frontage.

B.     Parking Structures. One projecting sign per street frontage; the size shall be determined in conjunction with conditional use permit approval for the structure.

C.     One additional directional sign shall be permitted at each parking lot / structure entrance, not to exceed 10 square feet. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.165 PRD (PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT) ZONE
17.165.010 Intent and purpose.
A.    It is intended that the PRD zone will result in projects which reflect comprehensively planned development and encourage imaginative planning and design that specifically relate to the topography and the natural characteristics of the site as well as the scale, density and type of development in the surrounding area. Depending upon the density, different PRD zones are consistent with different residential general plan designations. For example, the PRD low zone would be consistent with “low density residential”.

B.     PRD development projects may be approved with greater flexibility in design and building relationships than are permitted within the usual requirements of the zoning and subdivision titles of the El Cajon Municipal Code when said flexibility is determined to be in the public interest and consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.020 Permitted uses.
In a PRD zone, permitted uses are as follows:

 

A.    Residential.

1.     Planned residential developments; attached and detached units;

2.     Small family day care home as defined in Chapter 17.105;

B.     Agricultural.

1.     Field and seed crops;

2.     Truck crops;

3.     Orchards and vineyards;

4.     Pasture and range land;

5.     Horticulture specialties;

6.     Tree farms.

C.     Home occupation businesses, subject to the requirements of section 17.225.050.

D.    Keeping of chickens, subject to the provisions of section 17.205.065. (Ord. 5072 § 26, 2018)

 

17.165.030 Conditional uses.
Uses permitted by conditional use permit are as follows:

A.    Golf courses and country clubs;

B.     The keeping of horses shall be limited to the PRD low-low zone and subject to the following:

1.     The project shall include sublots, which have at least 10,000 square feet of net lot area,

2.     Not more than one (1) horse over one-year of age and offspring under one-year of age shall be permitted for every 10,000 square feet of lot area in each sublot,

3.     Horses shall be kept and maintained in a designated stable area as follows:

a.     Not within 100 feet of any structure used for human habitation, assembly, or place of business,

b.     In such a manner as to prevent offensive odors, flies, dust, noise and other nuisances.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.040 Zone reclassification.
PRD project plans may only be approved in a PRD zone district. Accordingly, any application for a PRD project shall be processed in conjunction with a requested PRD zone reclassification pursuant to Chapter 17.20. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.050 District requirements.
District requirements shall be as follows:

A.    Area. The minimum district area is one (1) acre, unless a smaller district area is expressly approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission.

B.     Frontage. The minimum district frontage upon a dedicated public street shall be 20 feet, and such frontage shall be upon a street designed to carry the increased traffic generated by the district.

C.     Setback. A setback of 10 feet shall be required along all interior district boundaries. A fence or wall may be required along the district boundary line to provide separation from or protection of adjacent properties. This fence or wall may be no higher than six (6) feet with the type of fence or wall to be determined in conjunction with approval of a planned residential development. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.060 Lot requirements.
A.    Lots. There is no requirement for a minimum lot area of a planned residential development, except the minimum district requirement of one acre.

B.     Sublots. A PRD may contain sublots, which may be of any reasonable area, width or configuration as determined in conjunction with approval of a planned residential development.

C.     Subdivision Map. A tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map which covers the exact boundaries of the PRD and indicates all sublots shall be approved and a final map recorded pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and the Title 16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.070 Density.
A.    The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in each of the PRD zones shall not exceed the following densities:

 

PRD low-low

3 units per net acre

PRD low

10 units per net acre

PRD low-medium

18 units per net acre

PRD medium

20 units per net acre

PRD high

30 units per net acre

 

B.     When calculating net acres, dedications for public streets along the exterior boundaries of the PRD shall not be included as acreage. The rights-of-way of public or private streets and driveways within the PRD boundaries may be included as net acreage.

C.     When a PRD consists of property in more than one PRD zone, the maximum number of dwelling units shall be the total of the dwelling units permitted by each of the component PRD zones. The dwelling units in a PRD in more than one PRD zone may be distributed without regard to the boundaries of the component PRD zone, if the city council, makes the following findings:

1.     The density transfer is compatible with existing development in the surrounding area; and

2.     The density transfer is consistent with the general plan.

D.    In all cases, the approved density shall be consistent with the general plan and compatible with existing development in the surrounding area. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.080 Setbacks and distances between structures.
A.    All buildings and structures in a PRD must maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from the PRD zone district boundary.

 

B.     All buildings other than front-entry garages or carports shall maintain a minimum distance of 10 feet from the right-of-way of a public street or a private street or driveway.

C.     All buildings other than front-entry garages or carports shall maintain a minimum distance of five (5) feet from any sidewalk.

D.    Front-entry garages and carports shall provide a minimum setback of 20 feet from the right-of-way of a public street.

E.     Front-entry garages and carports shall maintain a minimum setback of 20 feet from the edge of a private street or driveway, unless a finding is made that a reduced setback will not result in unauthorized parking behind the garages or carports, which would block or hamper pedestrian or vehicular movement or unnecessarily affect visibility on the private street or driveway. The following issues shall be considered in making a determination to allow a reduced setback for front-entry garages and carports from a private street or driveway:

1.     The length of the private street or driveway;

2.     The overall project density and design;

3.     Whether or not the private street or driveway provides a direct connection between public streets or high traffic volume private streets;

4.     The provision of automatic garage door openers.

F.     The minimum distance between any building used for human habitation and any other building on the same lot or sublot shall be 10 feet.

G.    Two or more buildings or portions of buildings may be attached without observing the usual building setback requirements of the PRD zone, as long as the resultant structure complies with the California Building Code and the California Fire Code.

H.    All other setbacks and distances between structures may be established as part of the project approval but are subject to California Building and Fire Code requirements. When considering building setbacks and distances between structures in a PRD, consideration shall be given to the overall project design and the relation of buildings to each other, to project topography, and to surrounding development. (Ord. 4984 §§ 63, 64, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.090 Lot coverage.
A.    Lot coverage within a PRD shall include all buildings and accessory buildings. It shall also include one hundred percent of the area devoted to parking spaces in private driveways serving individual dwelling units, and fifty percent of the area devoted to common driveways and streets, including public and private streets that are within the exterior boundaries of the PRD. For the purpose of calculating lot coverage in a PRD, 50 percent of the parking areas that are directly adjacent to, and accessed from, a common public or private street or common driveway within the PRD shall count toward the maximum allowable lot coverage. However, 100 percent of any parking areas not located along a common street or driveway within the PRD shall count toward the maximum allowable lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage within a PRD shall not exceed the following percentages:

 

 

PRD Zone

Maximum Lot Coverage

PRD low-low

40%

PRD low

50%

PRD low-medium

55%

PRD medium

55%

PRD high

60%

 

B.     If a PRD is in more than one PRD zone, the lot coverage limitations of each PRD zone shall be respected for the portions of the PRD in that zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.100 Building height.
A.    The maximum building or structure height shall be 35 feet in all PRD zones except the PRD high zone in which the maximum building height shall be 45 feet.

B.     If a PRD is in more than one PRD zone, the building height limitations of each PRD zone shall be respected for the portions of the PRD in that zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.110 Parking.
Parking requirements in a PRD are as follows:

A.    In all PRD Zones, a minimum of two (2) covered parking spaces (garage or carport) shall be provided for each dwelling unit.

B.     Such required covered parking spaces shall be maintained solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles, and such parking shall be maintained solely for the use of the residents of the PRD. The conversion of required covered parking spaces to any use other than the parking of motor vehicles shall be prohibited.

C.     Other Parking Requirements for All Residential Zoning Districts.

1.     Additional parking for residents and/or visitors shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) parking space for every dwelling unit. One (1) additional required parking space may be located in the private driveway providing access to the required covered parking spaces for an individual dwelling unit, if there is at least a 20-foot setback between the covered parking space and the right-of-way of a public street or the edge of the private street or driveway closest to the covered parking space. Any sidewalk located along a private street or driveway shall be counted as part of the private street for the purpose of measuring such a setback from a required covered parking space. In no case shall a parking space be allowed to overhang an adjacent walkway or sidewalk. All other parking spaces pursuant to this subsection must be located in parking areas that are conveniently located near the units they are intended to serve. The parking areas shall be located so as to not interfere with on-site circulation.

2.     Notwithstanding the above, these additional parking spaces may be provided as parallel parking spaces located on the private street or driveway in accordance with Section 17.165.160(B)(6).

3.     Supplemental parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of one-half parking space per dwelling unit with any fraction rounded up for all projects of up to 20 units. For those projects with more than 20 units, additional supplemental parking spaces at a ratio of one-quarter parking space per dwelling unit over 20 shall be provided and any fraction rounded up.

These spaces may be used for RVs, trailers, boats, additional resident or visitor parking, or a combination thereof, as approved in conjunction with a planned residential development.

Supplemental parking spaces shall be located in a parking area that is conveniently located. If the supplemental parking area or portion thereof is used for the storage of RVs, trailers, etc., it must be adequately screened from view by the use of view-obscuring fences, walls or landscaping. The location of all parking spaces shall be designated on the final site plan required by Section 17.165.210(F) and reflected in the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) required by Section 17.165.220 of this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.120 Trash and recycling collection.
The type of trash and recycling collection service (individual or common trash area) shall be determined at the time of project approval. If a common trash area is used, accommodation of recycling bins shall also be provided. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.130 Walls and fencing.
A.    Parking Areas. All open parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces that are not effectively screened from abutting residentially developed or residentially zoned property by permanent buildings or a 20-foot wide landscaped setback area, shall contain a six-foot-high solid masonry wall between the parking area and the residential property.

If the parking area is visible from a street, either public or private, it shall be screened from the street by a 42-inch-high solid masonry wall that is at least 10 feet from the exterior property line or private street right-of-way or by the use of alternative screening methods as approved by the city council.

The screening wall for parking areas visible from a public or private street is not required if the parking area is screened from the street with a landscaped area that is at least 20 feet in depth. No screening wall is required when the wall would be adjacent and parallel to the length of a parking space.

B.     Project Boundary Fence or Wall. The construction of a project boundary fence or wall may be required in conjunction with approval of a planned residential development. The intent of this fence or wall is to provide separation from or protection of adjacent properties. This fence or wall may be no higher than six (6) feet with the type of fence or wall to be determined in conjunction with approval of a planned residential development.

C.     Private Yard Fencing. Fencing of private yards may be required in conjunction with approval of a planned residential development. The type and maximum height of this fencing shall be determined in conjunction with approval of the applicable planned residential development.

D.    Reduction in Height of Wall or Fence. Walls or fences shall not exceed 42 inches in height within the area corresponding to the required exterior yard setback of any abutting residentially zoned or residentially developed property or any commercially zoned property developed with a setback.

E.     Under no circumstances shall any fence, wall or hedge, regardless of its location, block pedestrian or vehicular visibility for safe circulation. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.140 Open space, recreational areas and landscaping.
A.    Common open space and recreational areas.

1.     Open space and recreational areas especially designed for common use, either for active recreational use or passive scenic view, which may include private front yards that are a part of a common landscape easement but which may not include any other private yards, patios or distances between buildings, shall be provided based upon the density of the project as shown on the following table and except as provided below:

 

PRD low-low

1000 sq. ft. per DU

PRD low

400 sq. ft. per DU

PRD low-medium

225 sq. ft. per DU

PRD medium

225 sq. ft. per DU

PRD high

225 sq. ft. per DU

 

Recreational areas meeting these requirements and designed for active recreational uses may be placed upon roofs of buildings or structures. Recreational areas so placed shall not contribute to lot coverage requirements.

2.     Private rear yards for individual dwelling units in projects of 11 or more units and which have minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 10 feet (100 square feet minimum) may be counted as satisfying up to 50 percent of the common open space/recreational area required in subdivision (1) of this subsection. Private rear yards in projects of 10 units or fewer may satisfy 100 percent of the common open space/recreational area requirement in the same manner, subject to approval of the city council.

3.     Scenic natural areas such as rock outcroppings, creeks, wooded areas, vistas or other features worthy of preservation may be required to be preserved in conjunction with the approval of a planned residential development.

4.     Common open space and recreational areas shall be accessible to all dwelling units.

5.     Landscaping shall form a continuous area between and around all buildings and shall be permanently maintained, including a permanent underground irrigation system.

6.     At no time shall any open space or recreational area constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard or create a drainage problem.

B.     Detailed landscaping and irrigation plans, prepared by a registered landscape architect, shall be required as a condition of approval for all projects, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.195 of this title. The landscaping and irrigation plans shall indicate the type, size, and number of all plants, and shall be designed to provide a permanent underground irrigation system, served by a dedicated water meter. (Ord. 5018 §§ 51, 53, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.150 Signs.
Refer to Section 17.190.260 for sign guidelines within a PRD. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.160 Streets and driveways.
A.    Private streets and driveways shall be permitted within a planned residential development subject to the following criteria:

1.     Engineering calculations for the private streets and driveways must be approved by the public works department.

2.     The proposed private street and driveway widths and geometric designs shall relate to function, topography and proposed density;

3.     The proposed private street and driveway structural design shall be related to on-site soil conditions and predicted traffic volumes.

4.     Maintenance responsibilities for private streets and driveways must be assumed by a homeowner’s association.

B.     The following criteria shall be used to determine the widths of private streets and driveways:

1.     A private street or driveway serving no more than two dwelling units shall have a minimum paved width of 16 feet, if the private street or driveway length is 150 feet or less and a minimum width of 20 feet, if the private street or driveway length is greater than 150 feet.

2.     A private street or driveway serving from three (3) to five (5) dwelling units shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet, if the private street or driveway length is 150 feet or less, and 22 feet, if the private street or driveway length is greater than 150 feet.

3.     A private street or driveway serving six (6) or more dwelling units shall have a minimum paved width of 22 feet, if the private street or driveway length is 150 feet or less, and 24 feet, if the private street or driveway length is greater than 150 feet.

NOTE: The length of a private street or driveway shall be that distance measured from the exterior or front property line of the project to the parking space that is most distant from the exterior or front property line and is served by the private street or driveway. In the case of a circular or looped street, the length is the total distance along the centerline of the circular or looped street from the exterior or front property line of the project.

4.     All private streets and driveways shall be unobstructed for their entire length and shall provide a minimum 13 feet, six (6) inches of unobstructed vertical clearance.

5.     Any private street or driveway used as the backup or egress from any open/uncovered parking space or covered parking space, shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide for the entire width of the parking space plus four (4) feet on either side of the entire width of the parking space.

6.     Parallel on-street visitor or guest parking spaces may be permitted on either or both sides of a private street or driveway 24 feet in width as long as the visitor parking spaces are staggered along the length of the private street or driveway so as to not be opposite one another and as long as the width of the private street or driveway is increased by four (4) feet for a minimum length of 35 feet for one (1) visitor or guest parking space and 25 feet for each additional and adjacent visitor or guest parking space.

C.     Public streets shall be designed to comply with the city’s street improvement standards.

D.    Adequate on-site turnarounds shall be provided as determined by the fire department.

E.     Sanitary sewers and storm drains in private streets or driveways may be permitted, but shall be constructed to meet city standards. The maintenance of these private systems must be assumed by a homeowner’s association.

F.     The project engineer shall certify that the private streets or driveways have been constructed in accordance with the previously approved engineering design and calculations prior to the occupancy of any dwelling unit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.170 Pedestrian walkways.
A.    Concrete walkways shall be provided adjacent to all on-street parking areas, shall connect all building entrances, recreational buildings and parking areas, and shall have an unobstructed width of not less than (4) four feet.

B.     When required as part of a planned residential development, hiking, equestrian and bicycle paths shall be of a width and constructed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.180 Lighting.
Lighting adequate for pedestrian and vehicular safety and sufficient to minimize security problems shall be provided. However, in no case shall the required lighting create a nuisance on any adjacent property. An on-site lighting plan for all parking areas, pedestrian walkways and common open space/recreation areas shall be required prior to the issuance of building permits for an approved PRD. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.190 Utilities.
All utility distribution lines within a PRD shall be placed underground. Those utility distribution lines along the perimeter of a PRD shall be placed underground as required by Title 16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. A separate utility system shall be required for water, electric, gas, waste and vent services for each unit in a PRD. The systems shall be installed and operated pursuant to the applicable requirements and procedures of each utility or agency providing the services. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.200 Architectural compatibility.
A.    The architecture and design of a PRD shall be compatible with the terrain and existing surrounding development and shall be evaluated for conformance with the guidelines provided in Chapter 17.180.

B.     The architecture and design will be considered along with the project site plan. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.210 Processing a PRD—Preparation of site plan, building elevations and subdivision map.
A.    In addition to the required zone reclassification application, any application submitted for a Planned Residential Development shall be accompanied by a PRD plan consisting of a proposed site plan, building elevations, a materials/color board, a conceptual landscape plan, floor plans, and any other data determined necessary by the director to adequately evaluate the project for consistency with the applicable PRD development standards. In addition, the PRD plan shall be accompanied by a tentative subdivision map,

B.     Proposed Site Plan and Tentative Subdivision Map.

1.     The proposed PRD site plan shall be drawn to a standard engineering scale and shall reflect all proposed lots, buildings, streets, driveways, parking areas, landscaped areas, open space and recreational areas.

2.     A tentative subdivision map or a tentative parcel map, as appropriate, shall be filed concurrently with the proposed site plan for the PRD and shall comply with the state Subdivision Map Act and the city’s subdivision title.

3.     The information shown on the proposed site plan shall be coordinated with the information shown on the tentative parcel or subdivision map.

C.     Required Hearings. The proposed site plan and tentative map shall be considered at a public hearing by the planning commission, which shall recommend approval of the PRD or shall deny the PRD. The decision of the planning commission to deny a PRD may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.30. If a PRD is recommended for approval by the planning commission to the city council, or if a decision of the planning commission to deny a PRD is appealed, the city council shall hold a public hearing and make the final decision to approve or deny the project.

D.    Required Findings. A PRD plan may be approved by the city council, if it makes the following findings with respect to the project:

1.     The project is consistent with general plan land use map, and applicable general plan goals, policies and programs;

2.     The project complies with the intent and purpose of the existing or requested PRD zone and all applicable development regulations governing planned residential developments;

3.     Approval of the proposed project is in the public interest, convenience and general welfare;

4.     Conditions of approval, where appropriate, have been incorporated to ensure the compatibility of the project with its environment and surrounding development.

E.     Notices for public hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided as described in Chapter 17.25 of this title.

F.     Final Site Plan. The final site plan shall be in substantial conformance with the approved proposed site plan. Any phasing of development shall be indicated and may require the approval of the city council (See Section 17.165.230(B)). The final site plan shall include the following elements:

1.     External and internal property lines;

2.     Public improvements including streets, driveways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, drainage improvements, etc.;

3.     All building footprints;

4.     All streets, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian pathways;

5.     All landscaped areas;

6.     All easements, including landscape and common area maintenance easements;

7.     All common areas, recreational facilities, and private yards.

G.    A final parcel map or final subdivision map shall be recorded in conformance with the approved tentative parcel or subdivision map, and the appropriate number of copies provided to the city, prior to the issuance of any building permits. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

17.165.220 Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs).
When a planned residential development includes any land or improvements intended for common ownership and/or common maintenance including streets, driveways, parking areas, landscaping, fences, walls, buildings, utilities, recreational facilities or open space, the applicant shall submit proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions, which shall run with the land and which clearly set forth both the privileges and responsibilities involved in the common ownership and/or maintenance. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and the director of community development prior to the issuance of a building permit. A recorded copy of the approved covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be submitted to the city prior to the sale of any unit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.165.230 Guarantee of performance of required private and public improvements.
A.    Private Improvements in Single-Phase Projects. The developer of a planned residential development shall complete the installation of all private improvements and any other private work required by the city in accordance with the final site plan prior to final occupancy clearance of all units when the project is developed in a single phase or when all building permits are issued simultaneously.

B.     Private Improvements in Multiphase Projects. If a project consists of more than one phase, or if all building permits are not issued simultaneously, or if a single-phase project is changed to more than one phase, the developer of the planned residential development shall enter into an agreement with the city to guarantee the installation and completion of all private improvements and any other private work required by the city in accordance with the final site plan. The agreement shall be in the form of either:

1.     Bonding. A bond guaranteeing faithful performance of the agreement and guaranteeing payment for labor and materials; or

2.     Trust Agreement. A trust agreement evidencing that the estimated cost of the work or improvements has been deposited with an approved trustee.

C.     In order to determine the amount of the bond or trust agreement, the developer shall submit separate cost estimates for each of the following private improvements:

1.     Street and driveway paving, curbs, sidewalks, drainage structures and improvements, sewers, lighting, street signs;

2.     All landscaping, including irrigation systems;

3.     Undergrounding of utilities;

4.     Visitor parking areas; and

5.     Common recreational facilities.

D.    Public Improvements in All Projects. The developer of a planned residential development shall enter into an agreement with the city whereby, in consideration of approval by the city, the developer agrees to complete the installation of certain public improvements and other work required by the city in accordance with the final development plan. All of the installation and other work shall be completed within the time specified in the agreement. To assure the city that this work will be completed and lien holders paid, the developer shall furnish the city with either:

1.     Bonding. A bond guaranteeing faithful performance of the agreement and guaranteeing payment for labor and materials; or

2.     Trust Agreement. A trust agreement evidencing that the estimated cost of the work or improvements has been deposited with an approved trustee.

E.     In order to determine the amount of bond or trust agreement, the developer shall submit separate cost estimates for the following public improvements:

1.     Improvements to be made within a public street such as curbs, sidewalks, street paving, drainage structures, sewers, street lights, traffic control devices, monuments and street signs;

2.     Improvements to be made within an easement to be dedicated to the city such as sewer or drainage structures;

3.     Earthwork and slope planting in public areas; and

4.     Undergrounding of utilities in public rights-of-way.

The amount of such bond or cash deposited shall be determined by the city engineer or the city manager as to amount and adequacy. (Ord. 5018 § 55, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.170 H (HILLSIDE OVERLAY) ZONE
17.170.010 Intent and purpose.
It is the purpose of the hillside overlay zone to provide for the reasonable use of hillside areas while achieving the following:

A.    Minimizing the danger imposed on the public health, safety and welfare by soil erosion, slippage, flooding and fire; and

B.     Minimizing the disturbance of the natural terrain and thereby conserving the aesthetic qualities afforded by these areas.

With the recognition that hillsides do not lend themselves to the same development standards as predominantly level lands, the regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to encourage the orderly and controlled development of the hillside areas in El Cajon. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.020 Permitted uses.
The uses permitted by the underlying zone are subject to the restrictions and regulations of the underlying zone in addition to the restrictions and regulations of this zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.030 Lot lines.
Where applicable, lot lines shall be at the top of slopes so that all downhill slopes are made part of the lot at the lower elevation. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.040 Development standards—Grading.
Grading regulations shall be as follows:

A.    Cut and fill slopes shall be constructed at a gradient ratio no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1).

B.     No cut or fill slope or combination thereof shall exceed the height of 30 feet measured vertically.

C.     Cut and fill slopes with a height greater than 15 feet shall be separated by a building pad, a street, or, if a natural slope separation is used, a minimum distance of 30 feet.

D.    The elevation of the natural terrain shall not be lowered or raised by more than 30 feet.

 

E.     The density of all fill material shall be compacted to no less than 90 percent of maximum density, unless the city engineer requires a more dense compaction.

F.     The tops and vertical corners of all constructed slopes shall be rounded to eliminate the sharp corners and shall have a minimum curvature radius of at least five (5) feet.

G.    All slopes created as a result of grading shall have adequate provision for conducting water drainage from the site to a natural drainage course, drainage channel or public right-of-way. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.050 Development standards—Landscaping.
Refer to Section 17.195.160 for landscaping requirements on slopes created by grading. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.060 Streets.
A.    All streets shall conform to the provisions of the subdivision ordinance and the street improvement standards of the city. The city engineer is authorized, however, to modify current street improvement standards when in his determination such modification will provide streets that are functional and also adaptable to the natural terrain.

The reduction of standard right-of-way widths and the elimination of sidewalks on one side of the street may also be considered where the street is designed to serve a very limited number of dwelling units.

B.     Where it is proposed to reduce street widths by the elimination of curbside parking, equivalent parking shall be provided by other means such as parking bays, turn-outs or on-site parking spaces. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.070 Plan review.
A.    All tentative maps or plans for development, which require grading shall include the following additional information in order to review proposed grading:

1.     Relative contours of the existing ground (maximum five-foot interval);

2.     The location of all constructed slopes;

3.     Proposed finished grade elevations with all building pads and streets indicated.

B.     All proposals for development, including proposals for retaining walls in areas of known geological hazards, shall be accompanied by a detailed geotechnical report prepared by a certified engineering geologist or licensed geotechnical engineer and containing conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.

C.     A detailed grading plan certified by a licensed civil engineer shall be required prior to acceptance of a final map or development plan. The plan shall also be signed by a certified engineering geologist or licensed geotechnical engineer if the development is located in an area of known geological hazard. This plan shall be checked for compliance with the standards and requirements contained herein.

D.    Review of plans under the provisions of this chapter shall not impose any liability upon the city, its officers, agents or employees for damage to other persons or property. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.170.080 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.    An excavation that does not exceed 50 cubic yards and is less than one (1) foot in vertical depth;

B.     An embankment that does not exceed 50 cubic yards, is less than one (1) foot in vertical height, and does not obstruct a drainage course;

C.     Excavations or embankments made by a governmental agency or its contractor for purposes of the construction of roadways, pipelines or utilities within designated rights-of-way.

D.    An excavation below finished grade for a basement, footings of a building, or retaining wall, when authorized by a valid building permit;

E.     Existing excavations or embankments made prior to August 10, 1973. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.175 MH (MOBILE HOME OVERLAY) ZONE
17.175.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of the MH zone is to establish certain limited standards and criteria to be used in the development of new mobile home parks and to be applied to existing mobile home parks within the City of El Cajon. These standards are intended to ensure the provision of adequate parking and access for those persons residing within a mobile home park as well as to assure the compatibility of the mobile home park with the surrounding area. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.020 Statutory limitations.
Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations (“Title 25”) governs the physical structure and operation of mobile home parks in the state. Accordingly, this chapter is intended to complement Title 25. In the event of any discrepancy between the requirements of this chapter and provisions of Title 25, the provisions of Title 25 shall apply. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.030 Conditional use permit.
A.    A conditional use permit shall be required for mobile home park development under the following conditions:

1.     Development of a new mobile home park;

2.     Modification or expansion of an existing mobile home park.

B.     All existing mobile home parks which do not comply with all of the provisions of this chapter or which are annexed into the city after January 1, 1993, shall be designated as nonconforming uses, as that term is defined in Chapter 17.120 of this title, unless they subsequently comply with all provisions of this section.

C.     When a difference occurs between the standards and criteria of this chapter and the regulations of the underlying zoning district, the standards of this chapter shall apply.

 

D.    When applying for a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall submit the following:

1.     Completed conditional use permit application;

2.     Plot plan indicating the following:

a.     Each mobile home lot, numbered and dimensioned,

b.     Streets or driveways with dimensions,

c.     Ingress and egress,

d.     Parking areas, numbered and dimensioned,

e.     Landscaped areas,

f.      Storage yard,

g.     Trash areas,

h.     Walls and fences,

i.      Recreational amenities;

3.     Preliminary landscaping plan;

4.     Grading plan.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.040 Locational considerations.
Mobile home parks, regardless of the underlying zoning classification, shall be located on a major street (either a primary or secondary thoroughfare). Mobile home parks should also be located in close proximity to shopping, neighborhood parks, schools, public transportation and other residential support facilities. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.050 Design considerations.
A mobile home park should be designed and developed in a manner that is compatible with and complementary to existing and potential residential development in the immediate vicinity. In addition, the design should relate to the natural topography and environment of the property and surrounding properties so as to minimize any possible disturbances and dislocations. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.060 Minimum mobile home park size.
The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be five (5) acres. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.070 Density.
The maximum number of mobile homes shall not exceed the density established by the following table. The net lot area is the lot area that remains after all dedications for public streets along the exterior property line of the mobile home park have been made. The right-of-way of private or public streets within the mobile home park shall be included in the net lot area.

 

Underlying Zone

Maximum Number of Mobile Homes

RS-40

Net lot area divided by 40,000 sq. ft. (1 per acre)

RS-20

Net lot area divided by 20,000 sq. ft. (2 per acre)

RS-14

Net lot area divided by 14,000 sq. ft. (3 per acre)

RS-9

Net lot area divided by 9,000 sq. ft. (4.5 per acre)

RS-6

Net lot area divided by 6,000 sq. ft. (7 per acre)

RM-6000

Net lot area divided by 6,000 sq. ft. (7 per acre)

RM-4300

Net lot area divided by 6,000 sq. ft. (7 per acre)

RM-2500

Net lot area divided by 5,400 sq. ft. (8 per acre)

RM-2200

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

RM-1450

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

RM-HR

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

PRD low low

Net lot area divided by 20,000 sq. ft. (2 per acre)

PRD low

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

PRD low-medium

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

PRD medium

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

PRD high

Net lot area divided by 4,350 sq. ft. (10 per acre)

(Ord. 5018 § 57, 2015)

 

17.175.080 Development standards.
A.    Perimeter Walls and Fences.

1.     A solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence six (6) feet in height or a landscaped buffer strip 20 feet in depth shall be required along all exterior property lines adjacent to a public street. The wall or fence shall observe the same exterior yard setbacks as required by the underlying zoning district and the setback area shall be landscaped.

2.     Solid walls or fences six (6) feet in height shall be required along all interior property lines except those in cases where the planning commission determines that adequate buffer screening between the mobile home park and adjacent property is provided through landscaping or topographic features.

3.     All areas between required exterior walls and fences and the public right-of-way shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this title.

B.     Parking Requirements.

1.     Two (2) resident spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot.

2.     One (1) guest parking space shall be provided for every three (3) mobile home lots.

3.     One supplemental parking space shall be provided for every five (5) mobile home lots for the first 50 lots in the mobile home park. One (1) additional supplemental parking space shall be provided for every 10 mobile home lots in excess of the first 50 lots.

4.     Uncovered parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of 8.5 feet by 18.5 feet and covered parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 20 feet.

C.     Signs. Signs shall meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district. One (1) additional sign identifying the entire mobile home park may be approved by the planning commission, with the sign area not to exceed 48 square feet per face.

D.    Access. Vehicular access shall be provided. Minimum driveway widths shall be 12 feet for one-way driveways and 24 feet for two-way driveways. All driveways located in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.090 Mobile home subdivisions.
A new mobile home subdivision or the conversion of a mobile home park to a mobile home subdivision shall be processed as a planned unit development in lieu of requiring a conditional use permit. The development shall comply with all the requirements of Chapter 17.60 (Planned Unit Development) in addition to the requirements of this chapter. Where a conflict arises between the requirements of Chapter 17.60 (Planned Unit Development) and the requirements of this chapter, the requirements of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.100 Closure of mobile home park.
Prior to the closure of a mobile home park that would result in the displacement of existing mobile home residents, the property owner/applicant must initiate and successfully amend the General Plan to delete the “M” overlay designation and initiate and successfully rezone the subject property to delete the “MH” overlay zone.

In addition, a tenant impact report, prepared pursuant to state law, shall be submitted with any other required applications and considered by the planning commission and city council in making any decisions affecting the closure of the mobile home park. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.175.110 Application to existing mobile home parks.
Existing mobile home parks, which do not satisfy all of the above-referenced criteria and standards, may still receive the mobile home overlay zone based upon the consideration of, but not limited to, the following criteria:

A.    Age of park;

B.     Density;

C.     Space size;

D.    Maintenance levels;

E.     The percentage of permanent residents;

F.     The presence of amenities such as swimming pools, clubhouses or recreational facilities;

G.    Exclusive parking spaces available to each mobile home space;

H.    Available natural gas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.180 ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES
17.180.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to improve the appearance of buildings in the community, using quality and compatibility with surroundings as primary considerations. The simple, basic principles listed in this chapter shall provide guidance to applicants, staff members, and decision makers in making decisions related to building design and architecture. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.020 Height, bulk, and mass.
The height, bulk, and mass of structures shall be compatible with surrounding development and appropriate for the use and site. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.030 Design creativity.
Innovative and imaginative designs are encouraged, bizarre or monotonous architecture is prohibited. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.040 Visual interest.
Visual interest shall be provided by means of variation in building details, form, materials, and color. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.050 Continuation of design.
The architectural design of a structure shall be expressed on all exterior surfaces. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.060 Rooftop equipment screening.
Rooftop equipment shall be screened from view, and such screening shall be architecturally compatible with the rest of the structure. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.180.070 Variation of wall planes.
Large, flat, unbroken wall surfaces shall be varied by the use of projections, bays, window and structural rhythms, shadow lines, contrast, and surface richness. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.080 Entry features.
Building entrances shall be marked by eave-line changes, recesses, projections, roof overhangs, or special detailing. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.180.090 Proportionality.
Windows, columns, doorways, parapets, eaves, and other building elements shall have good proportions and good relationships to one another and to wall areas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.185 PARKING STANDARDS
17.185.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to list regulations relating to parking requirements, parking areas, vehicle access, and on-site vehicle circulation under simplified headings. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.020 Location.
Required parking shall be located as follows:

A.    Except as provided elsewhere in this title, off-street parking facilities shall be situated on the site for which the parking is required.

B.     In the M zone only, off-site parking may be provided In a private parking area that is within 300 feet of the site, provided that said additional parking area is owned by the same owner, and further provided that restrictive covenants are enacted limiting the use of the lot to parking for as long as the building exists or the parking is required by this title.

 

C.     In the commercial zones (including the C-M zone) off-site parking may be approved by a Specific Plan in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.70 provided that it is located within a safe walking distance of 300 feet from the subject property and not located across a primary thoroughfare, and further provided that restrictive covenants are recorded in the chain of title of all affected properties limiting the use of the lot or lots to parking for as long as the building exists, or for as long as the parking is required by this title.

D.    Except as provided elsewhere in this title, all parking areas shall be subject to the same setback restrictions governing accessory buildings.

E.     Parking areas shall not be situated within any required front or exterior yards, except that parking in the C-M and M zones may be located as close as ten feet from an exterior property line. Under no circumstance shall off-street parking be located within 10 feet of a public street. An exception to this provision exists for vehicles parked in an authorized driveway leading to covered parking at a single-family residence.

F.     With the exception of single-family residential development, on-site parking spaces shall not be situated so as to promote backing out onto any public right-of-way other than an alley. (Ord. 4968 § 45, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.030 Minimum stall dimensions.
A.    Outdoor, uncovered, parking stalls shall have minimum dimensions of 8.5 feet in width, by 18.5 feet in depth. Such parking spaces may overhang landscaped areas by no more than two feet inclusive of the curb width separating the stall from the landscaped area. The parking spaces my not overhang required walkway or sidewalk width. The painted stripes that define required parking stalls shall have a minimum width of four (4) inches and parking stall width shall be measured from the center of such stripes.

B.     Indoor and covered parking stalls, including stalls in garages and carports, shall have minimum dimensions of 10 feet in width by 20 feet in depth. Nothing shall be permitted to encroach into the required covered parking area including stairways, work-benches, laundry facilities, water heaters, etc.

C.     Minimum dimensions of angled parking stalls shall be determined by the city traffic engineer and maintained on file in the community development department.

D.    Motorcycle parking stalls shall have minimum dimensions of five (5) feet in width and 10 feet in depth.

E.     Parking spaces designed for small or economy cars shall not be permitted in satisfaction of the parking requirements imposed by this title, but may be permitted for parking spaces in excess of the requirements listed in this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.040 Fractional parking numbers.
All cumulative parking requirement calculations resulting in a fractional remainder of .50 or greater shall be rounded up to require one additional space. A fractional remainder of less than .50 shall be rounded down to require one less space. (Ord. 4984 § 66, 2013)

 

 

17.185.050 Vehicular access.
Each parking space required by this title shall have unobstructed vehicular ingress and egress. Access to required parking areas shall be provided in the form of a paved driveway. The location and design of all en-trances and exits from all parking areas to public streets shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.060 Backup space.
Standard, rectangular (90 degree) parking spaces shall provide at least 24 feet of unobstructed back up maneuvering space. Back up space requirements in parking areas with angled stalls shall be determined by the city traffic engineer and maintained on file in the community development department. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.070 Paving and maintenance.
All parking areas and driveways shall be paved with a minimum of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete on a prepared base, unless an alternative parking surface is required or approved by the director of public works. Areas of new and replaced pavement shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all water to a sufficiently sized and stabilized landscaped or otherwise pervious area in compliance with Low Impact Development (LID) requirements prior to being discharged to the public right-of-way. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.080 Curbs and wheel stops.
All parking spaces abutting a street or alley property line that are not separated by a fence or wall from such street or alley property line shall be provided with a suitable concrete curb or wheel stops not less than six (6) inches in height, situated not closer than two and one-half feet (2.5) from such street or alley property line. This provision shall not apply to parking spaces that are adjacent to, and accessed directly from an alley with a minimum width of 24 feet. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.090 Parking adjacent to alleys.
Parking spaces that are adjacent to and accessed directly from an alley are permitted provided that the alley is at least 24 feet wide. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.100 Parking requirements for uses not specified.
Where a use is not specifically listed within this title, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the director, in the manner set forth in Chapter 17.10, and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified herein. If a conditional use permit is required to establish the use, the planning commission shall determine the parking requirement based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified herein. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.110 Disabled parking requirements.
Disabled parking spaces will be counted toward satisfying the off-street parking requirements otherwise required by this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.120 Mixed occupancy in a building.
In the case of mixed uses in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as hereinafter specified for joint use. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.130 Joint use parking.
The planning commission may authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities subject to the granting of a conditional use permit:

A.    Up to 50 percent of the required parking for a use conducted primarily during the daytime may be provided by a use conducted primarily during the nighttime. The same provision exists for a primarily nighttime use, if the required parking is provided by a primarily daytime use. However, such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

B.     Up to 100 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a religious facility or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use, provided such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

C.     The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing or wholesale buildings, and similar uses. The following uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, religious facilities, dance halls, theaters and night clubs.

D.    Conditions required for joint use:

1.     The parking provided as joint use parking shall be a maximum distance of 150 feet from the building or use for which joint-use parking is proposed.

2.     The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.

3.     Upon approval by the planning commission a proper legal instrument, approved by the city attorney as to form and content, shall be recorded documenting conditions of approval applicable to the joint use parking agreement.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.140 Joint use driveways.
The joint use of abutting driveways on adjacent properties may be permitted upon acceptance by the city of legal arrangements granting joint access. Such joint driveways shall conform to all other provisions of this title relating to length, width and access. “Legal arrangements,” as used in this section, shall mean a recorded easement or other agreement that shall be recorded so that it appears in the chain of title of each affected property. (Ord. 5081 § 19, 2019.)

 

17.185.150 Bicycle parking.
All non-residential developments and mixed use developments requiring the approval of a site development plan, planned unit development, or conditional use permit, shall provide bicycle parking facilities on site to accommodate a number of bicycles equal to not less than 10 percent of the required vehicular parking. The design and location of the bicycle parking facilities shall be subject to review and approval in conjunction with the approval of the applicable site development plan, planned unit development, or conditional use permit. (Ord. 4968 § 47, 2011)

 

17.185.160 Vehicle stacking for drive-through service lanes.
For drive-through facilities that permit the transaction of business directly with customers within an automobile, for purposes of determining the stacking capacity of vehicles in a drive-through service lane, the minimum length provided per vehicle shall be 25 lineal feet. It shall be left for determination at the time of site development plan review and approval how much total stacking capacity is adequate for the use proposed. (Ord. 5018 § 59, 2015)

 

17.185.170 Residential zone parking requirements.
The table below lists the minimum parking requirements for residential developments. For parking requirements related to institutional uses and government facilities located in residential zones, see the commercial zone parking table located below in Section 17.185.190. For parking requirements related to affordable housing see Section 17.140.200. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that supplements the information listed in the table’s matrix.

 

Table 17.185.170
Residential Zone Parking Requirements

 

Zones

Per single-family unit

Per studio unit

Per 1 bedroom unit

Per unit with 2 or more bedrooms

Supplemental Parking Per unit

O-S

21

NA

 

NA

N/A

PRD

See Chapter 17.165

See Chapter 17.165

 

See Chapter 17.165

 

PUD

See Chapter 17.60

See Chapter 17.60

 

See Chapter 17.60

 

RS-40

21

NA

 

NA

N/A

RS-20

21

NA

 

NA

N/A

RS-14

21

NA

 

NA

N/A

RS-9

21

NA

 

NA

N/A

RS-6

21

NA

 

NA

N/A

RM-6000

21, 2

NA

 

NA

1

RM-4300

2

1

1.5

2

.25

RM-2500

2

1

1.5

2

.25

RM-2200

2

1

1.5

2

.25

RM-1450

2

1

1.5

2

.25

RM-HR

2

1

1.5

2

.25

 

1.      Must provide two spaces in an enclosed garage with minimum un-obstructed interior dimensions of 20 ft. by 20 ft. The conversion of an enclosed garage into living space within single-family zones in conjunction with the construction of a replacement garage shall be cause for the existing driveway, including public right-of-way improvements, to be removed and replaced with improvements that comply with applicable standards if the driveway will not be used to provide access to a new enclosed garage.

2.      Must provide one additional paved space per unit as visitor parking.

 

General Notes:

A.     Flag Lots. Flag lots must provide one additional paved parking space, which may not be located in a required front or exterior side yard and may not block the driveway leading to the required garage.

B.     Loading Spaces for Multi-Family Development. Multi-family developments in the RM-4300 through RM-HR zones shall provide one additional designated space for temporary loading activities per every 25 units, or fraction thereof.

C.     Board and Care Facilities. Board and care facilities shall provide two spaces, plus one space for every three beds, or fraction thereof.

D.     Multi-Family developments including mixed-use developments shall provide assigned parking to the units in accordance with the parking standards. Supplemental parking may be available as open parking provided that a minimum of 50% of the parking is reserved for visitors.

E.     Tandem parking is permitted for required residential parking provided that is located within a required garage or carport and the tandem spaces are assigned to one dwelling unit. Tandem parking spaces may not be used for guest parking. An additional.25 of supplemental parking spaces shall be provided for each unit for which tandem parking is provided.

 

(Ord. 5072 § 28, 2018; Ord. 5033 § 34, 2015)

 

17.185.180 Residential zone driveway and drive aisle widths.
The table below lists the minimum width requirements for required residential driveways and drive aisles. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that supplements the information contained in the table’s matrix.

 

Table 17.185.180
Residential Zone Driveway and Drive Aisle Widths

 

Residential Zones

1 or 2 units with driveway or connecting drive aisles less than 150 ft.

1 or 2 units with driveway or connecting drive aisles greater than 150 ft.

3 to 5 units with driveway or connecting drive aisles less than 150 ft.

3 to 5 units with driveway or connecting drive aisles greater than 150 ft.

6 or more units with driveway or connecting drive aisles less than 150 ft.

6 or more units with driveway or connecting drive aisles greater than 150 ft.

O-S

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

PRD

See Ch. 17.165

 

 

 

 

 

RS-40

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

RS-20

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

RS-14

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

RS-9

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

RS-6

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

RM-6000

12 ft.

16 ft.

16 ft.

22 ft.

N/A

N/A

RM-4300

12 ft.

16 ft.

16 ft.

22 ft.

22 ft.

24 ft.

RM-2500

12 ft.

16 ft.

16 ft.

22 ft.

22 ft.

24 ft.

RM-2200

12 ft.

16 ft.

16 ft.

22 ft.

22 ft.

24 ft.

RM-1450

12 ft.

16 ft.

16 ft.

22 ft.

22 ft.

24 ft.

RM-HR

12 ft.1

16 ft.1

16 ft.1

22 ft.1

22 ft.1

24 ft.1

 

1        Except as modified by SP No. 182.

         One-way Driveways. One-way driveways and drive aisles shall be permitted only when absolutely necessary. Minimum width for one-way driveways and drive aisles is 12 feet.

         Vertical Clearance. Driveways and drive aisles must maintain an unobstructed vertical clearance of 13.5 ft.

         Parking Restrictions for Reduced Driveway Widths. Standard (90-degree) parking stalls may not be located adjacent to any drive aisles that are less than 24 feet in width unless such parking spaces are physically separated by a wall, a six-inch concrete curb, or a wheel stop.

         Angled Parking. Drive aisles for angled parking shall be determined by the city traffic engineer and maintained on file in the community development department.

 

(Ord. 5018 § 63, 2015)

 

17.185.190 Commercial zone parking requirements.
The table below lists the minimum parking requirements for non-residential developments and uses.

 

Table 17.185.190
Commercial Zone Parking Requirements

 

Unique uses

 

Caretakers unit

Two (2) spaces in addition to any other parking required at the site

Institutional uses, utilities, and places of assembly

 

Religious facilities, theatres, auditoriums, and similar places of assembly

One (1) space per every five (5) fixed seats, or one (1) space for every two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater.

Public buildings including utilities and related facilities

As determined by CUP

Vocational or trade schools

One (1) space for every thirty-five (35) square feet of laboratory or work area plus one (1) space for every two hundred (200) square feet of remaining floor area at the school.

Commercial uses

 

General office uses and general retail commercial uses not specified elsewhere in this table

One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet, plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area for the next fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, plus one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area above twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet

Dance halls

One (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of dance floor, or one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater

Restaurants, cocktail lounges, and similar eating and drinking establishments

One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, except as follows: In shopping centers over two (2) acres in size, the parking requirement for restaurants is the same as for other general retail uses in that center; at an existing commercial property, the parking requirement for restaurants is the same as for other general retail uses.

Hospitals

One (1) space per bed.

Hotels and motels

One (1) space per room, plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area dedicated to offices, restaurants and lounges located within the hotel or motel.

Automobile fueling station

See Chapter 17.215.

Outdoor venues such as swap meets, farmers markets, athletic fields, and other outdoor recreational facilities

One (1) space for every three (3) people anticipated at maximum attendance as indicated by the required conditional use permit.

Indoor recreational facilities such as bowling alleys, game centers, fitness centers, dance studios, and martial arts facilities

One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of recreation area plus one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of non-recreation area; accessory eating and drinking areas to be calculated separately at one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet.

Outdoor sales areas

One (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of outdoor sales and display. The parking requirement for outdoor sales areas at automobile sales establishments shall be determined at time of the conditional use permit

Transportation facilities (bus depots, trolley stations, etc.)

One (1) space per five (5) fixed seats or one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater

Commercial building additions for storage space only

See section 17.130.255

(Ord. 5081 § 21, 2019.)

17.185.200 Nonresidential parking areas in multiple-family residential zones.
Nonresidential parking areas are permitted in all multiple-family residential zones, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and provided the following provisions are met:

A.    Such parking lot shall be in addition to the required parking of a permitted commercial or industrial establishment.

B.     Such parking lot shall be located within 50 feet of the commercial or industrial use that it serves.

C.     Such parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of private passenger vehicles.

D.    No sign of any kind, other than one designating entrances, exits or conditions of use shall be maintained on such parking lot. Any such sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.210 Commercial zone driveway and drive aisle widths.
The following standards for driveways and drive aisles shall apply to all commercial developments in commercial zones, exclusive of the C-M zone.

A.    Two-way commercial driveways and drive aisles shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. A drive aisle connecting a driveway to a parking area may be reduced to a width of 22 feet if the connecting drive aisle is less than or equal to 25 feet in length.

B.     One-way commercial driveways and drive aisles shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. A drive aisle connecting a driveway to a parking area may be reduced to a width of 11 feet if the connecting drive aisle is less than or equal to 25 feet in length.

C.     Drive aisle widths in parking areas with angled stalls shall be determined by the city traffic engineer and maintained on file in the community development department. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.220 M zone and C-M zone parking requirements.
The table below lists the minimum parking requirements for developments in the M zone and C-M zone. The endnotes at the bottom of the table contain information that supplements the information contained in the table’s matrix.

 

Table 17.185.220

M Zone and C-M Zone Parking Requirements

 

Manufacturing and transportation uses

1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor area1

Warehousing and distribution

1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area1,2

Trade and service uses

1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Outdoor sales areas and outdoor storage

1 space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor sales or storage area.

Large box retail

In the C-M zone, the parking requirement for large box retail establishments may be reduced to 1 space per 500 feet of gross floor area.

Vocational or trade school

1 space for every 35 square feet of laboratory or work area plus 1 space for every 200 square feet of remaining floor area at the school.

 

1        Includes accessory office space up to 25% of gross floor area. Office areas in excess of 25% shall provide parking at 1 space per 300 feet of additional office space.

2        Warehouse developments must provide sufficient undeveloped, open space that is not a part of any required landscaping or setbacks to be reserved for potential parking area expansion to accommodate the parking requirement for a manufacturing or transportation use.

         Parking for Mezzanines. The parking requirement for mezzanines areas shall be the same as the requirement for the other areas of a development

         Employee Compact Parking. In the C-M and M zones only, any use with fifty or more required parking spaces may designated an employee-only parking area with up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces reduced in size to 8.5 feet by 17 feet.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.230 M zone and C-M zone driveway and drive aisle widths.
In the M and C-M zones, two-way driveways and drive aisles shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. One-way driveways and drive aisles shall have a minimum width of 15 feet. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.240 Loading area requirements in the M and C-M zones.
Developments in the M and C-M zones shall provide on-site loading areas. Loading areas must be provided in such a location and configuration that their use does not extend into the public right-of-way when a vehicle is properly loading. A two-way driveway may be used to satisfy this requirement. Any overhead doors facing and visible from the public right-of-way shall be set back a minimum of 65 feet from any exterior property line. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.185.250 Use of parking for temporary storage in the M zone.
On existing developments in the M zone, a portion of the required number of parking spaces may be fenced off for temporary outside storage purposes subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. However, in granting such a conditional use permit the planning commission must find that there is a demonstrated need for the outdoor storage area and that the remaining on-site parking shall be adequate for both employee and customer needs. The following minimum requirements shall be included as conditions of approval, if the conditional use permit is granted:

A.    In no case shall the temporary outdoor storage occupy more than 50 percent of the required parking spaces;

B.     The planning commission shall determine the duration, or term, of the conditional use permit authorizing temporary outdoor storage;

C.     A view-obscuring fence shall screen the outdoor storage. The design and appearance of the required fence is subject to planning commission approval.

D.    A suitable and sufficient guarantee shall be posted to assure the removal of the fence and stored materials at the end of the approved term;

E.     The height of any stored materials shall not exceed the height of the screening fence. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.190 SIGNS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 5105. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


17.190.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the sign ordinance. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.020 Regulatory scope.
This chapter regulates signs that are located on private property (not including public rights-of-way), or on property owned by public entities other than the city of El Cajon, and over which the city holds land use regulatory authority, when such property is located within the corporate limits of the city of El Cajon. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.190.030 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs in the city of El Cajon. Sign regulation is enacted to serve the interests of community aesthetics, vehicular and pedestrian safety, to protect and preserve property values, to improve the visual environment of the city so as to promote commerce, investment, tourism, visitation, and the overall quality of life for persons living in, doing business in, or visiting the city. The provisions of this chapter are also intended to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of persons driving, parking, walking, residing, or conducting business within the city by reducing visual distractions to motorists, by making signs and advertising displays more attractive, aesthetically pleasing, and more effective. It is the further purpose of this chapter to ensure that every use of property within the city receives adequate identification. The regulations of this chapter are not intended to permit any violations of the provisions of any other lawful ordinance, or to prohibit the use of any sign required by any law superior to that of this ordinance. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 17.190.040 Basic policies.
The policies and provisions of this section shall apply to all signs regulated by this chapter.

A.    Message Neutrality. Consistent with both the federal and state constitutions, it is the city’s policy to regulate signs in a manner that is content neutral as to noncommercial signs and viewpoint neutral as to commercial signs.

B.     Regulatory Interpretations. All regulatory interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the city’s message neutrality policy. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a “structure” as defined in Chapter 15.04, then the director shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this chapter. Architectural compatibility shall be analyzed without consideration of the message to be displayed on a sign, other than the distinction between on-site and off-site commercial messages.

C.     Discretionary Approvals. Whenever a sign or proposed sign is subject to any discretionary approval process, including but not limited to a variance, or a conditional use permit, no consideration will be given to sign copy or message to be displayed, other than a determination as to whether the message will constitute off-site commercial copy. This principle applies equally at all levels of approval.

D.    Message Substitution Policy. Subject to a property owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal, without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel or land use, nor does it affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted.

E.     Noncommunicative Aspects of Signs. All rules and regulations concerning the non-communicative aspects of signs, such as location, size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation, and so forth, stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process.

F.     Billboard Policy. It is a fundamental land use policy of the city of El Cajon to prohibit the construction, erection or use of any billboards, as defined in this chapter, other than those that legally exist in the city, or for which a valid permit has been issued and has not expired as of the date on which this provision is first adopted, or as may be allowed by the S overlay zone (Section 17.34.260, below). The city adopts this policy pursuant to California Government Code Section 65850, California Business and Professions Code Sections 5354(a) and 5408.3 (both effective January 1, 2003). No permit shall be issued for any billboard that violates this policy, and the construction or maintenance of any billboard in violation of this subsection is declared a nuisance and the city may take immediate steps to abate any nuisance created by any billboard constructed or maintained in violation of this policy. The city council affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this subsection even if it were the only provision in this chapter.

The city council intends for this subsection to be severable and separately enforceable, even if other provisions of this chapter may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable. This subsection does not prohibit agreements to relocate presently existing, legal billboards, as encouraged by California Business and Professions Code Section 5412.

G.    Multiple Use Zones. In any zone where both residential and nonresidential uses are allowed, the signage rights and responsibilities applicable to any particular use shall be determined as follows: residential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a residential zone, and nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a conditional use permit or similar discretionary process.

H.    Property Owner’s Consent. No sign may be displayed on real or personal property without the consent of the legal owner of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this subsection, “owner” means the holder of legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right of possession, control, or use of the property.

I.      Projection Over Public Right-of-Way. No sign may project over the public right-of-way unless such projection is specifically authorized by this chapter or by a policy statement or resolution, adopted by the city council, authorizing such projection.

J.      Legal Nature of Signage Rights and Duties. As to all permanent signs attached to property, real or personal, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this chapter attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This subsection does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, or sign-related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this chapter).

K.    Compliance with Safety Codes. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all signs displayed in the city must comply with the provisions of Title 15, regulating building and construction in the city.

L.     Compliance With Other Laws. All signs displayed in the city must comply with the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of all other applicable laws.

M.    Permit Requirement. It is illegal to display any sign within the city without a sign permit as required in Section 17.190.060, unless the particular sign is expressly exempted from the permit requirement by any provision of this chapter.

N.    Right to Permit. When a given sign is subject to the permit requirements of this chapter, and the applicant satisfies all of the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable law, the permit shall be issued upon the terms and conditions stated in this chapter and such other applicable laws.

O.    Right to Sign. When a sign is not subject to a permit requirement, and fully conforms with all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws, the sign may be displayed as a matter of right.

P.     Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this chapter is held invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision in this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this chapter the city council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted the chapter even without any portion that may be held invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 5018 § 65, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.050 Sign definitions.
The following alphabetically listed definitions shall be used when interpreting this sign ordinance. Refer to Chapter 17.10 of this title for provisions relating to the interpretation of ambiguity or omissions.

“Advertising display” means an advertising structure or a sign as defined in this chapter.

“Advertising structure” means a structure of any kind or character, including statuary erected or maintained for outdoor advertising or attention calling purposes, on which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement, identification, or directions of any kind may be placed, including statuary which implies a message in itself or which calls attention to the premises on which it is constructed. The term “advertising structure” does not apply to public art.

“Animated sign” means a sign with action, motion, or moving parts, including devices activated by wind or forced air, or human power, and signs that revolve. This definition does not include revolving barber poles.

“Awning” means a temporary shelter, which protrudes from, and is supported entirely by, the exterior wall of a building. For the purposes of sign regulations, any sign on an awning shall observe all applicable provisions of the Zoning Code. For example, awning signs shall count toward overall size regulations and shall not project over public rights-of-way.

“Balloon” means a type of sign or advertising display consisting of a nonporous bag of material filled with heated air, a gas lighter than air, or air under pressure and used for advertising purposes.

“Billboard” means a permanent structure sign with a display face exceeding 32 square feet that is used to display off-site commercial messages.

“Boxing” means a technique used for calculating the area of irregularly shaped sign copy and graphics. Boxing means to draw a series of parallel lines around the area of the sign element being measured. These parallel lines are connected to enclose the sign element within a contiguous area consisting of rectangles and/or parallelograms. For the purpose of calculating allowable sign area, the cumulative area of the rectangles and parallelograms is considered to be the area of the sign element.

“Building face extension sign” means a sign that appears to be a direct vertical extension of a building face, but which in reality projects above the roofline of a building. A building face extension sign forms a continuous connection with the building face or wall toward which it is oriented and shall not extend higher than three feet above the building wall to which it is attached.

“Building face or wall sign” means a sign painted or constructed flush along the face of a wall of a building or structure.

“Canopy sign” means a sign attached, painted, or suspended from a canopy or similar architectural feature, but which does not project above the supporting canopy.

“Community service sign” means an advertising structure or sign less than one hundred square feet in total area (all display faces combined) that serves to identify approved community-wide events.

“Commercial message, or commercial speech” means a message displayed on a sign that proposes a commercial transaction or is related primarily to the economic interests of the speaker and its audience. Messages promoting professional services are within this definition.

“Construction sign” means a temporary sign located on property where a building permit or equivalent has been issued, actual building or construction is taking place, and no certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy has yet been issued.

“Electronic message display” means a sign with either a fixed or changeable display which may be changed by electronic processes or remote control, which may include words and/or pictures and composed of a series of lights, light emitting diodes (LEDs) or liquid crystal displays (LCDs) or functionally similar signs.

“Feather banner” means a freestanding temporary sign typically constructed of a single plastic or metal shaft driven in the ground with an attached pennant that is vertically elongated and mounted to the shaft.

“Flashing sign” means a sign with lights or reflective materials that flashes, strobes, or reflects light, or that changes in image or intensity more frequently than once each four seconds. Time and temperature indicators and traditional revolving barber poles are not within this definition.

“Freeway-oriented sign” means a sign within 660 feet of a freeway, which has copy that is directed toward, and intended to be viewed from, a freeway.

“Fueling station digital pricing sign” means a sign that displays the price of the product, but does not have changing copy.

“Incidental, or directional, sign” means a sign that provides functional information that is incidental, supplemental or accessory to a permitted use on a property, or direction and distance information for the use of pedestrians or motorists. Such signs typically display information such as Entrance, Exit, Telephone, Restrooms, etc.

“Inflatable object” means a type of sign or advertising display greater than sixteen inches in diameter at its widest point and consisting of a nonporous material that is filled with or activated by heated air, a gas lighter than air, or air or a gas under pressure, and used for purposes of advertising, attracting attention, or conveying a visual image.

“Marquee sign” means a sign attached to or constructed on a marquee.

“Menu board sign” means an informational sign used in conjunction with drive-through restaurants or other establishments that serve or communicate with customers, clients or members who are located in their motor vehicles.

“Monument sign” means a low-profile freestanding structure eight feet or less in height and length, and two feet or less in width, containing a sign area of no more than 48 square feet per sign face, and no more than 96 square feet per sign. A monument sign shall include a solid foundation. A monument sign shall require a building permit.

“Noncommercial speech, or noncommercial message” means sign copy or graphics that do not relate primarily to the economic interests of the speaker or audience, or do not propose an economic transaction or the providing of professional services. Such speech or messages typically consist of visual expression of opinion on topics of public concern and debate, including but not limited to, politics and religion.

“Off-premises or off-site sign” means a sign that displays commercial information, copy or image that does not pertain to goods or services available at the same location where the sign is located. The off-premises/on-premises distinction (or the off-site/on-site distinction) refers only to commercial messages.

“On-premises or on-site sign” means a sign that at any time carries any commercial advertising, identification or directions pertaining to the same location. The off-premises/on-premises distinction (or the off-site/on-site distinction) refers only to commercial messages.

“Permanent sign” means a sign of a non-temporary nature requiring a building permit or a sign permanently fixed in a lawful location.

“Pole sign” or “freestanding sign” means a separate and detached on-premises sign or advertising structure, which receives its support from one or more poles, columns, uprights, braces, pillars or similar devices.

“Portable sign” means a type of sign that is easily moved from one location or position to another. Such signs are typically mounted on vehicles or trailers, or made of such lightweight materials that they may be moved by hand to another location. This definition also includes “A-framed signs,” “sandwich boards,” and “stake signs.”

“Projecting sign” means a sign which projects or extends outward from the face of any building and which uses the building wall as its main source of support. For the purposes of this chapter, a standard size barber pole projecting no more than one foot from the face of a building shall be considered a projecting sign, but shall not fall under the limitations prescribed in Section 17.190.200(C)

“Real estate sign” means a temporary sign mounted on real estate that provides information regarding any proposed economic transaction involving real estate, including but not limited to “for sale,” “for rent,” “for lease,” etc., except that signs displaying information about short-term rentals, such as hotel and motel signs, are not within this definition.

“Real estate sign, off-site” or “off-site real estate sign” means an “off-premises sign” that is displayed for a temporary duration and which is located on property other than that which is being advertised for sale, lease, rental or exchange. The property being advertised for sale, lease, rental or exchange shall be located within the city of El Cajon. “Open house” signs are included in this definition.

“Roof sign” means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building and is wholly or partially supported by such building, and which projects above the highest part of such roof or parapet wall.

“Sign” means any mark, display, visual image, or painted character, on any card, cloth, paper, metal, or screen, that is mounted, supported, or displayed on any wooden structure, wall, bush, rock, fence, or other mounting or supporting device, and is visible from any public right-of-way within or adjacent to the city. The word “sign” also includes any graphic announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to promote the interest of any person when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. However, the following are excluded from this definition:

1.     Address Number. When 12-inches or less for buildings, and when 8- inches or less for individual ground floor tenants mounted on an applicable storefront; See Section 17.190.110 for address minimum standards.

2.     Architectural Features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks, or moving parts);

3.     Fireworks, etc. The legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this chapter;

4.     Grave stones or grave markers;

5.     Interior Signs. Signs or other visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof, provided the building or enclosed structure is otherwise legal;

6.     Manufacturers’ Marks. Marks on tangible products that identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and that customarily remain attached to the product even after sale;

7.     Mass Transit. Visual images on duly licensed mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city;

8.     Memorial tablets, plaques and directional signs for community historical resources;

9.     Newsracks and newsstands;

10.   Personal Appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, costumes (but not including commercial mascots); and

11.   Symbols Embedded in Architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts, including, but not limited to, religious, or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building that is otherwise legal.

“Sign face” means the entire communicative area of a sign, including any background area that demarks or emphasizes the visual image, not including architectural and structural features that function as mounting or support devices.

“Sign spinner” means an individual who holds, flips, or spins a portable sign containing a commercial message at a location intended to attract the attention of motorists or pedestrians. Sign spinners are defined by the possession of a portable sign with a commercial message, regardless of whether or not the sign is being flipped, spun, or otherwise moved in a manner intended to attract attention.

“Subdivision sign” means a temporary sign located on the premises of a subdivision or tract housing development located within the city, or whose message (if commercial in nature) refers or pertains to such a project.

“Suspended sign” means a sign attached to or suspended from the underside of an arcade, canopy, porte cochere or marquee and oriented to pedestrian traffic.

“Temporary advertising devices” means flags, banners, bunting, streamers, pennants, balloons, inflatable objects and similar devices. They are designed, constructed, and intended to attract attention or convey a visual image, and they are typically made of flexible or non-rigid materials such as cloth, fabric or plastic.

“Temporary sign” means a kind of temporary advertising device, which by virtue of its construction from lightweight or flimsy materials, is not intended for, or is not suitable for, display over a period of one hundred eighty days.

“Trailer-mounted” or “truck-mounted sign” means a sign mounted on a truck or trailer or other mode of conveyance. (See also “Vehicle sale sign.”)

“Vehicle sale sign” means one temporary sign, which is displayed, painted, or otherwise affixed to the front windshield of an automobile which is legally being sold from private property, the size of which shall not exceed the dimensions of the windshield on which it is displayed. (See also “trailer-mounted or truck-mounted sign.”)

“Window sign” means a sign illuminated or otherwise painted or installed on either side of a window, including signs that are less than three feet behind a window and facing public view. (Ord. 5018 §§ 67, 68, 70, 2015; Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4968 § 53, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.060 Permit requirements.
A sign permit, freeway-oriented sign permit, site development plan permit, or conditional use permit shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, moving, or alteration of any sign in the city, unless expressly exempted by this chapter. A temporary sign permit is required for all temporary signs, unless expressly exempted by this chapter. A site development plan shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, moving, or reconstructing of any billboard sign in the city. One or more signs may be approved for the same property with the same permit. Signs requiring a permit of any kind shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. Applications for sign permits, temporary sign permits, freeway-oriented sign permits, and site development plan permits shall be made on forms as prescribed by the director of community development. Such applications shall be filed with the planning division and shall be accompanied by the material noted on the attachments to the application. Applications for site development plan permits shall be submitted and processed as described in Chapter 17.65 of this title. Applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted and processed as described in Chapter 17.50 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.070 Appeals.
Appeals of sign-related decisions shall be processed as described in Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.080 Sign area computations.
A.    Background area or sign face. In computing background area in square feet, standard mathematical formulas for known common shapes will be used. In the case of irregular shapes, straight lines drawn closest to the extremities of the shape will be used. On signs with more than one face, only that face or faces visible from any one direction at one time will be counted;

B.     Copy area. Signs, when composed of individual letters, shall be measured as a solid mass with gross dimensions calculated by boxing the area occupied by the letters. See the definitions in this chapter for a description of the boxing technique. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.090 Maintenance.
Every sign shall be properly maintained to ensure an attractive appearance, as well as structural, electrical, and mechanical integrity, and every sign shall be subject to maintenance provisions as follows:

A.    Abandoned on-site commercial signs. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5495(d) of the California Business and Professions Code, any location where business goods are no longer sold or produced, or where services are no longer provided, shall have 180 days to remove any derelict and/or nonconforming on-site commercial signs following notification by the city. The removal duty is on the legal owner of record of the property. Where due written notification has been given by the city and compliance has not been made within the required 180 day period, the city may cause removal of such signs with the cost for such removal to be assessed to the property;

B.     All on-site commercial signs shall be kept in clean, neat, and readable condition at all times. Damaged or dilapidated structural elements shall be promptly repaired; and

C.     All on-premises electric signs shall be refinished to remove rust or other corrosion due to the elements, and any cracked or broken faces and malfunctioning lamps or illumination tubes shall be replaced within 30 days following notification by the city. (Ord. 4968 § 55, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

17.190.100 Illumination.
Permitted signs may be illuminated as follows:

A.    By interior means;

B.     By exterior means, provided such light illuminates only the sign and does not shine directly upon other property, either public or private;

C.     By frosted incandescent lamps, provided no single lamp exceeds fifteen watts capacity or does not exceed 0.5 candlepower at ten feet distance from sign. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.110 Nameplates and addresses.
A.    Nameplates. Nameplates not exceeding two (2) square feet in area shall be permitted for each separate and distinct commercial, industrial, or residential use.

B.     Address numbers – As required by El Cajon Municipal Code Section 15.56.150, New and existing buildings shall have address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or modern basic Latin alphabetic letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of five inches high for residential occupancies, and eight inches high for commercial and all other occupancies. Three-inch high numbers or letters may be used for individual suite numbers or apartment numbers. All numbers and lettering shall have a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm). (Ord. 4968 § 57, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.120 Incidental signs.
Incidental or directional signs, as described in Section 17.190.050 above, may be displayed in association with an authorized use and do not require approval of a permit. Other than menu boards, Incidental signs shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet or an area of four (4) square feet. Incidental signs shall only contain directional information, hours of operation, or necessary instructions, and shall not include commercial copy or company logos. (Ord. 4968 § 59, 2011)

 

17.190.130 Flags.
A.    Every property in the city may display the United States flag and the California State flag. Such flags may be attached to a single flagpole not to exceed a height of 55 feet, unless the planning commission approves a conditional use permit for an increased height.

B.     Additionally, each property in the city may display a single flag with a non-commercial message or an on-site commercial message that is mounted on a flagpole. The area of such flags shall not be counted toward the allowable sign area for the permitted use of the property. However, if such flags are mounted flush to a structure, they shall be considered banners and shall be subject to the requirements for temporary signs. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.140 Banners and other temporary advertising displays.
A.    Banners (including feather banners), balloons, searchlights, inflatable objects, and other temporary advertising displays may be used for special events such as grand openings and parking lot sales. They may also be used for approved seasonal businesses such as Christmas tree lots, flower stands and agricultural stands, or as otherwise permitted and described in this section.

B.     Temporary advertising displays shall be permitted only in the O-P, C-N, C G, C-R and C-M zones, and subject to the following limitations:

1.     New Establishments. A new establishment or new management of an existing establishment may display temporary advertising devices for a maximum period of 30 days.

2.     Balloons. Nonmetallic balloons with a maximum diameter of sixteen inches are permitted for any establishment, without limitation as to the number or height of display, except that such displays shall comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, and shall be limited to a period of 30 consecutive days and 120 days during any 12-month period.

3.     Banners for Businesses Conducted Primarily Outdoors. Any commercial business establishment in which over 50% of its merchandise for sale is permitted to be displayed outdoors in the normal course of business in the C-G, C-R, or C-M zone, and such establishment occupies a minimum gross lot area of two acres (single-occupancy properties), may display banner(s) not exceeding a total maximum banner sign area of 0.25 square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of total street frontage. Those properties with more than one street frontage may combine the length of all street frontages to determine the maximum total sign area of banners. Such banners may be mounted on buildings and light poles within the property, however, banners located on light poles shall not exceed 15 square feet each.

4.     During certain special time periods described below, any establishment may display temporary advertising devices. The time periods are:

a.     Valentine’s Day/Presidents’ Day—from 12:01 a.m. on the second Saturday before Valentine’s Day through two days after Presidents’ Day (third Monday in February);

b.     Mother’s Day—from 12:01 a.m. on the second Saturday before Mother’s Day (second Sunday in May) through two days after;

c.     Independence Day—from 12:01 a.m. on the second Saturday before Independence Day (July 4th) through two days after;

d.     Labor Day—from 12:01 a.m. on the second Saturday before Labor Day (first Monday in September) through two days after;

e.     Winter Holiday—from 12:01 a.m. on the day after Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in November) through January 3rd; and

5.     Any establishments in the O-P, C-N, C-G, C-R or C-M zones may also display temporary advertising devices with approval of a temporary use permit. Such displays shall be limited to two (2) events per calendar year, each for a maximum duration of two (2) weeks. For this purpose, the temporary use permit shall be processed without regard to the copy of message content of the sign.

C.     Noncommercial Temporary Signs. In addition to the noncommercial signage allowable under the message substitution policy, temporary signs with political, religious, or other noncommercial messages may be displayed as follows:

1.     Truck/Trailer-Mounted Signs. As truck-mounted or trailer-mounted signs on commercial or industrially zoned property on a temporary basis only;

2.     Window Signs. As signs mounted on the inside surface of any window in any zone so long as not more than 50 percent of the total amount of window space on the property is covered by signs at any point in time;

3.     Yard Signs. In residential zones and on legal residential uses, subject to property owner’s consent, signs displaying noncommercial messages may be displayed on temporary yard signs, so long as the total display area of such signs does not exceed 24 square feet, setback rules are observed, height does not exceed five (5) feet from grade, and the signs are not specially illuminated;

4.     Utility Poles, Wires, Cables, Crossbars or Pedestals. Property owner’s consent is required whenever temporary signs are mounted on utility poles, wires, cables, crossbars or pedestals. When such utility facilities are privately owned, written permission of the owner must be obtained before any temporary sign bearing a noncommercial message may be mounted thereon; and

5.     Removal. When a temporary sign displaying a noncommercial message pertains to a specific event on a certain day (such as an election), or occurring within a certain time period with a definite ending, and such event or time period has passed, then such sign must be removed by the person or persons who placed the sign on display within 30 days. If such signs are not removed within the 30-day period, the property owner shall be deemed to grant permission to the city for entry onto the property and removal of the sign. Entry and removal by such permission shall be performed only if it can be accomplished without damage to the property and without entry onto any part of the property to which the property owner has a reasonable expectation of privacy.

D.    The city manager is authorized to approve both on-site and off-site temporary signs in conjunction with designated community-wide events. Any appeal of the approval or denial by the city manager of temporary signs for designated community-wide events may be appealed to the city council as though it was a decision of the planning commission, following the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 5018 § 72, 2015; Ord. 4968 § 61, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.150 Construction, real estate and rental signs.
Construction signs, real estate signs, and rental signs shall be permitted when no more than one (1) such sign of each type is displayed on a given parcel of real property, and no such sign exceeds 12 square feet in total area, except: In commercial or industrial zones such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. One additional rental sign conforming to these provisions shall be permitted for each additional legal street frontage for a property, in a multiple-family zone, commercial zone, or industrial zone. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.160 Temporary on-site subdivision signs.
A.    Temporary on-site subdivision signs advertising the sale of dwelling units or lots within the subdivision on which the sign is located shall be permitted in any residential zone subject to:

 

1.     One (1) structure with a single face not to exceed 100 square feet (with total area not to exceed 200 square feet for both faces); or two (2) structures, each with a single-face area not to exceed 50 square feet (with a total area not to exceed one 100 feet for both faces);

2.     Where the subdivision is designed with more than one entrance from a public street, the director may approve one additional structure with a single-face area not to exceed 50 square feet (with a total area not to exceed 100 square feet for both faces).

B.     Such sign or signs shall be designed, constructed, and oriented to be viewed primarily from a surface street.

C.     Any sign permitted shall not hinder traffic visibility from any adjoining surface street, or from any driveways within the subdivision or adjoining the subdivision.

D.    If such sign or signs are single-faced, the back side shall be screened and/or painted a neutral color.

E.     An application shall be submitted to the director and shall be processed in the following manner:

1.     Applications will be approved when all the applicable requirements of this chapter are satisfied; initial approval shall be for a maximum display period of one (1) year;

2.     At the expiration of the initial display period, the permittee may apply to the director for extensions, each of which shall not exceed 180 days. Extensions shall be granted upon a showing that the development is still actively marketing new homes; and

3.     The applicant shall provide a $100.00 bond for removal of each sign. Signs are to be removed within 10 days after expiration of the sign permit, or 10 days after the sale or occupancy of the last house within the subdivision, whichever occurs first.

F.     For the purpose of this section, a “subdivision” means the original tentative subdivision application and includes all other tentative subdivision applications approved within one (1) year of the date of the original approval that are contiguous to any previous subdivisions owned by, or subdivided by, the same applicant. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.170 Off-site subdivision and real estate signs.
Except as otherwise provided herein, signs displaying off-site commercial messages shall be permitted only as follows:

A.    Temporary subdivision signs subject to the following provisions:

1.     No more than four (4) such temporary off-premises signs shall be permitted for each subdivision.

2.     All such signs shall be designed, constructed, and oriented to be viewed primarily from surface streets.

3.     The subdivision advertised must be located in the city.

4.     Any sign permitted shall be no larger than the largest commercial sign permitted in the zone in which the sign is being requested, and shall observe setbacks within the zone in which the sign is being requested; however, in no event shall such sign exceed 128 square feet for each sign face.

5.     An application shall be submitted to the director that shall be processed in the following manner:

a.     If the application conforms to all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable law, the director shall approve the application for a display period not exceeding one (1) year;

 

b.     After the initial one (1) year display period, extensions shall be approved by the director upon a showing that the subdivision is still actively marketing new residential units in the subdivision. Individual extensions shall not be granted for more than 180 days at a time; and

c.     The applicant shall provide a bond for removal in the amount of $100.00 for each sign. Temporary subdivision signs must be removed within 10 days after expiration of the sign permit, or 10 days after the sale or occupancy of the last unit within the subdivision, whichever occurs first.

B.     Temporary off-site real estate or open house signs as defined in Section 17.190.050 above are permitted as follows:

1.     The property being advertised for sale, lease, rental, or exchange shall be located within the city of El Cajon;

2.     No more than six (6) off-site real estate signs shall be permitted for each property being advertised;

3.     No more than two (2) off-site real estate signs shall be permitted on any one property;

4.     No off-site real estate sign shall exceed four (4) square feet in size, measured on one side;

5.     If an off-site real estate sign is located on property not owned by the applicant, proof of property owner’s consent or authorization may be required by the city;

6.     No off-site real estate sign shall block sight distance as determined from the public right-of-way; and

7.     No flags, pennants, or other attention-getting devices that are otherwise prohibited by this chapter, may be permitted in conjunction with or attached to an off-site real estate sign.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.180 Electronic message display signs.
Electronic message display signs, as defined in section 17.190.050 above, may be authorized as part of any permitted sign display, subject to the same height, sign area, and location limitations of the permitted sign, and subject to the granting of a minor use permit. Electronic message display signs may display only noncommercial or on-site commercial messages. When allowed, such signs may not include any illumination, flashing, or message change that is in motion, or appears to be in motion, or that changes in image or intensity more than once per four (4) seconds. (Ord. 5072 § 30, 2018)

 

17.190.190 Freeway-oriented signs.
A.    Any sign within 660 feet of a freeway right-of-way, and oriented toward the freeway or otherwise designed to be viewed from the freeway, shall require approval of a freeway-oriented sign permit by the director, or approval of a minor conditional use permit by the planning commission.

B.     The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this section:

1.     Signs or advertising displays that are not freeway-oriented and that conform in all other respects to the provisions of this title, may be permitted as freestanding signs (pole or monument) and wall or building face signs only;

2.     Signs erected by the city to direct traffic to roadside or community business areas, government offices or transit facilities. Pole or freestanding signs may be utilized for this use; and

3.     Signs required by law, including legal notices or advertisements prescribed by law or posted by any lawful officer or agent, are allowed without permit, so long as they conform to the law requiring their posting or display.

4.     Freeway-oriented city identification signs authorized by the city council.

C.     The director may approve freeway-oriented sign permits for freestanding and building face or wall signs as follows:

1.     If the commercial development as defined in Chapter 17.105 of this title is less than two (2) acres in size, a freestanding pole sign may be permitted up to a maximum height of 52 feet;

2.     If the commercial development is two (2) acres or more in size, a freestanding pole sign may be permitted up to a maximum height of 65 feet;

3.     Regardless of the permitted height, a freestanding pole sign shall be limited to a maximum sign area of two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of the total street frontage and/or freeway frontage;

4.     In no case may the total number of freestanding signs, pole, or monument, freeway-oriented or not, exceed the total number of street and freeway frontages; and

5.     Freeway-oriented building face or wall signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of building face or wall directed toward the freeway.

D.    The planning commission may approve freeway-oriented freestanding and building face or wall signs as follows:

1.     If the commercial development is two (2) acres or more in size, a freestanding pole sign greater than 65 feet in height may be granted by minor conditional use permit, if it can be shown that a greater height is necessary in order to gain adequate identification. Such showing shall include a comparison of the elevation of the site and the elevation of the adjacent freeway;

2.     The maximum sign area of such freestanding pole sign shall be limited to two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of total street and/or freeway frontage;

3.     In no case may the total number of freestanding signs, pole, or monument, freeway-oriented or not, exceed the total number of street and freeway frontages; and

4.     Freeway-oriented building face or wall signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of building face or wall directed toward the freeway.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.200 Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited, unless expressly allowed or permitted by another provision of this chapter:

A.    Animated signs;

B.     Flashing signs;

C.     Sign spinners;

D.    Marquee signs;

E.     Portable signs;

F.     Revolving signs (except barber poles);

G.    Banners, except as permitted by Section 17.190.140;

H.    Balloons, except as permitted by Section 17.190.140;

I.      Searchlights, except as permitted by Section 17.190.140; and

J.      Inflatable objects, except as permitted by Section17.190.140. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.210 Signs permitted in commercial zones.
The following signs are permitted in the O-P, C-N, C-G, and C-R zones, subject to the granting of a sign permit:

A.    Wall signs, building face signs, building face extension signs, and canopy signs shall be permitted, and shall be limited to a maximum cumulative sign area of four (4) square feet per each lineal foot of building face to which the sign is attached. The provision for wall signs is reduced to a maximum cumulative sign area of two (2) square feet per each lineal foot for properties in the O-P zone. The lineal distance of the building face shall be measured on a horizontal plane parallel to the surface of the building face.

B.     Roof signs may be permitted only in instances where it is demonstrated that it is not possible to adequately identify the use on the property by means of other permitted signs. Roof signs shall not be permitted where a property or business is already served and identified by a pole sign. A roof sign, where permitted, shall be limited to a total sign area not to exceed two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of the building face toward which the sign is oriented, and shall not project over the exterior building lines of the structure upon which it is located. The height of such sign shall be limited to that necessary to identify the use on the property. The supports for such sign shall appear as an architectural and integral part of the building, and shall be free of extra bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, etc.

C.     Projecting signs subject to the following restrictions:

1.     All properties may have projecting signs where wall signs, building face, or building face extension signs project no more than 18 inches from such wall or building face, for the purpose of providing interior lighting or a relief effect to such wall or building face sign. In no case shall such wall, building face, or building face extension sign thus permitted be designed to be viewed from the side.

2.     Projecting signs that can be viewed from the side may be mounted and displayed under the following conditions:

a.     Where it is shown that it is not possible to identify adequately the use on the property by means of other permitted signs.

b.     Such projecting signs shall not be permitted where a property is served by a pole or roof sign.

c.     Such projecting signs:

i.      Shall provide a minimum ground clearance of eight (8) feet;

ii.     Shall not projection over a public right-of-way;

iii.    Shall not project more than two (2) feet from the building face, unless it can be demonstrated a greater distance is necessary to identify the use on the property;

iv.    Shall not extend higher than the building face upon which the sign is mounted.

v.     Shall be designed with the sign copy oriented vertically.

D.    Vehicle signs. Signs may be displayed on automobiles and trailers only for identification of an establishment of which the vehicle is an instrument (not including general commercial advertising) for identification of the owner or occupant of such vehicle, for announcing that the vehicle is available for sale, rent, lease or hire, or for the display of noncommercial messages. Vehicles used exclusively for general commercial advertising may not travel on roads, streets, or highways owned by the city of El Cajon. Vehicles displaying commercial messages may not be parked on a public street in such a manner as to constitute a temporary or movable sign; such manner is typically indicated by the parking of the vehicle in or near the same location for time periods exceeding fifty-five hours per week.

E.     Freestanding signs are of two (2) types: pole signs and monument signs. Freestanding signs are permitted as follows: all establishments located in freestanding, single-occupant buildings, all commercial developments, and all individual commercial uses as defined in this title shall be entitled to at least one (1) monument sign. Only certain establishments satisfying requirements for width, size, or combination of property, as specified herein, may mount and display pole signs. Commercial developments that qualify for a pole sign may elect either the pole sign or a monument sign. Individual tenants or lessees within a commercial development, as defined in this title, or within an individual commercial use, as defined in this title, shall not be entitled to separate freestanding signs, but may participate in sharing display space with the freestanding signs that are permitted by this title.

In cases where these provisions would not permit adequate identification of a property, special relief may be granted under subsections (E)(1)(e) and (E)(2)(e) of this section.

The use of freestanding signs shall be permitted only as follows:

1.     One (1) pole sign shall be permitted for each commercial development located on a site having a minimum street frontage of 150 feet, or a minimum size of 22,500 square feet. This provision for a pole sign shall not apply to properties in the O-P zone.

a.     Such sign shall be limited to no more than 100 square feet of sign area per face, or no more than 200 square feet of sign area for all faces, excepting when such sign is utilized for more than one separate and distinct use, in which case the sign shall be limited to no more than 150 square feet of sign area per face, or no more than 300 square feet of total sign area for all faces.

b.     Such sign shall be limited to a height not to exceed 24 feet.

c.     Each commercial development located on a site having a minimum street frontage of 150, or a minimum lot area of 22,500 square feet, shall also have the option of selecting an alternative type of freestanding sign as described herein. However, not more than one type of freestanding sign arrangement shall be permitted for any one property, except as shown in subsections (E)(1)(e), (f) and (g) and (E)(2)(e) and (f) of this section.

d.     Properties with less than the required frontage for an individual pole sign may combine with other adjacent properties to jointly obtain the required frontage, and may place one (1) pole sign conforming to the provisions herein to serve jointly.

e.     A freestanding pole sign may be permitted on properties with less than the required frontage or area in instances where it is demonstrated that it is not possible to identify adequately the use on the property by means of other permitted signs. Such pole sign shall not be permitted where a property is served by a roof sign. A pole sign, where permitted under this section, shall be limited to sign area as follows:

i.      Property with frontage width of at least 15 feet but less than 76 feet: pole sign area not to exceed 50 square feet per sign face, and not more than 100 square feet of sign area for all faces;

ii.     Property with frontage width of 76 feet but less than 150 feet: pole sign area not to exceed 70 square feet per sign face, and not more than 140 square feet of sign area for all faces.

f.      Each commercial development that is two (2) acres or more in size may have one (1) freestanding type of sign, pole, or monument for each street frontage, including any freeway frontage. Any freestanding pole signs shall be subject to the following limitations (see subsection (E)(2)(f) of this section for freestanding monument signs):

i.      Such pole sign(s) shall be limited to no more than two (2) square feet of sign area per face for each lineal foot of street or freeway frontage;

ii.     Such pole sign(s) shall be limited to a maximum height of 65 feet. A greater height may be granted by conditional use permit, if it can be shown that a greater height is necessary to obtain adequate identification. In evaluating the factors for such conditional use permit, no consideration will be given to the copy or message to be displayed, other than whether it constitutes an off-site commercial message;

iii.    In no case may the total number of freestanding signs, pole and/or monument, exceed the total number of street frontages, including any freeway frontage;

iv.    The additional freestanding signs allowed by this subsection may be located along any street frontage, so long as the total number of allowable freestanding signs is not exceeded; and

v.     The location of any freestanding monument signs shall comply with subsection (E)(2)(c) of this section.

g.     Each commercial development that is two (2) acres or more in size, but which has only one street or freeway frontage, may have a second freestanding pole or monument sign subject to the sign area and height provisions contained in subsection (E)(1)(f) or (E)(2)(f) of this section, as applicable.

2.     One monument sign shall be permitted for each individual commercial development, or each individual commercial use, having a street frontage of less than 150, and a lot size of less than 22,500 square feet, subject to the following limitations:

a.     Such sign shall be limited to no more than 48 square feet per sign face.

b.     Such sign shall be limited to a height not to exceed eight (8) feet and a width or thickness not to exceed two (2) feet.

c.     Such sign shall be located at least 15 feet to the side of any driveway intersection with the public right-of-way, and at least 15 feet to the side of any interior property line intersection with the public right-of-way. If such sign is set back at least 10 feet and perpendicular from the public right-of-way, the aforementioned 15-foot lateral offset will not be required. Such setbacks may be modified if it can be demonstrated that safe and proper visibility can be maintained at lesser setbacks. On any corner radius, a monument sign shall satisfy the requirements of Section 17.130.090 (Vision Clearance of Corner Lots).

d.     Where such commercial development occupies a property that has frontage on two or more streets, each of which is 66 feet in width or greater, one (1) such sign may be permitted for each street frontage.

e.     Detached, freestanding commercial buildings in a commercial development may be granted a separate monument sign by conditional use permit if it can be demonstrated that it is not possible to identify adequately the use by means of other permitted signs.

f.      Each commercial development that is two acres or more in size may have one (1) freestanding sign, pole, or monument for each street frontage, including any freeway frontage. Said freestanding monument signs shall be subject to the following limitations (see subsection (E)(1)(f) of this section for freestanding pole signs):

i.      Such monument sign(s) shall be limited to no more than 48 square feet per sign face;

ii.     Such monument sign(s) shall be limited to a height not to exceed eight (8) feet;

iii.    In no case may the total number of freestanding signs, poles, and/or monuments, exceed the total number of street frontages including any freeway frontage;

iv.    The additional freestanding signs allowed by this subsection may be located along any street frontage, as long as the total number of allowable freestanding signs is not exceeded; and

v.     The location of any freestanding monument signs shall comply with subsection (E)(2)(c) of this section.

3.     Through the conditional use permit process, pole signs that are limited in area and height by subsections (E)(1)(a) and (b) of this section, may be increased in area and height up to 50 percent of the maximum dimensions permitted if it is determined that the sign will not be detrimental to surrounding properties and the increased dimensions are necessary for adequate identification.

F.     Screening fences and walls may contain signs painted, attached, or otherwise affixed to such fences and walls subject to:

1.     A sign on a screening fence or wall shall be approved only upon a demonstration by the applicant that such sign is necessary for the proper identification of the property, goods, services, or activities available thereon; and

2.     In no case shall the sign area for a screening fence or a screening wall exceed two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of such wall or fence structure.

G.    Menu board signs may be permitted only as an accessory to a restaurant or other establishment providing services or goods to their customers while such customers are in motor vehicles. Such signs may not exceed 35 square feet in sign area. Up to two (2) menu board signs may be permitted per such establishment.

H.    Window signs, as defined above in Section 17.190.050, are permitted in commercial zones and are exempt from the requirement for a permit. However, window signs shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the total window area and shall be counted toward the maximum wall or building face sign area otherwise allowed by this chapter; provided, however, the maximum total window area may be increased to 80 percent during certain special periods described in Section 17.190.130. (Ord. 4984 § 70, 2013; Ord. 4968 §§ 63, 64, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.220 Signs permitted in the M zone.
The following signs shall be permitted in the M zone, subject to the approval of the appropriate permits:

A.    Wall signs, building face signs, building face extension signs, and canopy signs as described in Section 17.190.210 above.

B.     One monument sign per street frontage as described above in Section 17.190.210(E)(2).

C.     Signs on screening fences and walls as described above in Section 17.190.210(F).

D.    Projecting signs as described above in Section 17.190.210(C). (Ord. 5018 § 74, 2015)

 

17.190.230 Signs permitted in the C-M zone.
The following signs shall be permitted in the C-M zone subject to the approval of the appropriate permits:

A.    Wall signs, building face signs, building face extension signs, and canopy signs as described above in Section 17.190.210.

B.     Freestanding signs as described above in Sections 17.190.210(E). (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.240 Signs permitted in single-family residential zones.
Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, properties in single-family residential zones are prohibited from displaying signs of a commercial nature. However, uses that are authorized by conditional use permit within single-family zones may include signs as approved by the planning commission in association with the approved conditional use permit. Generally, such signs shall be limited to building face signs and monument signs with a maximum area of 48 square feet per sign face, unless it is determined that larger signs are necessary for adequate identification, and that said signs would not be detrimental to surrounding properties. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.250 Signs permitted in multiple-family residential zones.
A.    Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, properties in multi-family residential zones are prohibited from displaying signs of a commercial nature. However, uses that are authorized by conditional use permit within multi-family zones may include signs as approved by the planning commission in association with the approved conditional use permit. Generally, such signs shall be limited to building face signs and monument signs with a maximum area of 48 square feet per sign face unless it is determined that larger signs are necessary for adequate identification, and that said signs would not be detrimental to surrounding properties.

B.     Properties developed with multi-family residential projects may display one building face sign or one (1) monument sign per legal street frontage. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 48 square feet per sign face and the sign copy shall be limited to the name and address of the complex. The monument sign(s) are subject to section 17.190.210.E.2 for location requirements. (Ord. 5072 § 30, 2018)

 

17.190.260 Signs in planned residential developments.
The following signs are permitted within a planned residential development (PRD):

A.    One project sign for each project street entrance identifying a PRD may be permitted provided the type, location, height and size of the sign is related to the location and design of the PRD, and further provided that the area of such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per sign face.

B.     One nameplate for each residence not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, with the name and address of the occupant of each dwelling unit.

C.     For uses permitted by CUP, signs shall be approved by the planning commission at the time of CUP approval.

D.    One unlighted sale or lease sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in total area advertising the sale or lease of only the particular building, property or premises upon which it is displayed, or the sale of commercial agricultural products grown on the premises upon which it is displayed.

E.     Temporary subdivision signs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.270 Sign overlay zone and billboard signs.
A.    Notwithstanding other provisions of the El Cajon Zoning Code, the sign overlay zone is established to provide for the limited application of certain off-premises signs (billboards) in the city; to provide for their reasonable spacing one to another, and to provide certain minimum distances from land uses which might be sensitive to billboard locations. It is the purpose and intent of this Section to set certain criteria to be used in the construction and appearance of such off-premises signs.

The sign overlay zone is to be applied in the city along the following five corridors:

1.     El Cajon Boulevard between Chase Avenue and Main Street;

2.     Main Street between Marshall Avenue and the northeast city limits;

3.     Broadway between Ballantyne Street and Interstate 8;

4.     Second Street between the north city limits and Interstate 8;

5.     Johnson Avenue between El Cajon Boulevard and Arnele Avenue.

B.     Properties in the sign overlay zone may be permitted off-premises signs as either poster panels (not to exceed 300 square feet each) or painted bulletins (not to exceed 720 square feet each, exclusive of embellishments.) The total number of all off-premises signs in the city including poster panels and painted bulletins shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5) for each one (1) square mile of city area. In addition to the above limitations, the total number of all painted bulletins in the city shall not exceed four (4), the total number of poster panels on Broadway shall not exceed four (4), and no painted bulletin structures shall be permitted on Broadway.

C.     All new signs constructed under the authority of this chapter shall meet the following standards:

1.     Standards of Spacing.

a.     No new outdoor advertising structure shall be less than 500 feet from any other outdoor advertising structure.

b.     No new outdoor advertising structure shall be less then 300 feet from any existing “R” zoned property, any existing church, existing park, or existing school.

c.     All measurements shall be made on the same side of the street upon which such new outdoor advertising structure is located and from which it is permanently to be erected, measured from the nearest edge of the right-of-way.

d.     No new outdoor advertising structure shall be located within the city of El Cajon central business district redevelopment project as it was created in 1971.

2.     Height. New outdoor advertising structures shall not exceed a height of 35 feet above grade level of the street from which it is to be viewed.

3.     Standards of Location.

a.     No new outdoor advertising structure shall be located so as to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on the main-traveled way of a freeway as defined in the Streets and Highways Code.

b.     No new outdoor advertising structure may be located on the walls or roof of another structure.

4.     Standards of Design.

a.     All new outdoor advertising structures shall contain no more than two (2) steel support posts.

b.     All new outdoor advertising structures shall include covered backs or facings.

c.     All new outdoor advertising structures shall be designed and built according to the requirements of Chapter 7, Ground Signs, of the Uniform Sign Code as it is in effect on the date of construction approval.

d.     All new outdoor advertising structures shall be so limited that no part of any sign facing not pertinent to the advertising face shall project outward more than 15 inches from the surface of the facing, e.g., “popout” or “three-dimensional” signs are not allowed.

5.     Notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Code, the retention of any existing off-premises sign (billboard) shall be permitted despite the space requirements of Section 17.190.270(C)(1), the height requirements of Section 17.190.270(C)(2), and any setback requirement within the underlying zone. However, setback requirements created by specific plan for the purpose of interconnecting access between properties shall be respected.

(Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.190.280 Abatement of nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs shall be abated in conformance with the regulations provided in Chapter 17.120 of this title. (Ord. 4968 § 65, 2011)

Chapter 17.195 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
17.195.010 Intent and purpose.
The intended purpose of this water efficient landscape ordinance is to:

 

A.    list the minimum requirements for the provision of landscaping improvements and landscape maintenance;

B.     promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to use water as efficiently as possible;

C.     establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes;

D.    promote the efficient use of water by setting a Maximum Applied Water Allowance as an upper limit for water use in landscaping, thus reducing water use to the lowest practical amount;

E.     encourage conservation and prevent water waste in landscaping; and

F.     establish water use standards for landscaping that are as effective at conserving water as the standards included in the California Model Water Efficient Land Use Ordinance (MWELO), contained in the California Code Regulations, Title 23, Chapter 2.7. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.020 Definitions.
The definitions listed below shall be used when interpreting and implementing the requirements of this chapter. Refer to the El Cajon Landscape Design Manual for a more comprehensive list of definitions, including technical landscaping terminology.

“Active recreation area” means an area that is dedicated to active play, where turf provides a playing surface. Examples of active recreation areas include golf courses, sports fields, parks and tot-lots.

“Applicant” means a person who seeks or receives approval of a discretionary land use permit or building permit, or Landscape Documentation Package.

“As-built plans” mean a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

“Automatic irrigation controller” means timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

“Building permit” means a certificate authorizing construction activity that is subject to the provisions of local, state, and federal regulations and codes applicable to building and construction activities.

“Certificate of Completion” means the document required under section 17.195.330.

“Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

“Conversion factor” means the number (0.62) that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

“Developer” means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activities. Developer includes a developer’s partner, associate, employee, consultant, trustee or agent.

“Discretionary permit” means any land use permit requiring the staff, planning commission or city council to exercise judgment prior to its approval, conditional approval or denial.

“Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

“Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the estimated total water use in gallons per year for a landscaped area.

“Evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor that when applied to reference ETo, adjusts for plant water requirements and irrigation efficiency, two major influences on the amount of water that is required for a healthy landscape. For purposes of this ordinance, the ETAF for residential projects shall be 0.55, and ETAF for non-residential projects shall be 0.45.

“Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time period.

“Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

“Grading” means any minor importation, excavation, movement, loosening or compaction of soil or rock that does not require a grading and drainage plan per the requirements of El Cajon Municipal Code, section 15.64.020.

“Grading and drainage plan” means the plan required by El Cajon Municipal Code, section 15.64.020.

“Hardscape” means any durable surface material, pervious or non-pervious, located within and around the landscape area.

“Homeowner-provided landscaping” means landscaping installed either by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a landscaping contractor hired by a homeowner.

“Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscape area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated.

“Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and may damage environmental or economic resources.

“Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. For purposes of this ordinance, IE shall be 0.81 for micro-spray emitters, bubblers, and drip lines. Irrigation efficiency shall be 0.75 for overhead spray irrigation.

“Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture by the state of California Business and Professions Code.

“Landscaped area” means an area with outdoor plants, turf and other vegetation. A landscaped area includes a water feature either in an area with vegetation or that stands alone. A landscaped area may also include design features adjacent to an area with vegetation when allowed under section 17.195.320. A landscaped area does not include the footprint of a building, decks, patio, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot or other hardscape that does not meet the criteria in section 17.195.320. A landscaped area also does not include an area without irrigation designated for non-development such as designated open space or area with existing native vegetation.

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscape design manual” means the document prepared by staff to provide guidance for implementing the requirements of this chapter.

“Landscape Documentation Package” means the permit application and additional items listed under section 17.195.240.

“Landscape grading plan” means the plan required by section 17.195.280. A landscape grading plan is NOT considered a grading and drainage plan as required by El Cajon Municipal Code, section 15.64.020.

“Landscape professional of record” means a licensed landscape architect, a licensed architect, or a licensed civil engineer that is listed in a Landscape Documentation Package and Certificate of Completion as the person responsible for ensuring that a landscape project was developed and is operating as approved. For homeowner installed landscaping at single-family residences only, this definition also includes a California licensed landscape contractor if, and only if, the licensed landscape contractor has a signed agreement to install the landscape project.

“Low head drainage” means a sprinkler head or other irrigation device that continues to emit water after the water to the zone in which the device is located has shut off.

“Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip lines or bubblers.

“Mass grading” means any activity that requires a grading and drainage plan per the requirements of El Cajon Municipal Code, section 15.64.020.

“Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)” means the maximum allowed annual water use for a specific landscaped area based on the landscape area, the ETAF and the reference evapotranspiration rate (ETo).

“Mulch” means an organic material such as leaves, bark, straw or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation, suppress weeds, moderate soil temperature or prevent soil erosion.

“Overspray” means the water from irrigation that is delivered outside an area targeted for the irrigation and makes contact with a surface not intended to be irrigated.

“Passive recreation area” means a landscaped recreational area where turf is present but does not provide an active playing surface. Examples of passive recreation areas include picnic areas, and areas dedicated for outdoor relaxation and meditation.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into underlying soil.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0.. These plant factors are derived from the Department of Water Resources publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species”.

“Recycled water” means wastewater that has been treated at the highest level required by the California Department of Health Services for water not intended for human consumption. “Tertiary treated recycled water,” means water that has been through three levels of treatment including filtration and disinfection.

“Reference evapotranspiration (ETo)” means a standardized measurement of environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the ETo of a large field of four-inches to seven-inches tall, cool season turf that is well watered. Reference ETo is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that is required by a building permit or site development plan or discretionary permit.

“Runoff” means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscaped area.

“Special landscaped area” means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, an area irrigated with recycled water, or an area dedicated as turf area within a park, sports field or golf course where turf provides a passive or active recreational surface.

“Subsurface irrigation” means an irrigation device with a delivery line and water emitters installed below the soil surface that slowly and frequently emit small amounts of water into the soil to irrigate plant roots.

“Transitional area” means a portion of a landscaped area that is adjacent to a natural or undisturbed area and is designated to ensure that the natural area remains unaffected by plantings and irrigation installed on the property.

“Turf” means a groundcover surface of mowed grass.

“Typical plans” means complete sets of landscaping plans that depict landscaping improvements that are applicable to multiple and identical landscape areas within multi-unit residential developments

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. A water feature includes a pond, lake, waterfall, fountain, artificial streams, spa and swimming pool. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or storm water best management practices are not water features.

“Water purveyor” means the Helix Water District or the Padre Dam Municipal Water District as applicable.

“WUCOLS” means Water Use Classification of Landscape Species, and refers to the most current version of the California Department of Water Resources publication of the same name. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.030 Applicability.
A.    The requirements in this chapter to provide landscaping improvements and maintain those improvements shall apply to all areas of the city. However, the following types of projects, shall be subject to the additional permitting and water conservation requirements contained in this chapter for landscape documentation packages:

1.     Any project that requires a building permit or discretionary permit and which includes the installation of 500 square feet or more of new irrigated landscaping.

2.     Any project that requires a building permit or discretionary permit and includes the rehabilitation of 2,500 square feet or more of irrigated landscaping.

3.     A cemetery under the limited requirements listed in section 17.195.170.

B.     The landscape documentation package requirements described in this chapter shall not apply to the following types of projects:

1.     A registered local, state or federal historical site.

2.     An ecological restoration project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

3.     A mined land reclamation project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

4.     A botanical garden or arboretum, open to the public.

(Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.040 Landscape approval and installation.
No person shall install or modify landscaping for a project subject to the permit requirements of this title without first obtaining the review and approval of landscape plans by the planning division. A person constructing a project or establishing a use subject to the permit requirements of this title shall obtain approval for the landscape project as follows:

A.    A person applying for a building permit, site development plan, or a discretionary permit meeting or exceeding the thresholds described in section 17.195.030A above, other than a cemetery:

1.     Shall submit a landscape and irrigation plan as part of the project application. The landscape and irrigation plan shall indicate the site features, the proposed planting areas, the proposed method of irrigation and the other proposed elements of the landscaping, including areas of turf, water features and hardscape areas.

2.     Shall obtain approval of a Landscape Documentation Package prior to the issuance of building permits for each project segment or phase that requires the installation or rehabilitation of irrigated landscaping.

3.     Shall obtain director approval of the Certificate of Completion prior to obtaining certificates of occupancy for the proposed development and prior to the establishment of the proposed use.

4.     May use “typical” plans for developer-installed landscaping at individual units in a multi-unit residential development.

B.     A person applying for a building permit, site development plan, or a discretionary permit associated with a project that does not meet or exceed the thresholds described in section 17.195.030 above:

1.     Shall submit a landscape concept plan as part of the project application. At a minimum, the concept plan shall indicate the site features, the proposed planting areas, the proposed method of irrigation and the other proposed elements of the landscaping, including areas of turf, water features and hardscape areas.

2.     Shall obtain approval of the required landscaping as part of the building permit process and prior to the issuance of building permits for each project segment or phase that requires the installation or rehabilitation of landscaping.

3.     Shall install the required landscaping prior to obtaining certificates of occupancy or establishing the proposed use.

(Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.050 Administration and landscape design manual.
The director shall administer and enforce this chapter. Moreover, the director shall create and maintain a Landscape Design Manual to provide guidance to applicants regarding compliance with landscaping requirements. In addition to providing contact information and links to a variety of helpful landscaping resources, the Landscape Design Manual shall include the reference evapotranspiration rate for El Cajon, all forms and tables required for the submittal of a Landscape Documentation Package and Certificate of Completion, and sample calculations demonstrating how to calculate the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use for a landscaping project. The landscape design manual shall also include a list of drought tolerant plants that are appropriate for Southern California inland valleys such as El Cajon. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.060 Basic landscape design elements.
The following basic elements shall be considered in the design of all landscaping required by this title:

A.    Soil type and soil stability;

B.     Erosion control;

C.     Topography;

D.    Water conservation;

E.     Solar access and shading;

F.     Pedestrian and vehicular sight distance;

G.    Maintaining aesthetic views and screening less desirable views. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.070 Preparation of landscape and irrigation plans.
Except as specifically noted elsewhere in this chapter, the planting and irrigation plans for all landscaping improvements required by this title shall be prepared by a California-licensed landscape architect, civil engineer, architect or landscape contractor. At a minimum, the plans shall include the information listed below. Plans that are required in association with a Landscape Documentation Package and Certificate of Completion have additional requirements as noted in this chapter.

A.    A plant legend identifying the type of plant materials to be used and stating both the botanical and common names.

B.     Size, quantity and location of all proposed plants.

C.     Identification of species included in lawn and hydroseed mixtures.

D.    Location and identification of existing trees and indication of which trees are to be retained, removed or relocated.

E.     Location and specifications for irrigation systems.

F.     Name, address, and phone number of person preparing the landscape and irrigation plans. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.080 Contents of required landscape areas.
Except as noted elsewhere in this title all required landscaped areas shall contain a mixture of trees, shrubs and ground cover. Trees shall be at least 15-gallon size, and shrubs shall be at least 5-gallon size. Non-living ground cover such as decorative crushed rock or mulch may cover up to 50% of any single planter bed, excepting that in parkway planting areas (the area between the sidewalk and the street) decorative paving may cover the entire area, exclusive of any required tree wells. Except as noted elsewhere in this title, decorative hardscape materials, rock groupings, and water features such as swimming pools, spas, fountains, waterfalls, and birdbaths may also be included in landscaped areas subject to the water conservation requirements of this chapter. Existing perennial vegetation and natural rock outcroppings may be used to satisfy landscaped area requirements, if approved by the director of community development. Artificial plants shall not be used in any required landscaped area, except that high quality artificial turf may be used in-lieu of other allowed ground covers in meeting the overall landscape requirement. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.090 Irrigation system required.
Except as noted elsewhere in this chapter, all required landscaped areas shall include a permanent underground irrigation system. The irrigation system shall include an automatic irrigation controller. In planters with interior dimensions of four (4) feet wide or less, drip irrigation or similar irrigation technologies that minimizes water usage shall be required. Irrigation is not required for areas covered with artificial turf. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.100 Minimum landscape area requirements.
A.    All commercial, industrial, and institutional developments shall provide landscaping as follows:

1.     All required exterior yards shall include landscaping, exclusive of the driveways.

2.     An additional 10 square feet of landscaping shall be provided for each parking space at the site. Such landscaping shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and may include tree wells and planter boxes.

3.     A permanent underground irrigation system with an automatic irrigation controller shall be provided.

B.     All planned residential developments and planned unit developments shall provide landscaping in the amounts and locations indicated in Chapters 17.165 and 17.60, respectively.

C.     Landscaping at single-family homes, duplex developments, and at residential properties in the RM-6000 zone that are not part of a planned residential development or planned unit development, shall provide landscaping as follows:

1.     At least 50 percent of required exterior yard areas shall contain landscaping consisting of living plants or a combination of living plants and decorative rock. Pavement and hardscape, whether decorative or not, shall not be used to satisfy this requirement.

2.     Trees shall be planted in required exterior yards at a minimum ratio of one (1) tree per each 600-square feet of required exterior yard area, or fraction thereof.

3.     A permanent method of irrigation shall be provided either in the form of an underground irrigation system to be located in front of the main building on the lot.

D.    Landscaping for multiple unit residential projects in the RM-4300, RM-2500, RM-2200, RM-1450, and RM-HR zones, that are not a part of a planned residential development or planned unit development shall satisfy the following criteria:

1.     All required exterior yard areas shall contain landscaping consisting of living plants or a combination of living plants and decorative ground cover such as decorative rock or bark.

2.     Trees shall be planted in required exterior yards at a ratio of one (1) tree per each 200 square feet of required exterior yard area, or fraction thereof.

E.     All landscaped areas required by this title, including planter boxes and tree wells, shall have minimum interior dimensions of four (4) feet in width, and length, or diameter. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.110 General maintenance requirements.
All required landscaped areas shall satisfy the following maintenance requirements.

A.    All plant material in required landscaped areas shall be sufficiently watered and periodically fertilized to establish and maintain healthy growth.

B.     All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, litter and weed free condition and all plants shall be pruned and trimmed as necessary.

C.     Upon notification by the planning division, all plant materials that have died or have failed to show healthy growth shall be replaced by plants of the same or similar species. Replacement by more drought resistant plants may also be approved.

D.    Maintenance shall include regular inspection, adjustment, repair and replacement of the irrigation system, including making seasonal changes to the irrigation controller. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.120 Trees in narrow planters and adjacent to the public right-of-way.
Trees in landscaped areas that are four (4) feet or less in width (inside dimension) shall not be larger than the five-gallon size. Trees planted in the public right-of-way, or within four (4) feet of the public right-of-way, shall include root-control barriers to prevent roots from damaging the sidewalk or public street. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.130 Landscaping adjacent to parking areas, streets, and driveways.
All landscape areas that adjoin parking spaces, driveways, vehicular circulation areas, or the public right-of-way shall be protected from encroachment by vehicles in a manner that also complies with storm water regulations, which require storm water to be discharged to landscaped areas in order to reduce or eliminate the discharge of pollutants. The method of protection shall be determined by the director of public works or his or her designee. The approved method may include six-inch high curb segments, wheel stops, decorative rock bands, or other methods determined to be acceptable by the director of public works. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.140 Storm water requirements.
Pervious landscaped areas may be required to accept storm water runoff from impervious areas and function as storm water treatment facilities. In such instances, the site design shall facilitate the drainage of runoff to the landscaped areas, prior to conveyance to the public right-of-way. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.150 Turf regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to the use of turf grass:

A.    Only low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used for turf in a landscaped area:

1.     On a slope greater than 25 percent grade where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape.

2.     Where any dimension of the landscaped area is less than six (6) feet wide.

B.     Turf shall not be allowed in medians or in parking lot islands.

C.     Ball fields, parks, golf courses, cemeteries and other similar uses shall be designed to limit turf in any portion of a landscaped area not essential for the operation of the facility.

D.    No turf shall be allowed in a landscaped area that cannot be efficiently irrigated without creating runoff or overspray.

E.     Non-residential landscape projects subject to the requirements of this title shall limit turf areas to no more than 25 percent of the total landscaped area. This provision shall not apply to sports fields, parks, golf courses, and cemeteries. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

7.195.160 Landscaping on slopes created by grading.
Landscaping requirements for slopes created by grading are as follows:

A.    In order to prevent the raveling and erosion of the ground surface subsequent to the construction of manmade slopes and to serve as a fire-retardant, adequate slope planting shall be required on all constructed slopes with a gradient steeper than six (6) horizontal to one (1) vertical (6:1), and a height in excess of three (3) feet measured vertically. Such slope planting shall consist of deep-rooting grasses, ground cover and shrubs, and on slopes of 10 feet or more in vertical height, a minimum of one (1) tree for every 600 square feet of the total slope area. Trees shall be a five-gallon size and shall be spaced a minimum of 30 feet apart. Shrubbery shall be a minimum one-gallon size and shall have a minimum separation of one (1) times the mature width. Plant size and planting pattern may be varied upon the recommendation of a landscape architect.

B.     An adequate irrigation system shall be required for all slope planting. Such system shall consist of a permanent watering system operative on an individual lot basis and capable of providing uniform water coverage on all plantings. Single-service meters may be used for common slope areas that will be maintained by a homeowners’ association or similar private maintenance organization, and for slopes less than six (6) feet in vertical height hose bibs located within 50 feet of the slope may be used.

C.     All slope planting and irrigation systems shall be complete and operative on an individual lot basis before final inspection of the lot by the Building Division.

D.    The land developer shall have the responsibility of satisfactorily maintaining such slope planting until the properties within the development are occupied. A performance bond may be required by the planning commission in order to assure that all planting will be maintained and replaced if necessary.

E.     All constructed slopes that are not part of a lot that is to be occupied and built upon shall also be planted and maintained to the satisfaction of the director of community development.

F.     A landscaping plan or landscape documentation package and certificate of completion prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and clearly indicating and identifying slope plantings and supportive irrigation system shall be required prior to the acceptance of a final map or development plan.

G.    The retention of natural features such as rock outcroppings and substantial native vegetation and their incorporation into landscaping schemes are strongly encouraged. The approval of any proposal for development may be conditioned upon the retention of certain natural features of the site. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.170 Cemeteries.
A person submitting an application proposing to establish a cemetery shall include the following:

A.    A landscape concept plan, as described in Section 17.195.040.

B.     A water efficient landscape worksheet that calculates the maximum applied water allowance for the project as described in Section 17.195.270.

C.     A landscape maintenance schedule as described in Section 17.195.340. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.180 Model homes.
If a residential project has a model home or homes that include landscaping, then the landscaping shall be designed and installed to meet the water efficiency criteria established in this chapter and shall include a sign in the front yard of the model home that is visible and readable from the roadway that the home faces, and that states in capital black lettering at least two inches high on a white sign, “THIS MODEL HOME USES WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION.”

Furthermore, a person who obtains a permit to construct a single-family residential development that contains a model home or homes shall provide a water efficient landscaping brochure, or pamphlet to each group of adults visiting the model home. At a minimum, such a brochure or pamphlet shall include information describing the water efficient features of the landscaping and a statement and contact information encouraging prospective home buyers to contact the applicable water purveyor and the planning division staff for additional information regarding water efficiency in landscaping. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.190 Recycled water.
A.    A person who obtains a permit for a project that is subject to this chapter shall use recycled water for irrigation if recycled water is available in the street in front of their property from the water purveyor who supplies water to the property.

B.     A person using recycled water shall install a dual distribution system for water received from a public water purveyor. Pipes carrying recycled water shall be purple.

C.     A person who uses recycled water under this section shall be entitled to an ETAF of 1.0.

D.    This section does not excuse a person using recycled water from complying with all State and local laws and regulations related to recycled water use. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.200 Preventing water waste.
A.    Property owners shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient or improperly maintained landscape irrigation on their property. In order to ensure that water is not wasted, the director may require water audits and may penalize property owners for water waste such as runoff leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for water waste resulting from inefficient landscaping may be imposed in the form of monetary fines, the amount of which shall be determined by the city council based upon the magnitude, duration and/or frequency of the ordinance violation.

B.     Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:

1.     the landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

2.     the adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.

C.     Except as noted elsewhere in this title, the following water saving techniques shall be incorporated in all required landscape areas:

1.     Provide drought tolerant plant material and minimize turf areas.

2.     Group plants with similar water needs into hydrozones, and provide a separate irrigation circuit for each hydrozone in the landscaped area.

3.     Mulch root area with a 2-inch layer of bark, sawdust, leaf mold or gravel to help soil retain moisture.

4.     Make earthen catch basins around shrubs and small trees for bubbler or emitter control.

5.     Early morning watering avoids excessive evaporation. Evening watering is only second best because fungus disease has all night to attack moist foliage. Follow recommended irrigation schedule on landscape plan or that established by the appropriate water agency.

6.     Raise the height of the lawnmower. Lawns cut too short expose roots to drying sun and increase water evaporation from soil. Follow recommendation of landscape architect or landscape contractor.

7.     Use drip irrigation or any system that will minimize evaporation and increase the effectiveness of the application of water.

8.     Use drip irrigation or any system that will minimize evaporation and increase the effectiveness of the application of water.

9.     Over watering or interference with rapid surface drainage should be avoided in the west rim of the El Cajon Valley (Fletcher Hills) because the area has highly expansive soils and is prone to landslides.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.210 Public education.
Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community. Developers of new residential subdivisions shall provide information to buyers of new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes. Moreover, the city shall make information available to the public regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.220 Water District requirements.
All landscape projects subject to the requirements of this chapter shall comply with the regulations and policies of the applicable water district. This includes but is not limited to requirements for: water efficient irrigation technology, low water use plants, dedicated irrigation water meters, and “smart” or weather-based irrigation controllers. (Ord. 4984 § 72, 2013)

 

17.195.230 Water emergencies.
Upon a majority vote of the city council declaring a water emergency, all or portions of the landscaping required by this title may be deferred until a later date, provided a suitable guarantee in a reasonable amount is posted with the city to cover the eventual installation of the landscaping. This deferral of installation shall not extend to any landscaping area that is being installed for purposes of erosion control or fire protection. Alternatively, if a water emergency is declared by the city council, the council may require approval of a landscape documentation package and certificate of completion for any required landscape project regardless of the size of the required landscape area or the type of development proposed. If a landscape documentation package is required, all applicable restrictions and requirements listed in this chapter shall apply, including the establishment of a water budget for the project (MAWA). (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.240 Landscape documentation package.
A.    Building permit applications for projects described in Section 17.195.030 shall include a Landscape Documentation Package that complies with the provisions of this chapter and with the Landscape Design Manual.

B.     For projects described above in Section 17.195.030, which require landscaping improvements but which do not require approval of a building permit, the applicant or property owner shall submit a Landscape Documentation Package to the planning division that complies with the provisions of this chapter and with the Landscape Design Manual. The Landscape Documentation Package and Certificate of Completion shall be approved by the director prior to the establishment of any use authorized by a discretionary permit and subject to the requirements of this chapter.

C.     An applicant for a project establishing a cemetery is not required to submit a Landscape Documentation Package, but shall comply with Section 17.195.170.

D.    The Landscape Documentation Package shall contain the following items:

1.     An application form including the name and contact information of the property owner, the property owner’s agent, and the professional of record for the landscape project.

2.     A soil management report and plan that complies with Section 17.195.250, and that analyzes the soil within each landscaped area of the project and makes recommendations regarding soil additives.

3.     Planting and irrigation plans that comply with Section 17.195.260, and that describe the landscaping and irrigation for the project.

4.     A water efficient landscape worksheet that complies with Section 17.195.270, and that calculates the maximum applied water allowance and the estimated total water use for the project.

5.     A landscape grading plan that complies with Section 17.195.280, and that describes the grading of the project. If the project applicant has submitted a grading and drainage plan with the application for the project, the director may accept that grading and drainage plan in lieu of the landscape grading plan required by this subsection if the grading and drainage plan complies with the requirements of Section 17.195.280.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.250 Soil management report.
A.    The soil management report required for a Landscape Documentation Package shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional licensed by the state to prepare soil management reports. The soil management report shall contain an analysis of the soil for the proposed landscaped areas of the project including information about the soil texture, soil infiltration rate, pH, total soluble salts, sodium, percent organic matter. The soil management report shall also contain recommendations about soil amendments that may be necessary to foster plant growth and plant survival in the landscaped area using efficient irrigation techniques.

B.     When a project involves mass grading of a site, the applicant shall submit the soil management report with the Certificate of Completion package required by Section 17.195.330, rather than submitting it with the Landscape Documentation Package.

C.     The soil management report shall include the following information regarding proposed soil amendments and mulch:

1.     The report shall identify any soil amendments and their type and quantity.

2.     The report shall identify the type and amount of mulch for each area where mulch is applied. Mulch shall be used as follows:

a.     A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces in each landscaped area except in turf areas, creeping or rooting ground covers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

b.     Stabilizing mulch shall be applied on slopes.

c.     Highly flammable mulch material shall not be used.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.260 Planting and irrigation plans for a landscape documentation package.
A.    The planting and irrigation plans required as part of the Landscape Documentation Package shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional licensed by the state to prepare planting and irrigation plans. The plans shall:

1.     Include the maximum applied water allowance for the proposed landscaping, including the calculations used to determine the maximum applied water allowance. The calculations shall be based on the formula in section 17.195.300.

2.     Include the estimated total water use for the proposed landscaping, including the calculations used to determine the estimated total water use. The calculations shall be based on the formula in section 17.195.310.

3.     Include a statement signed under penalty of perjury by the person who prepared the plans that provides, “I am familiar with the requirements for landscape and irrigation plans contained in Chapter 17.195 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. I have prepared these plans in compliance with those regulations and the El Cajon Landscape Design Manual. I certify that the plans implement those regulations to provide efficient use of water.”

4.     Demonstrate compliance with best management practices and other storm water regulations required by the City of El Cajon’s Jurisdictional Runoff Management Program (JURMP) and the City of El Cajon’s Storm Water Ordinance (Municipal Code Chapters 13.10 and 16.60).

5.     Address fire safety issues and demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements for defensible space around buildings and structures and shall avoid the use of fire prone vegetation in designated fire hazard areas.

B.     The planting plans shall meet the following requirements:

1.     The plans shall identify by common and botanical name, any existing vegetation that will be retained as part of the new or rehabilitated landscape area.

2.     The plans shall include a legend listing all vegetation by common and botanical name that will be added to each landscaped area. No invasive plant species shall be added to a landscaped area. The plans shall list the total quantities by container size and species. If the applicant intends to plant seeds, the plans shall describe the seed mixes and applicable purity and germination specifications.

3.     The plans shall be accompanied by drawings showing the specific location of all vegetation, retained or planted, the plant spacing and plant size, natural features, water features, and hardscape areas.

4.     All plants shall be grouped in hydrozones and the irrigation shall be designed to deliver water to hydrozones based on the moisture requirements of the plant grouping. A hydrozone may mix plants of moderate and low water use or mix plants of high water use with plants of moderate water use. No high water use plants shall be allowed in a low water use hydrozone. A high water use hydrozone may, however, provide for some low water use plants if the low water use plants are of a type that are likely to thrive and flourish with the additional water. The plan shall also demonstrate how the plant groupings accomplish the most efficient use of water.

5.     The plans shall identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants.

6.     The plans shall include a detailed description of each water feature that will be included in the landscaped area.

7.     The plans shall demonstrate that landscaping when installed and at maturity will be positioned to avoid obstructing motorists’ views of pedestrian crossings, driveways, roadways and other vehicular travel ways. If the landscaping will require maintenance to avoid obstructing motorist’s views, the plans shall describe the maintenance and the frequency of the proposed maintenance.

8.     The plans shall avoid the use of landscaping with known surface root problems adjacent to a paved area, unless the plan provides for installation of root control barriers or other appropriate devices to control surface roots.

9.     Plants in a transitional area shall consist of a combination of site adaptive and compatible native and/or non-native species. No invasive species shall be introduced or maintained in a transitional area. The irrigation in a transitional area shall be designed so that no overspray or runoff shall enter an adjacent area that is not irrigated.

10.   On a project other than a single-family residence, the plan shall identify passive and active recreational areas.

11.   The plans shall indicate adequate soil volume for healthy plant growth.

C.     The irrigation plans shall meet the following requirements:

1.     The plans shall show the location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system that will provide water to the landscaped areas, including the controller, water lines, valves, sprinkler heads, bubblers, emitters, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices.

2.     The plans shall identify the static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply and the flow rate in gallons, the application rate in inches per hour and the design operating pressure in pressure per square inch for each station.

3.     The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, overspray, low-head drainage and other similar conditions where irrigation water flows or sprays onto areas not intended for irrigation. The plans shall also demonstrate how grading and drainage techniques promote healthy plant growth and prevent erosion and runoff.

4.     The plans shall identify each area irrigated with recycled water.

5.     The plans shall provide that any slope greater than 25 percent will be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate of 0.75 inches per hour or less to prevent runoff and erosion. As used in this chapter, 25 percent grade means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length. An applicant may employ an alternative design if the plans demonstrate that no runoff or erosion will occur.

6.     The plans shall provide that all wiring and piping under a paved area that a vehicle may use, such as a parking area, driveway or roadway, will be installed inside a PVC conduit.

7.     The plans shall provide that irrigation piping and irrigation devices that deliver water, such as sprinkler heads, shall be installed below grade if they are within 24 inches of a vehicle or pedestrian use area. The director may allow on-grade piping where landform constraints make below grade piping infeasible.

8.     The plans shall provide that only low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used to irrigate any vegetation within 24 inches of an impermeable surface unless the adjacent impermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to cause water to drain entirely into a landscaped area.

9.     The irrigation system shall provide for the installation of a manual shutoff valve as close as possible to the water supply. Additional manual shutoff valves shall be installed between each zone of the irrigation system and the water supply.

10.   The irrigation system shall provide that irrigation for any landscaped area will be regulated by an automatic irrigation controller.

11.   The irrigation system shall be designed with a landscape irrigation efficiency necessary to meet the maximum applied water allowance.

12.   The plans shall describe each automatic irrigation controller the system uses to regulate the irrigation schedule and whether it is a weather based system or moisture detection system. The plans shall depict the location of electrical service for the automatic irrigation controller or describe the use of batteries or solar power that will power valves or a smart controller.

(Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.270 Water efficient landscape worksheet.
The water efficient landscape worksheet shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional licensed by the state to prepare water efficient landscape worksheets, and shall be subject to the following requirements:

A.    A calculation for the Maximum Applied Water Allowance shall be provided as described in section 17.195.300.

B.     A Hydrozone Information Table shall be completed that lists each hydrozone in the project landscape area. The table shall include the following information:

1.     The plant factor for each hydrozone shall be provided. Plant factors listed shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor shall be 0.10 for very low water use plants, 0.30 for low water use plants, 0.50 for moderate water use plants and 0.80 for high water use plants. A landscape plan that mixes plants with different plant factors in the same hydrozone shall use the plant factor for the highest water using plant in that hydrozone.

2.     The irrigation method and irrigation efficiency for each hydrozone shall be provided. Irrigation efficiency shall be .81 for micro-spray emitters, bubblers, and drip lines. Irrigation efficiency shall be .75 for overhead spray devices.

3.     The area of each hydrozone shall be provided. Areas shall be expressed in square feet.

4.     The percentage of the total landscaped for each hydrozone shall be provided.

5.     Each special landscaped area shall be identified on the worksheet and the area’s water use calculated using a modified ETAF of 1.0.

6.     Temporarily irrigated areas shall be identified and shall be listed as low water use hydrozones. “Temporarily irrigated” as used in this chapter means that the plants will only be irrigated until they become established.

7.     All water features, including swimming pools and spas, shall be listed in the table as high water use hydrozones.

C.     A calculation for the Estimated Total Water Use shall be provided. The formula for calculating Estimated Total Water Use is based upon the formula provided in section 17.195.310. (Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.280 Landscape grading plan.
The landscape grading plan shall be prepared by a California licensed civil engineer, licensed landscape architect, licensed architect, or other landscape professional licensed by the state to prepare landscape grading plans, and shall comply with following requirements:

A.    The grading on the project site shall be designed for the efficient use of water by minimizing soil erosion, runoff and water waste, resulting from precipitation and irrigation.

B.     The plan shall show the finished configurations and elevations of each landscaped area including the height of graded slopes, the drainage pattern, pad elevations, finish grade and any storm water retention improvements.

C.     The landscape grading plan does not meet the requirements for a grading and drainage plan as required by El Cajon Municipal Code, Section 15.64.020. However, a grading and drainage plan, which must be prepared by a California licensed civil engineer, may include a landscape grading plan as a component. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.290 Irrigation schedule.
The irrigation schedule shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional licensed by the state to prepare irrigation schedules, and shall provide the following information:

A.    A description of the automatic irrigation system that will be used for the project.

B.     The ETo data relied on to develop the irrigation schedule, including the source of the data.

C.     The time period when overhead irrigation will be scheduled and confirm that no overhead irrigation shall be used between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

D.    The parameters used for setting the irrigation system controller for watering times for:

1.     The plant establishment period.

2.     Established landscaping.

3.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

4.     Different seasons during the year.

E.     The consideration used for each station for the following factors:

1.     The days between irrigation.

2.     Station run time in minutes for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff.

3.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff.

4.     Amount of water to be applied on a monthly basis.

5.     The root depth setting.

6.     The plant type setting.

7.     The soil type.

8.     The slope factor.

9.     The shade factor.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.300 Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
A.    A landscape project subject to this chapter shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. The maximum applied water allowance for a landscape project shall be determined by the following calculation:

MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[0.7 x LA + 0.3 x SLA]

B.     The abbreviations used in the maximum applied water allowance equation have the following meanings:

1.     MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance in gallons per year.

2.     ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year.

3.     0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot.

4.     0.7= ET adjustment factor for plant factors and irrigation efficiency (ETAF).

5.     LA = Landscaped area includes special landscaped area in square feet.

6.     0.3 = the additional ET adjustment factor for a special landscaped area (1.0 - 0.7 = 0.3)

7.     SLA = Portion of the landscaped area identified as a special landscaped area in square feet.

(Ord. 5072 § 32, 2018)

 

17.195.310 Estimated total water use (ETWU).
A.    An applicant for a project subject to this chapter shall calculate the estimated total water use for each landscaped area and the entire project using the following equation:

B.     The abbreviations used in the estimated total water use equation have the following meanings:

1.     ETWU = Estimated total water use in gallons per year.

2.     ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year.

3.     0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot.

4.     PF = Plant factor from WUCOLS.

5.     HA = Hydrozone Area in square feet. Each HA shall be classified based upon the data included in the landscape and irrigation plan as high, medium or low water use.

6.     IE = Irrigation Efficiency of the irrigation method used in the hydrozone.

7.     SLA = Special landscaped area in square feet.

C.     The estimated total water use for a proposed project shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.320 Adjustment to the landscape area (LA) for non-vegetated areas.
Rock and stone or pervious design features, such as decomposed granite ground cover that are adjacent to a vegetated area may be included in the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use provided the features are integrated into the design of the landscape area and the primary purpose of the feature is decorative. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.330 Certificate of completion.
A.    Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy a person obtaining approval of a Landscape Documentation Package shall submit a signed Certificate of Completion, under penalty of perjury.

B.     The certificate shall include a statement, signed by the landscape professional of record, verifying that the landscaping and irrigation were installed as authorized by the approved landscape and irrigation plans, all approved soil amendments were implemented, the installed irrigation system is functioning as designed and approved, the irrigation control system was properly programmed in accordance with the irrigation schedule, and the person operating the system has received all required maintenance and irrigation plans.

C.     Where there have been significant changes to the landscape plans during the installation of landscaping or irrigation devices or irrigation system components, the professional of record for the landscape design shall submit “as built” plans that show the changes.

D.    The Certificate of Completion shall include an irrigation schedule that complies with Section 17.195.290, and that describes the irrigation times and water usage for the project.

E.     The Certificate of Completion shall include a landscaping and irrigation system maintenance schedule that complies with Section 17.195.340.

F.     The Certificate of Completion shall include a soil management report that complies with Section 17.195.250, if the applicant did not submit the report with the Landscape Documentation Package. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.340 Maintenance schedule.
A.    As part of the Certificate of Completion, a maintenance schedule shall be prepared for the approved landscaping and irrigation system. After director approval of the Certificate of Completion, a copy of the maintenance schedule shall be provided to the property owner. The schedule shall provide for:

1.     routine inspection to guard against runoff and erosion and to detect plant or irrigation system failure;

2.     replacement of dead, dying and diseased vegetation;

3.     eradication of invasive species;

4.     repairing the irrigation system and its components;

5.     replenishing mulch;

6.     soil amendment when necessary to support and maintain healthy plant growth;

7.     fertilizing, pruning and weeding and maintaining turf areas;

8.     maintenance to avoid obstruction of motorists’ view; and

9.     the schedule shall also identify who will be responsible for maintenance.

B.     After approval of a landscape documentation package and certificate of completion, the property owner is required to:

1.     Maintain and operate the landscaping and irrigation system on the property consistent with the maximum applied water allowance.

2.     Maintain the irrigation system to meet or exceed irrigation efficiency necessary to meet maximum applied water allowance.

3.     Replace broken or malfunctioning irrigation system components with components of the same materials and specifications, their equivalent or better.

4.     Ensure that when vegetation is replaced, replacement plantings are representative of the hydrozone in which the plants were removed and are typical of the water use requirements of the plants removed, provided that the replaced vegetation does not result in mixing high water use plants with low water use plants in the same hydrozone.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.350 Fees.
An applicant for a project subject to the requirements of this chapter shall include all fees established by the city council to cover the city’s cost to review the Landscape Documentation Package, the Certificate of Completion, and the limited materials required for approval of landscaping at a cemetery. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.195.360 Enforcement.
The director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city council may delegate or enter into a contract with a local water purveyor or other qualified person to implement and administer any of the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city. Penalties for water waste resulting from inefficient landscaping may be imposed in the form of monetary fines, the amount of which shall be determined by the city council based upon the magnitude, duration and/or frequency of the ordinance violation. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.205 AGRICULTURE AND ANIMALS
17.205.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to list regulations relating to the conduct of agricultural uses and the keeping of animals under simplified headings. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.020 Agricultural land uses permitted.
Commercial horticulture may be conducted in the O-S, RS-40, and RS-20 zones subject to the provisions of this chapter. No other commercial agricultural activities are permitted in any zone. Non-commercial agriculture such as private orchards, gardens, and greenhouses shall be permitted ancillary to any permitted residential use. Community gardens, as defined in Chapter 17.105 of this title, are permitted in all residential and commercial zones, subject to the requirements of this chapter.

Agricultural products may be sold at roadside stands in the O-S, RS-40, and RS-20 zones with approval of an administrative zoning permit and provided that the product is grown or produced on the same property. (Ord. 5018 § 82, 2015)

 

17.205.030 Ordinary household pets.
The keeping of ordinary household pets shall be permitted in all residential zones, subject to the following regulations:

A.    Not more than four (4) ordinary household pets (dogs or cats) are permitted for each dwelling, together with offspring less than four (4) months of age.

B.     A fifth (5th) ordinary household pet may be authorized for an individual dwelling unit subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit. (Ord. 5081 § 23, 2019.)

 

 

17.205.035 Beekeeping.
The keeping of bees shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations:

A.    Beehives shall be well maintained at all times.

B.     Only docile bee species may be permitted.

C.     Registration with the County of San Diego Department of Agriculture, Weights and Measures is required prior to beekeeping activities.

D.    Beehives shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

E.     Beehives shall not be located in the exterior or front yards.

F.     Up to four (4) beehives may be permitted per property.

G.    A beehive shall be no larger than 15 cubic feet in volume.

H.    The beehive shall not be within the required setbacks of the underlying zone. (Ord. 5072 § 33, 2018)

 

 

17.205.040 Pot-bellied pigs.
The keeping of pet pot-bellied pigs shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations:

A.    A maximum of two (2) pot-bellied pigs are permitted on individual lots in the O-S, RS-40 and RS-20 zones.

B.     A single pot-bellied pig may be kept on an individual lot in the RS-14, RS-9, RS-6, and RM-6000 zones, subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit. The minor conditional use permit may also authorize one (1) additional pot-bellied pig for properties in the RS-14, RS-9, RS-6, and RM-6000 zones with at least 20,000 square feet of lot area. (Ord. 5018 § 86, 2015; Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.050 Domesticated animals other than horses.
Domesticated animals other than horses may be kept as follows:

A.    A maximum of one (1) domesticated animal, not to exceed 125 pounds at maturity, shall be permitted in the O-S, RS-40 and RS-20 zones.

B.     A maximum of two (2) domesticated animals, not to exceed 125 pounds at maturity, and offspring less than six (6) months of age, shall be permitted in the O-S, RS-40 and RS-20 zones, subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit.

C.     A maximum of one (1) domesticated animal, not to exceed 125 pounds at maturity, shall be permitted in the RS-14, RS-9, RS-6, and RM-6000 zones, subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit. (Ord. 5018 § 88, 2015; Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.060 Rabbits, geese, and ducks.
The keeping of rabbits, geese, and ducks for private use is permitted in the O-S, RS-40 and RS-20 zones, not to exceed six (6) adult animals for each main dwelling, together with offspring until maturity. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.065 Chickens.
The keeping of chickens for private use is permitted in all single-family residential zones and also in the RM-6000 zone, subject to the following restrictions and requirements:

A.    Chickens are only permitted accessory to a permitted, detached, single-family residential land use. This provision shall include Planned Residential Developments, and Planned Unit Developments when all of the other requirements of this section are satisfied.

B.     Roosters are prohibited.

C.     Chickens must be kept in a fully enclosed chicken run located in an unpaved area of the rear yard, which provides an outdoor area of at least ten square feet per chicken. A covered coop is required, which shall be attached to, or located inside of the chicken run, and which shall provide at least four square feet per bird, including a nest for each of the birds to roost. The coop must protect the animals from predation as well as exposure to sun, wind, and rain. Chicken runs shall be constructed of well-ventilated and durable wire mesh such as chicken wire or hardware wire. Runs and coops shall not exceed a height of eight feet and an area of 150 square feet.

D.    Notwithstanding Subsection C, chickens may be permitted to roam free outside of the required chicken run and coop during daylight hours as long as they are confined to a completely fenced and unpaved rear yard. The enclosing fence must be at least six feet high. Chickens must be returned to the chicken run/chicken coop at sundown.

E.     Chicken runs and coops must be located behind the main house on the lot and at least three feet from side and rear property lines. No chicken runs or coops are permitted in any exterior yard.

F.     Chicken feed shall be kept in durable rodent-proof containers with tightly fitting covers.

G.    All chicken runs and coops shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition, free from offensive odors at all times. Evidence of unsanitary conditions includes, but is not limited to: numerous flies or fly larvae in the vicinity of the chickens; accumulations of chicken litter, refuse, or manure; offensive odors; and rat droppings.

H.    All chicken litter and manure and any material conducive to the breeding of flies, or which would create any offensive odor, that is removed from the chicken run or coop, shall be placed in sealed compost bins, air-tight containers, or air-tight bags until entirely removed from the premises or turned under the soil surface as fertilizer.

I.      All dead chickens shall be removed from the property or buried within twenty-four hours of death at a depth of at least three feet underground. Pending disposal or burial, the chicken(s) shall be stored in fly-proof, air-tight containers or bags. The illegal disposal of dead chickens constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

J.      The number of chickens at any one site shall not exceed one bird per each 100 square feet of unpaved rear yard area, up to a maximum of 10 chickens. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.070 Horses.
Horses may be kept accessory to a permitted residential use as follows:

A.    Horses are prohibited on lots with less than 20,000 square feet of net lot area, except horses may be kept on sub-lots with at least 10,000 square feet of area in the PRD-Low-Low zone.

B.     Horses are permitted in the O-S, RS-40, RS-20, and PRD-Low-Low zones, on lots with at least 20,000 square feet of net lot area, not to exceed one (1) animal over one (1) year of age for each 10,000 square feet of net lot area, and offspring less than one (1) year of age.

C.     Horses may be kept in the RS-14, and RS-9 zones, on lots with at least 20,000 square feet of net lot area, subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit, not to exceed one (1) animal over one (1) year of age for each 10,000 square feet of net lot area, and offspring less than one (1) year of age.

D.    Horses shall be kept within a fenced enclosure. Such a fenced enclosure may include stables, subject to the distance requirements listed in this chapter and the regulations for accessory buildings within residential zones. Within the PRD-Low-Low zone, horses shall be kept within a designated stable that is at least 50 feet from any structure used for assembly, the conduct of business, or human habitation. (Ord. 5018 § 90, 2015; Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

 

17.205.080 Distance requirements.
The keeping of animals, other than ordinary household pets, chickens, and pot-bellied pigs, are subject to the following minimum distance requirements:

A.    Animals other than ordinary household pets and chickens may not be kept within 50 feet of any school, church, hospital, place of business, dwelling, mobile home, or building constructed or used for human habitation, with the exception that this required separation may be reduced to 20 feet in the case of a dwelling on the same lot occupied by the owner of the or animals.

B.     Animals other than ordinary household pets and chickens may not be kept within 25 feet of any common property line shared with an adjacent lot, when the main dwelling or building has not been constructed on such adjacent lot. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.090 Animal related nuisances.
Animals shall be kept in a manner that prevents offensive odors, flies, dust, noise and other nuisances from affecting surrounding properties. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.100 Prohibited animals.
The following types of animals are prohibited:

A.    Any animal prohibited by the California Department of Fish and Game.

B.     Cattle.

C.     Ferrets and other members of the weasel family.

D.    Poisonous reptiles.

E.     Roosters.

F.     Swine (other than pot-bellied pigs kept as pets).

G.    Wild animals. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

 

17.205.105 Community gardens.
Community gardens, as defined in Chapter 17.105, are permitted in all residential and commercial zones subject to the following standards:

A.    Community gardens are exempt from the requirement for a Landscape Documentation Package described in Chapter 17.195. However, community gardens shall employ the applicable requirements of Section 17.195.200 (Preventing Water Waste). Additionally, all hoses at community gardens shall include trigger nozzles.

B.     Structures used accessory to community gardens shall be considered accessory structures for the purpose of applying setback requirements, except that no such structures may be located within 20 feet of the public right-of-way.

 

C.     Community gardens shall establish and maintain trash collection service from the city’s solid waste contractor. When not out for collection, the trash and recycling bins may be located in a permitted accessory structure or may be stored in a neat and orderly manner at a location at least 20 feet from the front property line.

D.    Compost at community gardens shall be covered or kept in covered containers located as close to the middle of the property as practicable in order to reduce odors. Composted material shall originate on-site or shall be provided by active members of the community garden. No other off-site material shall be accepted for composting at the community garden.

E.     Community gardens shall be closed from sundown until sunrise.

F.     Community gardens may include unlit monument signs subject to approval of a sign permit and the provisions of Chapter 17.190.

G.    Community gardens shall display a sign at the entrance which provides the name and phone number of a person responsible for maintaining the garden and responding to complaints.

H.    Non-compliance with these regulations constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. (Ord. 5018 § 92, 2015)

 

17.205.110 Agricultural buildings.
Accessory structures, used for the housing of animals, shall be located as described in this chapter. Greenhouses and agricultural buildings shall be subject to the same location and area restrictions applicable to other accessory structures permitted in residential zones. (Ord. 4984 § 74, 2013)

Chapter 17.210 ALCOHOL SALES AND DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOL SALES REGULATIONS
17.210.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Alcohol Sales and Deemed Approved Alcohol Sales Regulations Ordinance.” (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

 

17.210.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to list regulations pertaining to the establishment and conduct of alcohol sales in the city under simplified headings.

This chapter requires land use permits for newly established alcoholic beverage sales activities, confers deemed approved status for all existing permitted, conditionally permitted and legal nonconforming off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities, provides standards for the continued operation of alcoholic beverage sales establishments, sets forth grounds for the modification, revocation and termination of conditional use permits and deemed approved status for establishments violating this chapter, and provides a hearing process to review violations of the standards contained in this chapter in order to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of El Cajon and to prevent nuisance activities where alcoholic beverage sales occur.

Specific purposes for enacting this chapter are as follows:

A.    To protect residential, commercial, industrial and civic areas from the harmful effects attributable to the sale of alcoholic beverages and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses;

B.     To provide opportunities for alcoholic beverage sales establishments to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other commercial and civic services;

C.     To provide mechanisms to address problems associated with the public consumption of alcoholic beverages such as litter, loitering, graffiti, unruly behavior, violence, vandalism, and escalated noise levels;

D.    To provide that alcoholic beverage sales establishments are not to become the source of undue public nuisances in the community;

E.     To provide for properly maintained alcoholic beverage sales establishments so that the secondary effects of negative impacts generated by these activities on the surrounding environment are mitigated;

F.     To monitor deemed approved establishments to ensure they do not substantially change in mode or character of operation; and

G.    To promote a healthy and safe business environment in the city of El Cajon through appropriate and consistent land use regulations and to encourage the establishment of businesses that will benefit both the local economy and residents while not placing an undue strain on city resources or surrounding businesses.

This chapter alone does not allow or permit alcoholic beverage sales activities, but only applies to these activities where otherwise allowed or permitted within an involved applicable zoning district. The provisions of this ordinance are intended to complement the state of California alcohol-related laws. The city does not intend to replace or usurp any powers vested in the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.030 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the extent permissible under other laws to all alcoholic beverage sales establishments, as defined in Section 17.210.040, located in the city of El Cajon that sell alcoholic beverages for on- or off-site consumption.

 

B.     Whenever any provision of the alcohol sales and deemed approved alcoholic beverage sales regulations, and any other provision of law, whether set forth in these regulations, in an existing conditional use permit, or in any other law, ordinance, or regulations of any kind, imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided in the alcohol sales and deemed approved alcohol sales regulations. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.040 Definitions.
The meaning and construction of these words and phrases, as set forth below, shall apply throughout, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.

A.    “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, that contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances, the sale of which requires an ABC license.

B.     “Alcoholic beverage production” means manufacturing of alcoholic beverages. A brewery, micro-brewery, winery or distillery are each examples of alcoholic beverage production manufacturers.

C.     “Alcoholic beverage sales activity” means the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption.

D.    “Alcoholic beverage sales establishment” means an establishment where an alcoholic beverage sales activity occurs. Alcoholic beverage sales establishments include but are not limited to the following recognized types of establishments: liquor stores, beer and wine stores, convenience markets, markets, neighborhood specialty food markets, retail sales establishments, wine shops, service stations, taverns, clubs, cocktail lounges, ballrooms, cabarets, dance bars, piano bars, billiard or game parlors, bowling alleys, nightclubs, dance halls, cafés, bars, restaurants with bars, full-service restaurants, fast food establishments, and breweries. For purposes of this chapter, an “alcoholic beverage sales establishment” also includes a general retail store, a grocery store and a retail pharmacy that devotes any percentage of its gross floor area to the sale and display of alcoholic beverages.

E.     “California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control” or “ABC” refers to the department of the state of California empowered to act pursuant to Article 20, section 22, of the California Constitution and authorized to administer the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.

F.     “Conditions of approval” means all requirements that must be carried out by the owners engaged in the activity of: (1) a new alcoholic beverage sales activity to exercise a land use permit; or (2) an existing permitted, conditionally permitted, or legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales activity in order to comply with deemed approved performance standards and to retain its deemed approved status.

G.    “Deemed approved activity” means any existing permitted or conditionally permitted alcoholic beverage sales activity (as defined in subsection (P), below), or any legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity (as defined in subsection (J), below). Such activity shall be considered a deemed approved activity effective November 1, 2013 as long as it complies with the deemed approved performance standards set forth in Section 17.210.230.

H.    “Deemed approved status” means the permitted use of land for a deemed approved activity. Deemed approved status replaces permitted and conditionally permitted status (to the extent the establishment is not already required to meet all of the operational standards established in this chapter), and legal nonconforming status for off-sale alcohol establishments with respect to alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity and remains in effect as long as it complies with the deemed approved provisions and performance standards.

I.      “Enforcement officer” means the city manager or designee, and chief of police or designee.

J.      “Hip flask” means a small flask for potable liquids of a kind designed so that it may be carried in a hip pocket.

K.    “Illegal activity” means an activity, which has been finally determined to be in noncompliance with local, state or federal laws, the conditions of any applicable permits, or the deemed approved provisions and performance standards in this chapter. Such an activity may lose its deemed approved status, and if it does it shall no longer be considered a deemed approved activity.

L.     “Legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity” or “legal nonconforming activity” means an off-sale alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity which was a nonconforming use pursuant to Chapter 17.120, and for which a valid state of California Alcoholic Beverage Control license had been issued and used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the license at a time immediately prior to November 1, 2013. A “legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity” or “legal nonconforming activity” includes all beverage sales activities of existing off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments that are not in conformance with the regulations applicable to new off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments contained in this chapter, regardless of whether such activities were allowed as part of a conditional use permit granted prior to November 1, 2013. Such an activity shall be considered a deemed approved activity and shall no longer be considered a legal nonconforming activity.

M.    “Modify” or “modified” as used in Sections 17.210.070, 17.210.100 and 17.210.130 of this chapter means the expansion or increase in intensity or substantial change of a use, as these terms are used in Chapter 17.120 of this title.

N.    “Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment” means an establishment that conducts retail sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises where sold. For purposes of this chapter, an “off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment” does not include a lawfully established alcohol beverage production manufacturer such as a winery, brewery or micro-brewery that sells alcohol for off-site consumption.

O.    “On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment” means an establishment that conducts retail sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.

P.     “Operational standards” means regulations for the business practice activities and land use for locations with a conditional use permit issued in conformance with the regulations in this chapter on or after November 1, 2013 or those further requirements imposed on off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments to achieve the purposes of this chapter. Operational standards constitute requirements which must be complied with by an establishment in order to maintain its conditional use permit or deemed approved status.

Q.    “Performance standards” means regulations for the business practice activities and land use for locations with deemed approved status, in whole or in part, or those further requirements imposed to achieve the purposes of this chapter. Performance standards constitute requirements which must be complied with by an off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment in order to retain its deemed approved status.

R.     “Permitted or conditionally permitted alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity” or “permitted or conditionally permitted activity” means an off-sale alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity which is a permitted or conditionally permitted activity pursuant to Chapter 17.210 and other applicable provisions of the El Cajon Municipal Code prior to November 1, 2013, and for which a valid state of California Alcoholic Beverage Control license has been issued and was used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the license at a time immediately prior to November 1, 2013. A “permitted or conditionally permitted alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity” or “permitted or conditionally permitted activity” includes all alcoholic beverage sales activities of any existing off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment that are not in conformance with the regulations applicable to new off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments contained in this chapter, regardless of whether such activities were allowed as part of a conditional use permit granted by the planning commission or otherwise allowed as permissible activities associated with the establishment’s permitted use, prior to November 1, 2013. To the extent that the activity is not in conformance with this chapter, it shall be considered a deemed approved activity.

S.     “Premises” means the actual space in a building devoted to alcoholic beverage sales.

T.     “Redeveloped” means the demolition of an existing off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment (whether conducting permitted or conditionally permitted activities or deemed approved activities) followed by the immediate reconstruction and operation of a replacement off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment.

U.    “Restaurant” means a bona fide eating place whose predominant function is the service of food and where on-sale of alcoholic beverages is incidental or secondary. (Ord. 5033 § 38, 2015)

 

17.210.050 Public hearing by planning commission.
The planning commission may conduct public hearings and make determinations on whether alcoholic beverage sale establishments are in compliance with conditions of approval, operational standards, or deemed approved performance standards prescribed in these regulations, and may modify, suspend or revoke an establishment’s conditional use permit or deemed approved status in order to obtain the compliance of the particular establishment with the provisions of this chapter. This section is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other city officers or bodies in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony of alcoholic beverage sale activities in the city. The planning commission shall have the powers and duties assigned to them by the El Cajon Municipal Code and by this chapter. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.060 Inspection and right of entry.
The sale of alcoholic beverages is a closely regulated industry. The officials responsible for enforcement of the El Cajon Municipal Code or other ordinances of the city or their duly authorized representatives may enter on any site or into any structure open to the public for the purpose of investigation provided they shall do so in a reasonable manner whenever they have cause to suspect a violation of any provision of this ordinance or whenever necessary to the investigation of violations to the conditions of approval, operational standards, or deemed approved performance standards prescribed in these regulations. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to enter, inspect or investigate, premises which are not open to the public, the officials or their representatives may seek an inspection warrant under the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure section 1822.50 et seq. All such inspections shall be conducted in compliance with the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.070 New, modified, or redeveloped off-sale alcohol establishment standards.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall establish a new off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, nor shall any person modify or redevelop an existing off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, in violation of Section 17.120.030 of this title or an applicable conditional use permit without first obtaining a conditional use permit in the manner provided by this chapter. Furthermore, the standards contained in Sections 17.210.080 through 17.210.120 require new off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments, as defined in this chapter, to secure a conditional use permit in the manner provided in this chapter in order to lawfully engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages from premises located in the city of El Cajon; and require such establishments to manage such premises in accordance with the requirements of such permit, including operational standards and any conditions of approval incorporated as conditions of the permit. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.080 Conditional use permit required.
A.    Except as provided in subsections B and C, below, all alcoholic beverage establishments to which this chapter is applicable shall obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this title and satisfy all pertinent conditions prior to engaging in any alcoholic beverage sales activity.

B.     Unless otherwise required by this chapter, a conditional use permit shall not be required of an alcoholic beverage establishment consisting of a general retail store, a grocery store, or a retail pharmacy, which has (1) at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor space, and (2) a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area devoted to the sales and display of alcoholic beverages. A conditional use permit shall not be required of an alcoholic beverage production manufacturer with an accessory tasting room. An alcoholic beverage establishment exempt from the requirement of a conditional use permit pursuant to this subsection is deemed to have been approved to conduct alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity subject to the terms and conditions of a conditional use permit required under this chapter provided, however, that if it is found to be in violation of this chapter such an exempt establishment may lose its exemption and be required to obtain a conditional use permit as set forth in section 17.210.260.

C.     All new on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments in the Regional Commercial (C-R) zone shall obtain a minor use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.57 of this title to satisfy all pertinent conditions prior to engaging in any alcoholic beverage sales activity. (Ord. 5081 § 25, 2019.)

 

17.210.090 Distance requirements—applicable to new off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities.
A.    No new off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment shall be located within 600 feet of residentially zoned property, public or private schools, health care facilities, religious facilities, and parks or playgrounds, except:

1.     A general retail store, or grocery store, or retail pharmacy with greater than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and a maximum of 10 percent of the gross floor area devoted to the sale and display of off-sale alcoholic beverages; or

2.     A convenience market with a maximum of 10 percent of the retail display area devoted to the sale and display of alcoholic beverages, limited to off-sale beer and wine, non-fortified products only. Retail display area includes all floor area within the establishment that is accessible and within view of customers, including aisles, and floor area occupied by shelves, counters, and refrigerator coolers.

B.     For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured between the closest property lines of the affected locations. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.100 Operational standards—applicable to new, modified, or redeveloped off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities.
A.    All new, modified, or redeveloped off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities shall be designed, constructed, and operated to conform to all of the following operational standards:

1.     That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

2.     That it does not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

3.     That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests.

4.     That it complies with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, California Business and Professions Code sections 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city business license fees.

5.     That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with, and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood.

6.     That it complies with the following alcohol sale limitations:

a.     No wine shall be displayed, sold or given away in containers of less than seven hundred fifty (750) milliliters, except multipack containers of wine, and multipack wine coolers containing no more than six percent (6%) alcohol by volume.

b.     No wine shall be displayed, sold or given away with an alcoholic content greater than fifteen percent (15%) by volume unless in corked bottles and aged at least two (two) years.

c.     No distilled spirits shall be displayed, sold or given away in containers of less than three hundred seventy five (375) milliliters, including but not limited to, airline bottles, except pre-mixed cocktails.

d.     Notwithstanding subsection (c) above, no distilled spirits shall be displayed, sold or distributed in three hundred seventy-five (375) milliliters hip flask containers.

e.     No beer, ale or malt liquor shall be offered for sale in a container with a volume greater than thirty-two (32) ounces. This restriction is not intended to prohibit the sale of such beverages in kegs or other types of containers, with a volume of two or more gallons, which are clearly designed to dispense multiple servings.

f.      No sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-up or walk-up window.

g.     No display, sale or distribution of beer or wine, wine coolers or similar alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub, barrel or similar container.

h.     All display of alcoholic beverages shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the store entrance.

7.     That it complies with the following public nuisance prevention measures:

a.     Lighting: Exterior areas of the premises and adjacent parking lots shall be provided with sufficient lighting in a manner that provides adequate illumination for alcohol establishment patrons while not spilling onto surrounding residential and commercial properties. A photometric study may be required to demonstrate compliance.

b.     Litter: Adequate litter receptacles shall be provided on site and in the building. The premises shall be kept free of the accumulation of litter and shall be removed no less frequently than once each day the business is open.

c.     Loitering: The following measures may be required:

i.      No fixtures or furnishings that encourage loitering and nuisance behavior are permitted on the premises. This includes, but is not limited to chairs, seats, stools, benches, tables, crates, etc.

ii.     The establishment’s operators or employees shall be required to discourage loiterers and to ask persons loitering longer than fifteen (15) minutes to leave the area and contact local law enforcement officials for enforcement of applicable trespassing and loitering laws if persons requested to leave fail to do so.

iii.    No video or other electronic games shall be located in an off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment.

iv.    No pay phones are permitted outside of the off-sale establishment.

d.     Cups: The sale or distribution to the customer of paper or plastic cups in quantities less than their usual and customary packaging is prohibited.

e.     Signage: There shall be no exterior advertising of alcoholic products, or tobacco and paraphernalia or similarly controlled products as defined in section 8.33.010 of this Municipal Code.

f.      Signs: The following signs shall be required to be prominently posted in a readily visible manner on an interior wall or fixture, and not on windows, in English, Spanish, Arabic and the predominant language of the patrons:

i.      “California State Law prohibits the sale of alcoholic beverages to persons younger than 21 years of age.”

ii.     “No Loitering or Public Drinking.”

iii.    “It is illegal to possess an open container of alcohol in the vicinity of this establishment.”

g.     Presentation of Documents: A copy of the conditions of approval and the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license shall be required to be kept on the premises and presented to any enforcement officer or authorized state or county official upon request.

h.     Mitigating Alcohol Related Problems: The establishment shall be required to operate in a manner appropriate with mitigating alcohol related problems that negatively impact those individuals living or working in the neighborhood including but not limited to sales to minors, the congregation of individuals, violence on or near the premises, drunkenness, public urination, solicitation, drug-dealing, drug use, loud noise and litter.

i.      Drug Paraphernalia: An off-sale alcohol establishment shall be prohibited from selling drug/tobacco paraphernalia products as defined in California Health and Safety Code sections 11014.5 and 11364.5. “Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment products and materials of any kind that are used intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, com-pounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act commencing with California Health and Safety Code section 11000.

j.      Prohibited Vegetation: Exterior vegetation shall not be planted or maintained that could be used as a hiding place for persons on the premises. Exterior vegetation may be planted and maintained in a manner that minimizes its use as a hiding place.

k.     Window Obstructions: To ensure a clear and unobstructed view of the interior of the premises, including the area in which the cash registers are maintained, from the exterior public sidewalk or entrance, no more than fifteen percent (15%) of windows and entry doors shall be blocked by signs, vending machines, shelves, racks, storage, etc.

l.      Training: Each off-sale operator and their employees shall complete the Responsible Beverage Service (RBS) Training component. To satisfy this requirement, a certified program must meet the standards of the Alcohol Beverage Control Responsible Beverage Service Advisory Board or other certifying/licensing body designated by the state of California. Proof of completion shall be submitted to the Community Development department.

m.    Posting of Documents: A copy of these operational standards, any applicable California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations or city operating conditions, and any training requirements shall be posted in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment.

B.     Failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5081 § 27, 2019.)

 

17.210.110 Required findings—new off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities.
In addition to the findings listed in Section 17.50.060, the planning commission shall approve issuance of a conditional use permit to allow a new off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity upon making the following findings:

A.    The proposed establishment meets the locational requirements of Section 17.210.090.

 

B.     The proposed alcoholic beverage sales activity will not aggravate existing problems in the neighborhood created by the sale of alcohol such as loitering, public drunkenness, alcoholic beverage sales to minors, noise and littering.

C.     The proposed establishment will not detrimentally affect nearby neighborhoods considering the distance of the alcohol establishment to residential buildings, schools, parks, playgrounds or recreational areas, nonprofit youth facilities, places of worship, hospitals, alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities, county social service offices, or other alcoholic beverages sales activity establishments.

D.    The proposed establishment is located in a census tract with capacity for additional off-sale licenses, as defined by the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control, with low to average crime rates, as defined by the police department annually, subject to the condition that an additional off-sale establishment will not be contradictory to a moratorium. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.120 Conditions of approval—new off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities.
A.    In order to make required findings the applicant must acquire an existing off-sale license issued by the ABC from an off-sale alcohol sales establishment located in an over-concentrated census tract in the city of El Cajon and transfer the license to an approved location or otherwise extinguish such license.

B.     Conditions of approval that may be imposed as necessary to make required findings include but are not limited to the following:

1.     Program: A “complaint response community relations” program adopted and maintained by the establishment conducting the alcoholic beverage sales activity may be required. The program may include the following:

a.     Posting at the entry of the establishment providing the telephone number for the watch commander of the police department to any requesting individual.

b.     Coordinating efforts with the police department to monitor community complaints about the establishment activities.

c.     Having a representative of the establishment meet with neighbors or the applicable neighborhood association on a regular basis and at their request attempt to resolve any neighborhood complaints regarding the establishment.

2.     Hours of Operation: In an off-sale alcohol establishment, the sale of alcoholic beverages may be restricted to certain hours of each day of the week unless limited further by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

3.     Security Cameras: At least two high definition 24-hour time lapse security cameras may be required to be installed and properly maintained on the exterior of the building at locations recommended by the police department capable of color recording and storing a minimum of 30 days of continuous video. All criminal and suspicious activities recorded on this surveillance equipment must be reported to local law enforcement. To the extent allowed by law, the establishment operators may be required to provide any tapes or other recording media from the security cameras to the police department.

4.     Security Guards: An establishment may be required to retain a specified number of security guards. The number of security guards shall vary based upon the specific facts and circumstances of each establishment site and operation. All security guards shall have all required state and city permits and licenses. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.130 New and modified on-sale alcohol establishment standards.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall establish a new on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment or modify an existing on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment in violation of section 17.120.030 of this title or an applicable conditional use permit without first obtaining a conditional use permit or minor use permit (C-R zone) in the manner provided by this chapter. Furthermore, the standards contained in sections 17.210.140 through 17.210.160 require on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments to secure a conditional use permit or minor use permit in the manner provided in this chapter in order to lawfully engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages from premises located in the city of El Cajon; and require such establishments to manage such premises in accordance with the requirements of such permit, including operational standards and any conditions of approval incorporated as conditions of the permit. (Ord. 5081 § 29, 2019.)

 

17.210.140 Distance requirements—applicable to new on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments.
A.    No new on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment (except in the C-R zone) and/or within six hundred (600) feet of residentially zoned property, public or private schools, health care facilities, religious facilities, parks or playgrounds, and off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments, except:

1.     A restaurant with an ancillary bar with less total square footage than the restaurant eating area; or

2.     On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment with alcohol sales secondary and incidental to an approved, complementary, principal use within the boundaries of Specific Plan No. 182; or

3.     An alcoholic beverage manufacturer such as a craft brewery with an ancillary tasting room or craft brewery with a full service restaurant.

B.     For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured between the closest property lines of the affected locations.

C.     For the purposes of this section, “secondary and incidental,” shall mean that the sales of alcoholic beverage shall be limited to not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross annual retail receipts generated by the use on the site, which shall be calculated on a quarterly basis, for the prior twelve (12) month period ending on the last day of the then concluding quarter of year, and shall further mean that sales of alcoholic beverages are not promoted or advertised in any signs, or the name of the business establishment.

D.    For the purposes of this section, “principal use,” may include, but is not limited to, live entertainment, participatory sporting activities, museums, theaters, performing arts center owned by a public agency, hotels, or other, similar uses approved by the city council, so long as the location of the sales of alcoholic beverages occurs on the same premises as the principal use, and the owner of the principal use is the owner of the liquor license. (Ord. 5081 § 31, 2019.)

 

17.210.150 Operational standards—applicable to new on-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities.
A.    That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

B.     That it does not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

C.     That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests.

D.    That it complies with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code §§ 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city business license fees.

E.     That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with, and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.160 Required findings—new on-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities.
In addition to the findings listed in section 17.50.060, the issuance of a conditional use permit or minor use permit to allow a new on-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity shall meet the following findings:

A.    The proposed alcoholic beverage sales activity will not exacerbate existing problems in the neighborhood created by the sale of alcohol such as loitering, public drunkenness, sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, noise and littering.

B.     The proposed alcoholic beverage sales establishment will not detrimentally affect nearby neighborhoods considering the distance of the alcohol establishment to residential buildings, schools, parks, playgrounds or recreational areas, nonprofit youth facilities, places of worship, hospitals, alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities, county social service offices, or other alcoholic beverages sales activity establishments.

C.     The proposed alcoholic beverage sales establishment is not located in what has been determined to be a high-crime area or where a disproportionate number of police service calls occur. In the alternative, if the proposed alcoholic beverage sales establishment is proposed to be located in a high-crime area or where a disproportionate number of police service calls occur, the establishment has or will adopt appropriate safeguards, to be set forth in conditions of approval, reasonably intended to prevent any increase in criminal activities and calls for service. (Ord. 5081 § 33, 2019.)

 

17.210.170 Grounds for conditional use permit suspension, revocation or termination.
A.    In addition to the grounds for revocation or modification of a conditional use permit contained in Section 17.35.030 of this title, an alcoholic beverage sales establishment’s conditional use permit may be suspended for up to one year, modified or revoked by the planning commission after holding a public hearing in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.25, for failure to comply with operational standards, training requirements or conditions of approval imposed through their conditional use permit. Notice of such hearing by the planning commission at which it will consider the modification, suspension or revocation of an establishment’s conditional use permit shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefore. Notice shall be mailed by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested at least 10 days before the date of the hearing.

B.     Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the condition, in addition to any and all other conditions, that it shall terminate and cease to apply to any establishment which:

1.     Shall have ceased its operation for a period of 180 or more calendar days, and

a.     If there is thereafter filed any application or requested transaction with the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, whereby the laws of the state of California require notice thereof to be filed with the city, and allow the filing of a protest thereon by the city (including person-to-person transfer of existing licenses); or

b.     Where after such 180-calendar-day period, the existing license shall have ceased to apply to such establishment; or

2.     Where the existing license shall have been surrendered to the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for a period exceeding 180 calendar days. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

 

 

17.210.180 Investigative procedures of potential violation of conditions of approval and operational standards.
Upon the city’s receipt of a complaint from the public, police department, city official or any other interested person that a conditional use permit activity is in violation of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval set forth in this chapter, the following procedure shall be followed:

A.    An enforcement officer shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity by conducting an on-site observation and inspection of the premises to assess the activity’s compliance with operational standards and/or conditions of approval.

B.     If the enforcement officer determines that the activity is in violation of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval, the enforcement officer shall give written notice of the violation to the owner and/or operator of the establishment and seek to remedy the violation under the city’s administrative citation procedures contained in Chapter 1.14 of this code. The first notice of violation shall be given in accordance with Section 1.14.040 of this code. If, however, the enforcement officer, in his or her sole discretion, determines that the violation is not capable of correction, presents a serious threat to public health or safety, or otherwise warrants expedited action, he or she may in lieu of following the administrative citation procedure, refer the matter directly to the planning commission for a hearing at which the establishment’s conditional use permit may be suspended, modified or revoked.

C.     Any administrative citation issued under this section shall be issued, processed, and enforced in compliance with all of the provisions of Chapter 1.14 of this code, unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter. If the owner or operator receiving an administrative citation contests the citation and a hearing is held pursuant to Chapter 1.14, the hearing officer may, in addition to exercising all powers designated in Chapter 1.14, make a recommendation to the planning commission to suspend, modify or revoke the establishment’s conditional use permit if in the judgment of the hearing officer, based upon information then before him or her, such action is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. Such recommendation may include the suggestion of additional or amended reasonable conditions on the use, including but not limited to, the conditions listed in Section 17.210.120, and the operational standards listed in Section 17.210.100 of this chapter.

D.    If a hearing before the planning commission is conducted on a potential violation in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.25, it shall determine whether the activity is in compliance with the operational standards and/or conditions of approval. Based on this determination, the planning commission may suspend, modify or revoke the activity’s conditional use permit or impose additional or amended conditions on the use, including but not limited to the conditions listed in Section 17.210.120, and the operational standards listed in Section 17.210.100, of this chapter, based upon the information then before it. In reaching a determination as to whether a use has violated the operational standards or conditions of approval, or as to the appropriateness of suspending, modifying, or revoking of a conditional use permit, or the imposition of additional or amended conditions on a use, the planning commission may consider the following:

1.     The length of time the activity has been out of compliance with the operational standards and/or conditions of approval.

2.     The impact of the violation of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval on the community.

3.     Any information regarding the owner of the activity’s efforts to remedy the violation of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval.

E.     “Efforts to Remedy” shall include, but are not limited to:

1.     Timely calls to the police department that are placed by the owner and/or operator of the establishment, his or her employees, or agents.

2.     Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing violations of the operational standards and or conditions of approval cease those activities, unless the owner or operator of the activity, or his or her employees or agents feels that their personal safety would be threatened in making that request.

3.     Making improvements to the establishment’s property or operations, including but not limited to the installation of lighting sufficient to illuminate the area within the use’s property line, the installation of security cameras, the clearing of window obstructions, the cleaning of sidewalks and the abatement of graffiti within three days.

F.     If in the judgment of the planning commission, the operations of the owner or operator of the establishment constitute a nuisance, the owner or operator is unable or unwilling to abate the nuisance and the nuisance is shown to be a threat to the public health and safety of the surrounding neighborhood, the planning commission may suspend, modify or revoke the activity’s conditional use permit. All determinations, decisions, and conditions made or imposed regarding the use of an activity shall run with the land.

G.    The decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in writing to the city council within 10 days of planning commission action. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.190 Appeal from suspension, modification or revocation of conditional use permit.
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission from a suspension, modification or revocation of a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this code. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.200 Deemed approved alcoholic beverage sales regulations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any permitted or conditionally permitted off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, and legal nonconforming off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment lawfully operating prior to November 1, 2013 pursuant to an ABC license that authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption shall thereafter be an establishment with deemed approved status in accordance with Section 17.210.220. In addition, any alcoholic beverage establishment exempt from the requirement to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection (B) of Section 17.210.080 that lawfully commences operations on or after November 1, 2013 shall be an establishment with deemed approved status for purposes of this chapter. Such establishment may continue to lawfully operate provided the operation is conducted in compliance with the performance standards contained in Section 17.210.230, has satisfied the applicable training requirement and paid the annual permit fee required by this chapter. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.210 Applicability of deemed approved alcoholic beverage sales regulations.
The deemed approved alcoholic beverage sales regulations shall apply to all permitted or conditionally permitted off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activities and legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales activities for off-site consumption existing and operating within the City on November 1, 2013 and to all alcoholic beverage sales establishments exempt from the requirement to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection (B) of Section 17.210.080 that lawfully commence operations on or after November 1, 2013. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.220 Automatic deemed approved status.
All alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities not consistent with the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter that were conducted by permitted or conditionally permitted activities, and all legal nonconforming activities for off-sale alcohol establishments, on November 1, 2013, shall automatically become deemed approved activities as of November 1, 2013, and shall no longer be considered permitted, conditionally permitted or legal nonconforming activities. In addition, all alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities of an alcoholic beverage sales establishment exempt from the requirement to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection (B) of Section 17.210.080 that lawfully commence operations on or after November 1, 2013 that are not consistent with the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter are deemed approved activities. Each deemed approved activity shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the performance standards of this ordinance. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.230 Deemed approved performance standards for off-sale alcohol establishments.
The provisions of this section shall be known as the deemed approved performance standards. The purpose of these standards is to control dangerous or objectionable environmental effects of alcoholic beverage sales activities. These standards shall apply to all deemed approved alcoholic beverage sales activities that hold deemed approved status pursuant to this chapter. An off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity shall retain its deemed approved status only if it conforms to all of the following deemed approved performance standards:

A.    The off-sale alcohol establishment shall not cause adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

B.     The off-sale alcohol establishment shall not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

C.     The off-sale alcohol establishment shall not allow repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, or lewd conduct.

D.    The off-sale alcohol establishment shall comply with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code sections 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city business license fees.

E.     The off-sale alcohol establishment’s upkeep and operating characteristics shall be compatible with and not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood.

F.     A copy of these performance standards, any applicable ABC or city operating conditions, and any training requirements shall be posted in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment.

G.    The owners and all employees of the alcohol beverage sales establishment involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall complete an approved course in “Responsible Beverage Sales” (RBS) within 60 days of hire for employees hired after the passage of this ordinance or within six months of the passage of this ordinance for existing employees. To satisfy this requirement, a certified program must meet the standards of the California Coordinating Council on Responsible Beverage Service (CCC/RBS) or other certifying/licensing body designated by the state of California. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.240 Notification to owners of off-sale establishments conducting deemed approved activities.
The city’s community development department shall notify the owner and/or operator of an off-sale alcohol establishment of each deemed approved activity as shown on their city business license, and also, if not the same, any property owner at the address shown on the county assessor’s property tax assessment records, of the activity’s deemed approved status. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested and shall include a copy of the performance standards in this chapter with the requirement that they be posted in a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public review. This notice shall also provide that the activity is required to comply with all performance standards, and that the activity is required to comply with all other aspects of the deemed approved regulations. Should the notice be returned, then the notice shall be sent via regular mail. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this chapter shall not affect the deemed approved status of the activity. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.250 Grounds for deemed approved status suspension, revocation or termination.
A.    An alcoholic beverage sales establishment’s deemed approved status may be suspended for up to one year, modified or revoked by the planning commission after holding a public hearing in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.25, for failure to comply with the performance standards set forth in Section 17.210.230. Notice of such hearing by the planning commission at which it will consider the modification, suspension or revocation of an establishment’s deemed approved status shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefore. Notice shall be mailed by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested at least 10 days before the date of the hearing.

B.     The occurrence of any of the following shall terminate the deemed approved status of the alcoholic beverage sales activity after notice and a hearing in front of the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 17.25, and require the issuance of a conditional use permit in order to continue the alcoholic beverage sales activity:

1.     An existing alcoholic beverage sales activity changes its activity so that ABC requires a different type of license.

2.     There is a substantial modification to the mode or character of operation.

3.     As used herein, the phrase “substantial modification to the mode or character of operation” includes but is not be limited to the following:

a.     The off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity establishment increases the floor or land area or shelf space devoted to the display or sales of any alcoholic beverage.

b.     The off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity establishment extends the hours of operation.

c.     The off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after the ABC license has been either revoked or suspended for a period 180 days or greater by ABC.

d.     The off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity voluntarily discontinues active operation for more than 180 consecutive days or ceases to be licensed by the ABC.

4.     A “substantial change in the mode of character of operation” shall not include:

a.     Re-establishment, restoration or repair of an existing off-sale alcoholic beverage sales activity on the same premises after the premises have been rendered totally or partially inaccessible by a riot, insurrection, toxic accident or act of God, provided that the re-establishment, restoration or repair does not extend the hours of operation of any establishment or add to the capacity, floor or land area or shelf space devoted to alcoholic beverages of any establishment that sells any alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption.

b.     Temporary closure for not more than 180 days in cases of vacation or illness or for purposes of repair, renovation, or remodeling if that repair, renovation, or remodeling does not change the nature of the premises and does not extend the hours of operation of any establishment, or add to the capacity, floor or land area, or shelf space devoted to alcoholic beverages of any establishment that sells any alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption, provided notice is provided to the City. The planning commission may, upon request of an owner of an alcoholic beverage sales establishment made prior to the expiration of 180 days, grant one or more extensions to the period of temporary closure, none of which may exceed 60 days, and together not to exceed 180 days.

5.     Once it is determined by the City that there has been a discontinuance of active operation for 180 consecutive days or a cessation of ABC licensing, it may be resumed only upon the granting of a conditional use permit as provided in Sections 17.210.070 to 17.210.120 of this chapter. In the event that any active operation is discontinued on a property for a period of 180 consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be presumed to be abandonment of the use by the property owner. At any time after any active operation is discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days or more, the City Manager’s designee shall notify the property owner in writing of the determination of presumed abandonment of the active operation. Pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this title, the property owner may appeal the determination to the planning commission, which may overturn the determination only upon making a finding that the evidence supports the property owner’s position that the nonconforming use was not discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days or more. The property owner shall be notified by the city of the termination of the deemed approved status and shall be informed of the property owner’s right to appeal the City’s decision to the planning commission. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.260 Investigative procedures of potential violation of performance standards by establishment with deemed approved status.
Upon the City’s receipt of a complaint from the public, police department, city official or any other interested person that a deemed approved use is in violation of the performance standards set forth in this chapter, the following procedure shall be followed:

A.    An enforcement officer shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity by conducting an on-site observation and inspection of the premises to assess the activity’s compliance with performance standards.

B.     If the enforcement officer determines that the deemed approved activity is in violation of the performance standards, the enforcement officer shall give written notice of the violation to the owner and/or operator of the establishment and seek to remedy the violation under the city’s administrative citation procedures contained in Chapter 1.14 of this code. The first notice of violation shall be given in accordance with Section 1.14.040 of this code. If, however, the city manager, in his or her sole discretion, determines that the violation is not capable of correction, presents a serious threat to public health or safety, or otherwise warrants expedited action, he or she may in lieu of following the administrative citation procedure, refer the matter directly to the planning commission for a hearing at which the deemed approved activity’s deemed approved status may be suspended, modified or revoked.

C.     Any administrative citation issued under this section shall be issued, processed, and enforced in compliance with all of the provisions of Chapter 1.14 of this code, unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter. If, the owner or operator receiving an administrative citation contests the citation and a hearing is held pursuant to Chapter 1.14, the hearing officer may, in addition to exercising all powers designated in Chapter 1.14, make a recommendation to the planning commission to suspend, modify or revoke the deemed approved activity’s deemed approved status if in the judgment of the hearing officer, based upon information then before him or her, such action is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. Such recommendation may include the suggestion of additional or amended reasonable conditions on the use, including but not limited to, the conditions listed in Section 17.210.120 and the operational standards listed in Section 17.210.100, of this chapter.

D.    If a hearing is conducted on a potential violation in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.25, the planning commission shall determine whether the deemed approved activity is in compliance with the performance standards. Based on this determination, the planning commission may suspend, modify or revoke the deemed approved activity’s deemed approved status or impose additional or amended conditions on the use, including but not limited to the conditions listed in Section 17.210.120, and the operational standards listed in Section 17.210.100, of this chapter, based on information then before it. In reaching a determination as to whether a use has violated the performance standards, or as to the appropriateness of suspending, modifying or revoking a deemed approved activity’s deemed approved status, or imposing additional or amended conditions on the use, the planning commission may consider:

1.     The length of time the deemed approved activity has been out of compliance with the performance standards.

2.     The impact of the violation of the performance standard(s) on the community.

3.     Any information regarding the owner of the deemed approved activity’s efforts to remedy the violation of the performance standard(s).

E.     “Efforts to Remedy” shall include, but are not limited to:

1.     Timely calls to the police department that are placed by the owner and/or operator of the deemed approved activity, his or her employees, or agents.

2.     Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing violations of the performance standard(s) cease those activities, unless the owner of the deemed approved activity, or his or her employees or agents feels that their personal safety would be threatened in making that request.

3.     Making improvements to the deemed approved activity’s property or operations, including but not limited to the installation of lighting sufficient to illuminate the area within the use’s property line, the installation of security cameras, clear unobstructed windows, clean sidewalks and graffiti abated within three days.

F.     If in the judgment of the planning commission, the operations of the owner or operator of the deemed approved activity constitute a nuisance, the owner is unable or unwilling to abate the nuisance and the nuisance is shown to be a threat to the public health and safety of the surrounding neighborhood, the planning commission may suspend, modify or revoke the activity’s deemed approved status. If suspended, any continued operation of the business shall require a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission. All determinations, decisions, and conditions made or imposed regarding the use of a deemed approved activity shall run with the land.

G.    The decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.30 of this title.

H.    All hearings held pursuant to this section shall be conducted in the manner set forth in Chapter 1.36. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.270 Appeal from suspension, modification or revocation of deemed approved status.
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission from a suspension, modification or revocation of an establishment’s deemed approved status pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this code. All hearings held pursuant to this section shall be conducted in the manner set forth in Chapter 1.36. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.280 Alcoholic beverage sales activity penalties.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who causes or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code.

B.     In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the City.

C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city of El Cajon from pursuing any and all other legal remedies that may be available, including but not limited to civil actions filed by the city attorney seeking any and all appropriate relief such as civil injunctions and penalties.

D.    Notwithstanding Chapter 1.24 General Penalty, Chapter 1.16 Nuisance, Chapter 1.14 Administrative Citation Procedures, or any other section of this code to the contrary, any person, entity, or organization that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to civil penalties up to $1,000 for each day said violation is in existence.

E.     Any violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of these regulations is committed, continued, permitted, or caused by such violator and shall be punishable accordingly.

F.     In addition to the punishment provided by law a violator is liable for such costs expenses and disbursements paid or incurred by the City or any of its contractors in correction, abatement and prosecution of the violation. Re-inspection fees to ascertain compliance with previously noticed or cited violations may be charged against the owner of the establishment conducting the deemed approved activity or owner of the property where the establishment is located. The enforcement officer shall give the owner or other responsible party of such affected premises a written notice showing the itemized cost of such chargeable service and requesting payment thereof. Should the bill not be paid in the required time, the charges shall be placed as a lien against the property. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.290 Annual alcohol sales regulatory fee.
A.    The intent and purpose of this section is to impose a regulatory fee upon all off-sale alcohol establishments that either hold deemed approved status pursuant to this chapter or obtained a conditional use permit after November 1, 2013. This fee shall provide for the enforcement and regulation of the conditions of approval, operational standards, performance standards and other applicable regulations set forth in this chapter with regard to off-sale alcohol establishments.

B.     The annual alcohol sales regulatory fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both administration and enforcement of the performance standards and other applicable regulations set forth under this chapter upon all off-sale alcohol establishments that either hold deemed approved status pursuant to this chapter or obtained a conditional use permit after the November 1, 2013, including, for example, notifying establishments of their deemed approved status, administering the program, establishment inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, conducting hearings and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the total program. All fees shall be used to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

 

17.210.300 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid. (Ord. 4994 § 3, 2013)

Chapter 17.212 DEEMED APPROVED LODGING ESTABLISHMENT
17.212.010 Short Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Deemed Approved Lodging Establishment Ordinance.” (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.020 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of employees and customers of lodging establishments and the community at large by conveying deemed approved status to all existing lodging establishments and requiring adherence to performance standards intended to prevent public nuisance. The objectives of this chapter are as follows:

A.    To improve and maintain the quality of the City’s transient lodging through the enforcement of minimum standards and the advancement of responsible operations of these lodging establishments;

B.     To ensure that lodging establishments adhere to public health and safety standards and that guests are provided with safe and sanitary accommodations;

C.     To ensure that each lodging establishment is operated safely in a manner that discourages nuisance and criminal activity;

D.    To provide ongoing monitoring of lodging establishment activities to ensure that the activities do not substantially change over time;

E.     To ensure that the operations of existing lodging establishments are not a source of undue public nuisance or visual blight; and

 

F.     To protect surrounding residential, commercial, industrial, or civic areas and minimize the negative impact of nonconforming or incompatible uses.

This chapter confers deemed approved status on the effective date of this ordinance to all existing permitted, conditionally permitted, and legal nonconforming, lodging establishments; provides standards for the continued operations of these businesses; establishes grounds for termination of deemed approved status for lodging establishments violating this chapter; and provides a hearing process to review the violations of these standards. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.030 Definitions.
A.    “Deemed approved activity” means any existing permitted, conditionally permitted, or legal nonconforming, lodging establishment activity. Such activity shall be considered a deemed approved activity effective date as long as it complies with the deemed approved performance standards established in this chapter.

B.     “Deemed approved status” means the permitted use of land for a deemed approved activity. Deemed approved status replaces legal nonconforming status for lodging establishment activities and remains in effect as long as the business complies with the deemed approved provisions and performance standards of this chapter. Lodging establishments having permitted or conditionally permitted status shall retain such status provided, however, that these lodging establishment activities are further subject to the deemed approved performance standards to the extent that these standards are not already included in applicable conditions of approval.

C.     “Lodging establishment” or “establishment” means a place of business that provides overnight accommodations regardless of the length of stay. This shall include hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments or any other temporary lodging establishments regardless of the length of stay of any guest or tenant. This does not include single-or multi-family residences, single room occupancy hotels, institutional or group care facilities, or group quarters.

D.    “Lodging establishment activity” means the provision of overnight accommodations to persons in exchange for the payment of valuable consideration. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.040 Applicability.
A.    The deemed approved lodging establishment regulations shall apply to all legal nonconforming, conditionally, or otherwise permitted hotels, motels, or bed and breakfast places of business within the city. This shall apply to all hotels, motels, or businesses established as temporary lodging businesses regardless of the length of stay of any guest or tenant. This does not apply to residences where rooms are rented. This chapter applies to all lodging establishments as defined in section 17.212.030.

B.     Whenever any regulation or law or condition of approval is more restrictive than these regulations, the more restrictive or higher standard shall control unless otherwise expressly described in this chapter. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.050 Deemed Approved Status.
All lodging establishments that were legal nonconforming activities, conditionally or otherwise permitted immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter shall automatically become deemed approved lodging activities as of the effective date of this chapter and shall no longer be considered legal nonconforming activities. Each such deemed approved lodging activity shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the standards in section 17.212.070. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.060 New, modified, or expanded lodging establishments.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall establish a new lodging establishment, nor shall any person modify or expand an existing lodging establishment without first obtaining or amending a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.070 Deemed Approved Performance Standards.
A.    Management operations

1.     A staff person, caretaker or resident manager or other responsible person shall be available in person 24 hours per day at each lodging establishment in which there are twelve (12) or more rooms.

2.     A caretaker or resident manager shall be available by phone 24 hours per day at each lodging establishment in which there are eleven (11) or fewer rooms.

3.     The name, phone number, and address of the responsible person shall be posted conspicuously in an area that is generally available to the public.

4.     The telephone number and address for the City of El Cajon code compliance office shall be posted in a prominent location in the reception area.

B.     Registration requirements

Each lodging establishment shall comply with the El Cajon Municipal Code chapter 9.25 Hotel, Motel and Lodging House Registration Regulations.

C.     Security measures

1.     Each guestroom shall be equipped with an operable dead bolt lock on the swinging entry door of the room.

2.     Each connected door between two rooms that share a common wall shall be equipped with two dead bolt locks, separately operable without a key on each side of the door; or two separate doors, each with a dead bolt lock only operable without a key from the room-side of the door.

3.     All windows designed to be opened shall have an operable window security or locking device.

4.     Each room shall have privacy coverings such as shades, draperies, or blinds on all windows.

D.    Minimum property standards

1.     All common interior and exterior areas shall be maintained in a sanitary condition free of garbage and debris.

2.     The property shall be maintained in accordance with El Cajon Municipal Code section 15.16.130 Standards of maintenance and repair.

3.     Any graffiti shall be removed in accordance with El Cajon Municipal Code chapter 9.70.

4.     All parking lots, adjacent public sidewalks, walkways, and exterior areas shall be swept or cleaned regularly and maintained free of litter and debris.

5.     Exterior lighting shall be provided and maintained in working order to adequately illuminate parking lots, walkways, and areas of public access.

6.     All designated landscape areas shall be maintained with properly trimmed, fertilized, and watered living plant materials free of litter or debris.

7.     Directional signs shall be posted as necessary to ensure that emergency personnel can find guest rooms.

8.     All containers used for the storage of trash, garbage, or recycled materials and placed on the exterior of the building shall be kept locked and maintained in a sanitary condition.

E.     Maintenance and Housekeeping

The maintenance and housekeeping provisions shall apply to all lodging establishments which provide shelter, furniture, linens and housekeeping services within guest rooms and throughout the property. These provisions shall not apply to permanent residential facilities wherein the owner is responsible only for shelter but does not provide furniture, linens or housekeeping services.

1.     Each guest room shall be maintained by regularly occurring maintenance and routine cleaning to provide a clean and sanitary space free from garbage, rodents, or vermin.

2.     Housekeeping and cleaning services shall be provided at a minimum weekly and in between guests. Where housekeeping is provided on a weekly basis, guests must have access to additional clean linens and a dumpster or bin for emptying room trash cans on a daily basis or as needed.

3.     Rooms with private bathrooms shall have a functioning toilet, sink, and shower or bathtub.

4.     Hot and cold running water shall be provided for all plumbing facilities.

5.     Room furnishings including mattresses and furniture shall be free of stains, holes, rips, or odors in excess of normal wear and tear, and shall further be free and clear of bed bugs, fleas, lice, and other similar vermin.

6.     Room linens, drapes, or blinds shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear.

7.     Bathroom fixtures shall be maintained without significant cracks, chips, or stains. Bathroom facilities must be maintained in working order.

8.     Carpeting or flooring, walls, and ceilings shall be free of stains, holes, cracks, chips, or odors in excess of normal wear and tear, and shall further be free and clear of bed bugs, fleas, lice, and other similar vermin.

F.     Nuisance activity

The deemed approved lodging establishment activities shall not result in nuisance activities on the property or contribute to nuisance activities in close proximity to the property. Nuisance activities may include, but are not limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, prostitution, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, trafficking in stolen goods, public urination, theft, assault, battery, vandalism, illegal parking, excessive noise, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or excessive police detentions or arrests.

G.    Transient Occupancy Tax

In accordance with Chapter 3.44 of Title 3 of the El Cajon Municipal Code, each establishment must maintain records and remit transient occupancy tax to the city following the close of each calendar quarter.

 

H.    Compliance with laws

Each lodging establishment shall comply with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including without limitation, the Uniform Housing Code, Building Code, Fire Code, and all other provisions of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.080 Right of inspection.
A.    The City shall conduct regular inspections of all businesses subject to the regulations specified in this chapter. The City Manager or designee is authorized to allow the acceptance of satisfactory ratings conferred by recognized, independent agencies in lieu of a City inspection, provided that the independent inspection is based upon performance and facility standards equal to or in excess of the standards set forth in this chapter.

B.     The officials responsible for enforcement of the El Cajon Municipal Code or other ordinances of the city or their duly authorized representatives may enter on any site or into any structure open to the public for the purpose of investigation provided they shall do so in a reasonable manner whenever they have cause to suspect a violation of any provision of this ordinance or whenever necessary to the investigation of violations to the conditions of approval, operational standards, or deemed approved performance standards prescribed in these regulations.

C.     Upon a showing of probable cause by the officials responsible for enforcement of the El Cajon Municipal Code, the officials responsible for enforcement shall request of the owner or agent and the occupant, permission to inspect the rooms and facilities, and/or the production of guest registers and other records necessary to determine compliance with all applicable regulations, including but not limited to building, fire, health, occupancy, and zoning codes, and to verify collection and payment to the City of all taxes owed.

D.    If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to enter, inspect or investigate, premises, including guest registers, which are not open to the public, the officials or their representatives may seek an inspection warrant under the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure section 1822.50 et seq. All such inspections shall be conducted in compliance with the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.090 Violation of Performance Standards.
As a result of an inspection or upon the city’s receipt of a complaint from the public, police department, city official or any other interested person that a deemed approved lodging establishment activity is in violation of the operational standards set forth in this chapter, the following procedure shall be followed:

A.    An enforcement officer shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity by conducting an on-site observation and inspection of the premises to assess the activity’s compliance with operational standards and/or conditions of approval.

B.     If the enforcement officer determines that the activity is in violation of the operational standards, the enforcement officer shall give written notice of the violation to the owner and/or operator of the establishment and seek to remedy the violation under the city’s administrative citation procedures contained in Chapter 1.14 of this code. The first notice of violation shall be given in accordance with section 1.14.040 of this code. If, however, the enforcement officer, in his or her sole discretion, determines that the violation is not capable of correction, presents a serious threat to public health or safety, or otherwise warrants expedited action, he or she may, in lieu of following the administrative citation procedure, refer the matter directly to the planning commission for a hearing at which the establishment’s deemed approved status may be suspended, modified or revoked.

C.     Any administrative citation issued under this section shall be issued, processed, and enforced in compliance with all of the provisions of Chapter 1.14 of this code, unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter. If the owner or operator receiving an administrative citation contests the citation and a hearing is held pursuant to Chapter 1.14, the hearing officer may, in addition to exercising all powers designated in Chapter 1.14, make a recommendation to the planning commission to suspend, modify or revoke the establishment’s deemed approved status if in the judgment of the hearing officer, based upon information then before him or her, such action is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.

D.    If a hearing before the planning commission is conducted on a potential violation in the manner prescribed in this chapter, it shall determine whether the activity is in compliance with the operational standards. Based on this determination, the planning commission may suspend, modify or revoke the activity’s deemed approved status. In reaching a determination as to whether a use has violated the operational standards, or as to the appropriateness of suspending, modifying, or revoking of a conditional use permit, or the imposition of additional or amended conditions on a use, the planning commission may consider the following:

1.     The length of time the activity has been out of compliance with the operational standards.

2.     The impact of the violation of the operational standards on the community.

3.     Any information regarding efforts to remedy the violation of the operational standards.

E.     “Efforts to Remedy” shall include, but are not limited to:

1.     Timely calls to the police department that are placed by the owner or operator of the establishment, or by his or her employees or agents.

2.     Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing violations of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval cease those activities, unless the owner or operator of the activity, or his or her employees or agents feels that their personal safety would be threatened in making that request.

3.     Making improvements to the establishment’s property or operations to address performance standards.

F.     If in the judgment of the planning commission, the operations of the owner or operator of the establishment constitute a nuisance, the owner or operator is unable or unwilling to abate the nuisance, and the nuisance is shown to be a threat to the public health and safety of the surrounding neighborhood, the planning commission may suspend, modify, or revoke the activity’s deemed approved status. All determinations, decisions, and conditions made or imposed regarding the use of an activity shall run with the land.

G.    The decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed in writing to the city council within 10 days of planning commission action.

H.    At any time during a violation proceeding or after revocation of a lodging establishment’s deemed approved status, the property owner or an applicant with the property owner’s consent may apply for a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

17.212.100 Public hearing by planning commission.
The planning commission may conduct public hearings and make determinations on whether lodging establishments are in compliance with conditions of approval or deemed approved performance standards prescribed in these regulations, and may modify, suspend, or revoke an establishment’s conditional use permit or deemed approved status in order to obtain the compliance of the particular establishment with the provisions of this chapter. This section is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other city officers or bodies in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony of lodging establishment activities in the city. The planning commission shall have the powers and duties assigned to them by the El Cajon Municipal Code and by this chapter. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.110 Grounds for deemed approved status suspension, revocation or termination.
A lodging establishment’s deemed approved status may be suspended, modified or revoked by the planning commission after holding a public hearing in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.25 for failure to comply with the performance standards set forth in section 17.212.070. Notice of such hearing by the planning commission at which it will consider the modification, suspension or revocation of an establishment’s deemed approved status shall be in writing and state the grounds therefore. Notice shall be mailed by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested at least 10 days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.120 Deemed approved status revocation.
Upon revocation of a lodging establishment’s deemed approved status, the planning commission may choose to impose additional conditions of approval on the use of the establishment, or may proceed to revoke the conditional use permit in accordance with section 17.35.030. Upon revocation of a lodging establishment’s deemed approved status, the lodging establishment activity must cease any and all lodging establishment activity until the property owner has applied for and received approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.130 Appeal from suspension, modification or revocation of deemed approved status.
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission to suspend, modify or revoke a lodging establishment’s deemed approved status or conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this code. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.140 Notification to owners of lodging establishments conducting deemed approved activities.
The City shall notify the owner and/or operator of a lodging establishment of the activity’s deemed approved status. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested to the address shown on the city business license and any property owner at the address shown on the county assessor’s property tax assessment records and shall include a copy of the performance standards in this chapter. This notice shall also provide that the activity is required to comply with all performance standards, and that the activity is required to comply with all other aspects of the deemed approved regulations. Should the notice be returned, then the notice shall be sent via regular mail. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this chapter shall not affect the deemed approved status of the activity. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.150 Violations and Penalties.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who causes or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in section 1.24.010 of this code.

B.     In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the City.

C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city of El Cajon from pursuing any and all other legal remedies that may be available, including but not limited to civil actions filed by the city attorney seeking any and all appropriate relief such as civil injunctions and penalties. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

 

17.212.160 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be declared invalid. (Ord. 5083 § 2, 2019.)

Chapter 17.215 AUTOMOTIVE FUELING STATIONS
17.215.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to regulate the establishment and operation of automotive fueling stations in order to ensure compatibility between fueling stations and surrounding land uses. Furthermore, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter to promote pedestrian and vehicular safety in and around automotive fueling stations, and to prevent automotive fueling stations from having negative effects upon the development or redevelopment of property in the vicinity of existing or proposed fueling stations. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.020 Conditional use permit required.
The establishment of an automotive fueling station requires approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this title. This requirement applies to the construction of new fueling stations, the re-opening of existing fueling stations that have been closed for a period of at least 12 months, and the renovation of existing fueling stations when the renovation includes the construction, expansion or relocation of buildings or pump islands. Furthermore, any existing fueling station that is annexed by the city shall obtain approval of a conditional use permit within nine (9) months of annexation or shall be considered a lawful nonconforming use. In obtaining conditional use permit approval, the annexed fueling station must satisfy the criteria listed in this section related to permitted and prohibited activities and services, trash enclosures, storage space, and landscaping within one year. However, the planning commission shall have the authority to modify these requirements if finds that practical difficulties exist, which would make such requirements impossible or impractical to satisfy. New automotive fueling stations may only be established in the C-N, C-G, C-R, and C-M zones. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.030 Nonconforming provisions.
Fueling stations existing prior to January 1, 1973, and fueling stations annexed by the city, which obtain a conditional use permit, but which do not comply with the permitted and prohibited activities and services, or the requirements regarding trash enclosures, storage space, and landscaping, shall be considered lawful nonconforming uses and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120. (Ord. 4968 § 73, 2011)

 

17.215.040 Conditionally permitted ancillary activities.
In addition to the sale of automotive fuels, propane, motor oil, automotive fluids, windshield wipers, and other automotive accessories, the following activities may be conducted at an automotive fueling station, if specifically approved with the granting of a conditional use permit:

A.    The sale and installation of tires.

B.     Automotive service and repair as defined in Chapter 17.105, excluding major engine and transmission repair. All service and repair activities must be conducted completely within an enclosed building.

C.     The conduct of a convenience market.

D.    The conduct of a car wash.

E.     The sale of beer and wine, subject to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.210 and Section 17.215.070.

F.     Pay telephones.

G.    Other uses determined by the planning commission to be compatible with the fueling station and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 5018 § 100, 2015; Ord. 4968 § 75, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.050 Prohibited activities.
The following activities and facilities are prohibited at fueling stations:

A.    The sale of liquor and spirits;

B.     Vehicle storage;

C.     Vehicle sales;

D.    Automotive body repair as defined in Chapter 17.105;

E.     Outdoor automobile lifts. (Ord. 5018 § 102, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.060 Hours of operation.
The hours of operation for a fueling station may be limited as part of the conditional use permit approval. In limiting the hours of operation for a fueling station, the planning commission shall consider the following:

A.    Proximity to residential uses and other sensitive land uses;

B.     The sale of beer and wine;

C.     Crime statistics for the district in which the fueling station is located;

D.    The presence of accessory activities and equipment such car washing, automotive fueling and repair activities, and vacuum cleaners. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.070 Beer and wine sales.
Beer and wine may be sold within a convenience market at a fueling station, subject to the criteria listed below and also in Chapter 17.210.

A.    No beer or wine shall be displayed within five (5) feet of the cash register or the front door, unless it is in a permanently affixed cooler.

B.     No advertisement of beer or wine shall be displayed at motor fuel islands.

C.     No sale of beer or wine shall be made from a drive-in window.

D.    No sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub.

E.     No self-illuminated advertising for beer or wine shall be located on buildings or windows.

F.     All employees shall be at least 21 years of age to sell beer and wine.

G.    The space allotted to the display of beer and/or wine shall not exceed 10 percent of the total available retail floor space in the convenience market.

H.    No video games shall be located within 15 feet of any beer or wine display. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.080 Location.
Fueling stations shall be located only in the C-N, C-G, C-R and C-M zones and only at locations meeting the following criteria:

A.    Corner sites at the intersection of two (2) dedicated public streets;

B.     Lots which side on a freeway right-of-way;

C.     Shopping centers with an area equal to or greater than two (2) acres. (Ord. 4984 § 76, 2013)

 

17.215.090 Site area and frontage.
Fueling stations shall meet the following minimum area requirements:

A.    Corner Site and Freeway Adjacent Site. The minimum area of a corner site, or a site that sides on a freeway right-of-way shall be 20,000 square feet, with a minimum of 150 linear feet on one street.

B.     Shopping Center Site. When fueling stations are developed as a part of a commercial development with an area greater than two (2) acres, the fueling station sites may be reduced to 1,500 square feet, providing the additional required area is provided within the mutual parking and access areas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.100 Setbacks.
All buildings shall be set back from street frontage property lines a minimum of 15 feet, pump islands parallel to the adjacent street shall be situated a minimum of 16 feet from all property lines, pump islands perpendicular to the adjacent street shall be a minimum of 24 feet from all property lines, and canopies shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from any street frontage property line. No setback shall be required for buildings to interior property line, except if the adjacent property is zoned residential, a setback of 15 feet shall be required. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.110 Parking.
There shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space for each pump island and two (2) parking spaces for each service bay. If the fueling station includes a convenience market, additional parking at a ratio of one (1) space per each 250 square feet of floor area shall be required for the area dedicated to the convenience market. All such parking spaces shall be marked clearly and shall meet all city ordinances and standards as to size and accessibility. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.120 Perimeter wall.
Fueling station sites shall be separated from abutting property by a six-foot-high masonry wall constructed on the property line. Such walls shall be reduced to 42 inches in height 10 feet from street frontage property lines. Walls need not be installed when building walls or other acceptable walls already exist on such property lines, or the fueling station is part of a shopping center development. The wall requirement may be modified as part of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.130 Trash and recycling.
Each fueling station shall have at least one (1) trash/recycling enclosure, which meets the requirements listed in Section 17.130.160. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.140 Storage.
Each fueling station shall have a storage area. The required storage area may be constructed outside of the main building, providing that it be enclosed with a view-obscuring gate made of a durable metal material, and be roofed and contiguous to the main building, unless approved otherwise as part of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.150 Landscaping.
At least eight (8) percent of the site shall be landscaped with plant materials. Planting areas shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    Four-feet-inside-dimensioned planters along all exterior property lines, except for driveways. Planters may be rounded at driveway entrances;

B.     A planting area at the intersecting corner of the site, from curb cut to curb cut, containing a minimum of 150 square feet of landscaping;

C.     A series of tree wells, each situated a maximum distance of 20 feet on center along all interior property lines, having a minimum inside dimension of four (4) feet square and containing at least one 15-gallon tree of a variety, subject to city approval;

D.    Except for common traffic drive aisles, fueling stations within shopping centers or tourist centers shall be delineated from the remainder of the property by a landscaped buffer with minimum inside dimensions of four (4) feet and enclosed by a six-inch concrete curb. Common and integrated traffic drive aisles between the fueling station and the remainder of the property shall be encouraged;

E.     Plant material shall be subject to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.195 and shall be chosen for attractiveness, drought tolerance, durability and ability to screen sound and visual elements. Plantings shall include a mixture of trees, shrubs and ground cover. Artificial plant material shall be prohibited except that ground cover may be of rock, bark or artificial turf. All planting areas shall be provided with a permanent irrigation system designed by a licensed landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor and of a design suitable for the type and arrangement of the plant materials selected. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.160 On-site lighting.
On-site light shall be required that is adequate for pedestrian and vehicular safety and sufficient to minimize security problems. However, in no case shall the lighting create a nuisance to any surrounding properties. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.170 Outdoor display of auto-related merchandise.
Tires, windshield wipers, lubricants, automotive fluids, and similar auto-related merchandise may be displayed outdoors in racks or cabinets provided that such racks or cabinets not be located within 15 feet of any street property line or in conflict with any designated on-site drive aisles or parking spaces. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.215.180 Location of accessory outdoor equipment.
Accessory outdoor equipment including but not limited to compressed air and water stations, vacuum cleaners, propane tanks, pay telephones, etc. may be permitted outside of required drive aisles and parking stalls and subject to the following distance and screening requirements:

A.    Pay telephones shall visible from, and shall be set back at least 15 feet from, the public right-of-way.

B.     Vacuum cleaners shall not be located within 15 feet of the public right-of-way, nor within 50 feet of residentially zoned property or other sensitive land uses.

C.     Other accessory equipment such as compressed air and water stations shall be located at least 15 feet from the public right-of-way and from any residentially zoned property.

D.    Exceptions may be made to the setbacks listed above for equipment that is required by other agencies and is related to soil contaminant remediation, and for equipment related to air quality management. Unless specifically addressed in the approving conditional use permit, such exceptions shall be at the discretion of the director. All such equipment shall be screened from view of the public right-of-way by buildings. landscaping or an equipment enclosure. Such landscaping and equipment enclosures are subject to the approval of the director. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.220 DENSITY BONUS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
17.220.010 Intent and purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to: (1) comply with State Density Bonus Law (California Government Code Section 65915); and (2) implement the housing element of the El Cajon general plan. The regulations are intended to materially assist the housing industry in providing adequate and affordable shelter for all economic segments of the community and to provide a balance of housing opportunities for senior, low income and very low-income households, as well as moderate income owners of condominium or planned developments as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351, subdivisions (f) and (k), respectively, throughout the City. It is intended that the affordable housing density bonus and any additional development incentive be available for use in all types of residential developments. It is also intended that these regulations implement the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. It is further intended that these regulations will require any increase in density of residential developments to be distributed and constructed within the same development site as the market rate housing; however, in no event shall the total number of residential units granted exceed 135% of the usual maximum density. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.220.020 Applicability.
This chapter applies to any residential development of five (5) or more dwelling units (before density bonus is applied) when the written request of an applicant proposes density beyond that permitted by the underlying zone in exchange for an agreement that a portion of the total dwelling units in the proposed development is reserved for low or very low-income households, senior citizens or moderate income families in a condominium or planned development.

To the extent that any provision of this chapter conflicts with State Density Bonus Law, as amended from time to time, the provisions of State Density Bonus Law shall be applied in lieu of any conflicting provisions below. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.220.030 Definitions.
The following terms are hereby defined for the purposes of this chapter:

“Affordable housing agreement” means an agreement between the applicant and the city guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership units to applicable income households for a period of not less than 30 years, and is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

“Affordable housing costs” means those amounts set forth in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 50052.5.

“Appreciation” means the increase in value of a moderate income unit in a condominium or planned development project approved as a density bonus unit as determined by the difference between the original market value of the unit minus the price of the unit as sold to the first moderate income purchaser. If the value of the unit increases, the city and the initial purchaser shall divide the “appreciation” by respective percentage share with the city’s share equal to the percentage that the original sales price was less than fair market price at the time of original sale. So, if the original sales price was $200,000 for a unit with a fair market price of $300,000, the original unit sold for two-thirds or 66.67 percent of its fair market price and the city’s share of appreciation would be 33.33 percent.

“Child care facility” means a child day care facility, other than a family day care home, including but not limited to infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities and school age child care centers licensed by the state.

“Concession or incentive” means:

1.     A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions;

2.     Approval of mixed use development in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located; or

3.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.

“Condominium project” means a project as defined by Section 1351(f) of the California Civil Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Density bonus” for housing projects that have the requisite percentage of housing reserved for senior citizen housing developments, lower income households or very-low income households, means a density increase of at least 20 percent, but not more than 35 percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable Zoning Code and land use element of the general plan as of the date of application by the applicant to the City.

“Density bonus” for housing projects that are condominium projects or planned developments in which at least 10 percent of the total dwelling units are reserved for persons and families of moderate income, means a density increase of at least five (5) percent, but not more than 35 percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan as of the date of application.

“Development standard” includes site or construction conditions that apply to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

“Families of low or moderate income” means persons or families whose income meets the requirements set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 50093.

“Housing development” means one or more groups of projects for residential units with a minimum of five (5) residential units, including a condominium project and a planned development. “Housing development” also includes either (1) a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use, or (2) the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of California Government Code Section 65863.4, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 65863.4, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

“Lower income households” means households defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 50079.5. At the time of the adoption of this chapter Section 50079.5 defines “lower income households” as those whose income is equal to or less than 80% of the area median income (“AMI”).

“Maximum allowable residential density” means the density allowed under the Zoning Code, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range applicable to the project.

“Persons and families of moderate income” means persons and families defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 50093. At the time of the adoption of this chapter Section 50093 defines “moderate income households” as those whose income does not exceed 120% of the area median income.

“Planned development” or “planned unit development” or “planned residential development” means a project as defined by Section 1351(k) of the California Civil Code, and as defined by a planned unit development or planned residential development in this Title.

“Senior citizen housing development” means a project as defined by Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 51.3.

“Very low income households” means households defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 50105. At the time of the adoption of this chapter Section 50105 defines “very low income households” as those whose income is equal to or less than 50% of the area median income. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.220.040 Density bonus affordability and longevity.
A.    Affordability in General. The affordable dwellings units proposed or constructed as defined in this subdivision shall be subject to an affordable housing agreement, and such deed restrictions and other applicable documents, approved by the city attorney, ensuring continued affordability of the dwelling units for a period of not less than 30 years or a longer period of time (if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, first time home buyer’s program, rental subsidy program or any local, state and federal laws, regulations or statutes). Affordability limits are established as follows:

1.     Rental units targeted for lower income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 60 percent of AMI.

2.     Rental units targeted for very low-income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 50 percent of AMI.

3.     Ownership units shall be made available only to households whose income does not exceed the limits for the targeted households for the duration of the affordable housing agreement.

B.     Affordability for Moderate-Income Condominium or Planned Development Units. The city shall ensure that the initial occupant of each moderate-income unit that is directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a condominium project or planned development is a person or family of moderate income as defined above in section 17.220.030. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be used as required by California Government Code section 65915, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any applicable state law replacing section 65915. The city’s share shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial sales price of the moderate-income household was less than the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. If there is any direct financial contribution from the city through participation in the cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction the city may limit the amount of the appreciation upon resale for at least 30 years or more, if required by the project funding source.

C.     Affordability Covenants. Affordability shall be ensured by requiring that the applicant enter into an affordable housing agreement which shall be reviewed by the city department of community development and approved by the city attorney and shall be recorded and run with the land. The 30 year or longer affordability period shall commence from the date that the final certificate of occupancy is issued, or the date of the recording of the affordable housing agreement, whichever shall last occur. (Ord. 5072 § 35, 2018)

 

17.220.050 Density bonus calculations, incentives, concessions and location.
A.    Density Bonus Calculations. Upon written request of an applicant through the processing of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this title, the city council shall grant a density bonus of at least 20 percent, but not more than 35 percent, and incentives or concessions as provided in this section when the applicant for the housing development agrees or proposes to construct at least any one of the following: (Note: The applicant shall also simultaneously process each and every other development application required by this title for the proposed project.)

1.     10 percent of the total units of a housing development for lower income households;

2.     Five (5) percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households;

3.     A senior citizen housing development, including a mobile home park that limits residency to senior citizens; or

4.     10 percent of the total units in a common interest development as defined by section 1351 of the California Civil Code for persons and families of moderate income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase.

For the purpose of this section, “total units” does not include density bonus units.

B.     Additional Density Bonus.

1.     If an applicant exceeds the percentages set forth in subsection A of this section the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus above 20 percent calculated as follows:

a.     For each one (1) percent increase above 10 percent in the percentage of units affordable to lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half (1.5) percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent for the total project;

b.     For each one (1) percent increase above five (5) percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half (2.5) percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent for the total project;

c.     For each one (1) percent above 10 percent in the percentage of units affordable to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one (1) percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent for the total project.

Note: All density bonus calculations resulting in fractions shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

C.     Incentives or Concessions.

1.     An applicant may request incentives and/or concessions pursuant to this subsection in conjunction with a density bonus request. The applicant shall submit a written request to the community development department, detailing the specific incentives and/or concessions that the applicant requests.

2.     Number of Incentives/Concessions. The applicant shall be entitled to receive the following number of incentives or concessions:

a.     One (1) incentive or concession for projects that include at least five (5) percent of the total units for very low income households, or at least 10 percent of the total units for lower income households or persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned unit development.

b.     Two (2) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 10 percent of the total units for very low income households, or at least 20 percent of the total units for lower income households or persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

c.     Three (3) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 15 percent of the total units for very low income households, or at least 30 percent of the total units for lower income households or persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

3.     In addition to all other application requirements, an applicant requesting incentive(s) and/or concession(s) shall also show, using one of the following methods, that the concession(s), and/or incentive(s), is necessary to make the density bonus housing units economically feasible:

a.     A development pro forma with the capital costs, operating expenses, return on investment, loan-to-value ratio and the debt coverage ratio including the contribution(s) provided by any applicable subsidy program(s), and the economic effect created by the minimum 30 year use and income restrictions on the affordable housing units; or

b.     An appraisal report indicating the value of the density bonus and of the incentive(s)/concession(s); or

c.     A use of funds statement identifying the projected financing gap for the project with the affordable housing units. The analysis shall show how much of the funding gap is covered by the density bonus and how much by the incentive(s)/concession(s).

4.     When the city council grants a density bonus in accordance with this section, the city council shall grant the additional concessions or incentives requested by the applicant, unless it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that:

a.     The concessions or incentives are not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in section 17.220.040; or

b.     The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact (as defined in California Government Code section 65589.5(d)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any applicable state law replacing section 65589.5(d)(2) upon the public health and safety or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or

c.     The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law; or

d.     The concession would have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

D.    The granting of a density bonus, incentive or concession shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment or zoning change. The request for such items shall be processed as part of the applicable planning application as described in this title.

E.     This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city, or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements.

F.     All affordable units shall be of similar design and quality as the market rate units, including exteriors and floor plans.

G.    All affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development rather than clustered in a single area or building. (Ord. 5072 § 35, 2018)

 

17.220.060 Donation of land.
When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development donates land to the city that meets the requirements of this section and California Government Code Section 65915(g)(2), the applicant shall be entitled to a 15 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable Zoning Code and land use element of the general plan for the entire development.

A.    The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land must be sufficient to permit construction of units in an amount not less than 10 percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development; and

B.     The units shall be affordable to very low-income households.

C.     Any increase in the density required by this section shall be in addition to any increase in density provided to the applicant under Section 17.220.050 provided, however, that the project shall not be allowed density bonuses under this section and under Section 17.220.050 in excess of 35 percent combined. (Ord. 4984 § 4, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.220.070 Child care facilities.
When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of this title and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the following shall apply:

A.    The city council shall grant one of the following, unless based upon substantial evidence, the council finds that the community has adequate child care facilities:

1.     An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; or

2.     An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

B.     The city council shall require the following as conditions of approving the housing development; these requirements shall be included in the affordable housing agreement:

1.     The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 17.220.040; and

2.     Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income in the proposed housing development pursuant to subsections A and B of Section 17.220.050.

C.     The city council shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility, if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the city already has adequate child care facilities.

D.    The density bonus allowed under this section shall be in addition to any density bonuses already given to the applicant pursuant to Sections 17.220.050 and 17.220.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.220.080 Development standards.
A.    The city shall not apply any development standard that will have the effect of precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of this title while at the same time at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter.

B.     All development standards of the underlying zone shall apply to density bonus projects, unless one or more concessions have been granted.

C.     Any discretionary actions for modification or waiver shall be processed as a conditional use permit per Chapter 17.50 of this title in addition to each and every other development application required by this Title for the proposed housing project.

D.    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in California Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any applicable state law replacing Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon the health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

E.     Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.220.090 Parking standards.
A.    Upon request of the applicant for any housing development qualifying for a density bonus under this chapter, the following maximum parking standards shall apply, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, for the entire housing development:

1.     One (1) onsite parking space per dwelling unit that has up to one (1) bedroom;

2.     Two (2) onsite parking spaces per dwelling unit that has two (2) to three (3) bedrooms; and

3.     Two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces per dwelling unit that has more than three (3) bedrooms.

B.     All parking calculations for the development resulting in a fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

C.     Parking may be provided by tandem parking and need not be covered or garaged, but may not be on street parking.

D.    An applicant may request additional parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this section pursuant to subsection D of Section 17.220.050. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.220.100 Appeals.
Any decision of the commission to deny or limit any request for density bonuses, incentives, concessions, or waivers/modifications of development standards may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.36 of this code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.220.110 Penalties.
A.    Any violations of the density bonus agreement, deed restriction or other provisions of this chapter may be deemed a nuisance by the director and abated in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code. In addition to the right to abate a nuisance, the director may assess civil penalties in the manner described in Section 1.24.020 by Notice and Order properly made and the city attorney may seek recovery of civil penalties in the manner described in Section 1.24.020.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A, above, any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted in the manner described in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.225 MISCELLANEOUS SPECIAL USES AND REGULATIONS
17.225.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter to list regulations and development standards for special and/or unique land uses and facilities and under simplified headings. Because of their unique nature, the uses listed in this chapter shall be subject to special standards. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.020 Bed and breakfast establishments.
Bed and breakfast establishments as defined in Chapter 17.105 may be permitted in any residential zone subject to the granting of an administrative zoning permit processed in accordance with Chapter 17.40 of this title and compliance with the following development criteria:

A.    The residence shall have received a historical rating of “2” or higher as described in the SANDAG historical preservation survey of El Cajon dated November, 1985 and on file in the offices of the department of community development;

B.     The owner/operator shall live on the property;

C.     The maximum length of stay shall be seven (7) days;

D.    The maximum number of guest rooms shall be established as part of the administrative zoning permit;

E.     Breakfast is the only meal that may be served and then only to registered guests. No kitchens shall be permitted in any guest rooms;

F.     Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of two (2) spaces for the owner/operator and one (1) space for each guest room. All parking spaces shall comply with the parking location and improvement requirements applicable in the underlying zone;

G.    Signs shall be limited to one (1) unlighted monument sign which is a maximum of six (6) feet high and 12 square feet in sign area or one (1) unlighted building face/wall sign which is a maximum of 12 square feet in sign area. No monument sign shall be located in the public right-of-way nor shall its location affect visibility from any driveways or public streets;

H.    The proposed bed and breakfast establishment shall satisfy all applicable fire, building and health codes; and

I.      A business license shall be obtained and maintained in effect at all times and any transient occupancy taxes required by Chapter 3.44 of this code shall be collected and paid. (Ord. 5072 § 37, 2018)

 

17.225.024 Card rooms – Non-gambling.
A.    Card room - non-gambling, may be permitted in the city as provided in Section 17.140.210 and Section 17.145.150 of this Title, subject to approval of a special operation license as provided in Chapter 5.16 of Title 5, compliance with Chapter 5.28 of Title 5, and compliance with the following development standards.

1.     There shall be a minimum of 900 feet separating card room facilities, the distance to be measured from property lines of the parcel on which the card rooms are intended to be located.

2.     There shall be a maximum of eight card rooms permitted within the city.

3.     Within Specific Plan No. 182 a facility with a card room, whether restaurant or bona fide club, society, professional organization, union hall, fraternal organization, and similar use, must be a minimum of 5,000 square feet. Outside of Specific Plan No. 182 a facility with a card room must be a minimum of 2,500 square feet.

B.     The following operational performance standards shall apply to all card rooms in the city.

1.     Windows in card rooms shall remain transparent/not obstructed during hours of operation.

2.     Operators shall enforce, post and maintain a sign(s) in the card room visible/legible to all patrons stating “Gambling and smoking are prohibited in this establishment”.

3.     Operators shall voluntarily allow city staff right-of-entry into the card room during all hours of operation, for the purpose of monitoring compliance with and enforcing applicable city regulations, including taking photographs inside for evidentiary purposes.

4.     No charge shall be made for the use of any card room facility.

 

5.     No gambling of any sort shall be permitted at any card room facility.

 

 

 

6.     A card room may only be operated as an accessory use to a primary use that operates under any business model (profit or non-profit) or organization, provided that the primary use is either a bona fide club, society, professional organization, union hall, fraternal organization or a restaurant.

7.     Card room tables, accessory to a club, society, professional organization, union hall, fraternal organization, and similar use shall be for the exclusive use of members of such club, society, or organization, and their guests, and shall be located at the same address as the business address of the organization.

8.     Card rooms may only operate during the same hours and frequency as the primary use.

9.     Card playing may be restricted to membership, and guests of members, for clubs, but must be open and available to the general public when located in restaurants.

(Ord. 4990 § 8, 2013)

 

17.225.026 Drive-through facilities.
Drive-through facilities shall be operated in accordance with the follow standards:

A.    For purposes of determining the stacking capacity of vehicles in a drive-through service lane, the minimum length provided per vehicle shall be 25 lineal feet. It shall be left for determination at the time of review and approval how much total stacking capacity is adequate for the use proposed.

B.     Notice of new drive-throughs must be provided to blind, disabled, or aged communities prior to any decision by the director, the planning commission, and the city council.

C.     If a business with an approved drive-through ceases operations, any new use conducting business at the site shall continue to operate the drive-through.

D.    If a new business proposes to occupy the site and discontinue operating the drive-through, it shall be cause for the drive-through lane, including public right-of-way improvements, to be removed and replaced with improvements that comply with applicable standards, as determined by the director. Any decision by the director may be appealed pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. (Ord. 5018 § 105, 2015)

 

17.225.030 Family day care homes.
A.    Family day care homes, small, as defined in Chapter 17.105, are a permitted use in all residential zones.

B.     Family day care homes, large, as defined by Chapter 17.105, are permitted in all residential zones, upon approval of an administrative zoning permit, as described in Chapter 17.40.

1.     Prior to granting approval for a large family day care home, the director shall verify that the proposed large family day care home meets the following standards:

a.     The business operator shall demonstrate that one (1) off-street parking space for every employee (including the business owner) will be available during business hours on the subject property;

b.     The subject property shall provide adequate space on-site for the safe loading and unloading of passengers. As an alternative, the property may be located on a through street that allows on-street parking in front of the subject property;

c.     Any rear or side yard used as a play area for the large family day care home shall be separated from adjoining properties by a six-foot high solid fence or wall in good condition; and

d.     No portion of the large family day care home (or accessory structures used for day care on the subject property) shall have been constructed or converted in violation of local building and zoning regulations.

2.     Large family day care homes must also comply with any regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Section 1597.46(d) of the California Health and Safety Code. Compliance with such ordinances shall be no more demanding for the large family day care home than for any other residential use.

3.     In no event shall a large family day care home be approved to operate in an illegally converted garage.

(Ord. 5018 § 107, 2015)

 

17.225.040 Garage sales.
A maximum of six (6) garage sales may be conducted during a single calendar year on any residentially developed property. No single garage sale event shall exceed one (1) calendar day. This limitation applies to multi-family residential developments as well as single-family homes. Therefore, residents in multi-family developments are encouraged to coordinate their garage sales. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.050 Home occupations.
Home occupation means an occupation lawfully conducted within a dwelling by an inhabitant of such dwelling. A home occupation shall meet each of the requirements set forth in subsections (A) through (J) of this section, unless otherwise excepted by subsection (K), and further shall be subject to subsections (L) and (N) of this section.

A.    One for which no customer comes to the dwelling to receive the service or merchandise offered by the home occupation;

B.     One for which no employees other than inhabitants of the dwelling work at or come to the dwelling;

C.     One for which no sign or other advertising is displayed;

D.    One in which no merchandise, equipment or materials are kept or stored at the dwelling or outside the dwelling, except those necessary to maintain an office;

E.     One for which the required garage, carport or parking space for the dwelling is not converted for use in any way by the home occupation to preclude its use for parking;

F.     One in which there is no alteration of the residential character of the premises;

G.    One for which all contacts with customers or clients take place on-site only by mail, telephone, or electronic media, such as a computer and/or facsimile machine, or entirely off-site;

 

H.    One in which any equipment necessary to perform the home occupation on the premises must be kept in a pickup truck or van with a maximum capacity of one (1) ton or a trailer that can be towed by a truck or van;

I.      One which does not create a nuisance by reason of noise, dust, odor, vibration, fumes, smoke, electrical interference or similar conflicts with compatibility; and

J.      One for which a valid business license is obtained and annually renewed.

K.    Notwithstanding the above, any home occupation conducted by a disabled person or by a person for therapy and not deemed detrimental to the subject area may be permitted, provided the applicant’s claim for handicap or therapy is supported by a written statement by a licensed medical doctor.

L.     Notwithstanding the above, a cottage food operation may be permitted to allow for the production and sale of cottage food products. A cottage food operator must obtain and maintain required permits from the County Department of Environmental Health in order to operate a cottage food home occupation business.

M.    Notwithstanding the above, any home occupation may be revoked by the director of community development upon the violation of any requirements of this title or any conditions of approval, unless the violation is corrected within five days of giving written notice thereof.

N.    Any decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission for review pursuant to Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 5018 § 109, 2015)

 

17.225.060 Kitchen facilities in hotels and motels.
A maximum of 10 percent of the total number of hotel or motel units may contain kitchen facilities with any fractional total rounded down to the next lowest whole number. (Ord. 5018 § 111, 2015)

 

17.225.070 Massage establishments.
A.    Massage services as an accessory use, as defined in sections 17.105.020 and 17.115.110, to a permitted primary use shall be permitted and not be subject to spatial requirements in subsections B and C included in this section.

B.     Massage establishments shall comply with all of the requirements provided in Chapter 5.40 of the El Cajon Municipal Code and shall be located pursuant to the following minimum proximity requirements:

1.     No massage establishments shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other massage establishment or adult entertainment establishment as defined in section 17.45.040;

2.     No massage establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any residential zone; and

3.     No massage establishment shall be located within 600 feet of any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land uses:

a.     Religious facility;

b.     Courthouse;

c.     Public playground/park/recreation area; or

d.     School.

C.     Distance, without regard to intervening structures shall be:

1.     A straight line measure from the closest exterior structural wall of any massage establishment to any other massage establishment, or adult entertainment establishment as defined in section 17.45.040; and

2.     A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any massage establishment and to the closest property line of a religious facility, courthouse, public playground/park/recreation area, school, or residential zone.

(Ord. 5072 § 37, 2018)

 

17.225.080 Mobile homes, temporary buildings used as offices.
An owner may use a trailer, mobile home or other temporary building or structure as a temporary business office, trade or business facility for a period of time and upon such reasonable conditions as approved by a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.75. No such trailer, mobile home, or structure shall be used as a permanent business or other permanent trade or business facility. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.090 Outdoor dining areas.
Outdoor dining areas are permitted in association with otherwise permitted and legally established eating and drinking establishments, subject to the following guidelines of this section. The total area dedicated to outdoor dining shall not exceed the area dedicated to indoor dining. The outdoor dining area shall not be located in the public right-of-way, unless approved by the department of public works. No additional parking is required for the outdoor dining area as long as the area dedicated to outdoor dining is less than the area dedicated to indoor dining.

All outdoor dining uses shall maintain ingress/egress and pedestrian circulation subject to building and fire safety code requirements including Americans with Disabilities Act requirements; and shall comply with the following minimum requirements:

A.    Maintain a minimum four (4) foot wide access in a direct and straight path to the building entrance clear and unimpeded for ingress and egress.

B.     Maintain a minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalk for general pedestrian circulation adjacent to the use.

C.     Maintain a minimum fifteen (15) foot radius from street corner intersections, measured from the back of the curb.

The location and use of the outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians, goods or vehicles; required parking spaces; driveways or parking aisles; entrances; legal signs; utilities or other improvements. When located adjacent to parking spaces, driveways or parking lot aisles, a physical barrier such as curb or railing shall be provided.

Furnishings shall be strictly limited to chairs, benches and tables, and single pole table umbrellas designed for outdoor use. All furnishings and barriers shall be maintained free of appendages or conditions that pose a hazard to pedestrians and vehicles.

Table center and freestanding umbrellas are permitted.

The outdoor seating area shall be located proximate to the business providing the seating, such as adjacent to the building or within courtyards. Outdoor seating areas shall not reduce, be located within, or damage any required landscaped area.

 

Any deviation from the standards listed in this subsection shall require an administrative zoning permit in compliance with Chapter 17.140. (Ord. 5081 § 35, 2019.)

 

17.225.100 Resource recovery centers.
Resource recovery centers authorized by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act may be located in any commercial or industrial zone (except the Office-Professional zone) subject to the processing of a conditional use permit. This requirement shall not apply to the installation of reverse vending machines used for purposes of returning beverage containers. Resource recovery centers located in commercial zones shall be conducted within permanent enclosed structures. (Ord. 4968 § 77, 2011)

 

17.225.110 Roadside stand.
Farm products may be sold at roadside stands in the O-S, RS-40, and RS-20 zones, the design subject to the approval of an administrative zoning permit and provided the product is grown or produced on the same property. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.120 Satellite antennas.
A.    Building Permit Required. Prior to installation, a building permit shall be required for any satellite antenna (as defined in Chapter 17.105) that is:

1.     Roof-mounted or otherwise mounted upon an existing or proposed structure regardless of the size of such antenna; or

2.     Ground-mounted and greater than 10 feet in diameter; or

3.     Ground-mounted and greater than 11 feet in height as measured from the ground to the top of the antenna when fully positioned for operational use; or

4.     Ground-mounted and located between a building and any exterior yard in residential zones or between a building and any public street in office, commercial or industrial zones.

B.     Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to all satellite antenna installations regardless of type, size or location or whether a building permit is required.

1.     All antennas, but especially roof-mounted antennas, shall be positioned so as to minimize their appearance from the street level of surrounding properties;

2.     The color of an antenna shall be harmonious with its background or the surrounding area;

3.     No antenna shall contain any advertising copy or be used as a sign;

4.     No antenna shall occupy a required parking space;

5.     Any roof-mounted antenna greater than five (5) feet in diameter shall be constructed of mesh material as opposed to being solid unless the applicant can demonstrate that a solid roof-mounted antenna greater than five (5) feet in diameter will be adequately screened from view;

6.     Wind-load calculations shall be required for all roof-mounted antennas, all ground-mounted antennas greater than 10 feet in diameter and all ground-mounted antennas greater than 11 feet in overall height;

7.     No satellite antenna shall be permitted in the front setback (yard) in a residential zone; and

8.     Only one satellite antenna shall be permitted on any lot for any single business enterprise, unless additional antennas are approved by the planning commission.

(Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.130 Take-out restaurants.
Take-out restaurants, as defined in Chapter 17.105 shall not be required to provide the increased parking that is required for other restaurants. However, take-out restaurants may not provide tables, counters, or any other amenities for the purpose of on-site dining either inside or outside of the establishment. A take-out restaurant shall be allowed a maximum of eight (8) indoor seats for the convenience of customers who are waiting for take-out orders. (Ord. 5018 § 113, 2015)

 

17.225.140 Temporary construction buildings.
Temporary structures for the housing of tools and equipment or containing supervisory offices in connection with major construction on major construction projects may be established and maintained during the progress of such construction on such project, provided that such temporary structure may not be maintained for a period exceeding one (1) year. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.150 Temporary real estate office.
One (1) temporary real estate office may be located on any new subdivision in any zone, provided that such office in any “R” zone shall be removed at the end of two (2) years from the date of recording of the map of the subdivision upon which such office is located, or completion of original sales, whichever is earlier. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.160 Temporary shade structures.
A.    One temporary shade structure may be allowed as an accessory carport for one vehicle in front of an existing single-family home, upon approval of an administrative zoning permit, if performance standards 1 or 2 below, and performance standards 3, 4 and 5 below, are met:

 

1.     The lot on which the shade structure is proposed contains a single-family home, but not two covered parking spaces.

2.     One or more of the residents in the home on the property has been issued a disabled person placard or plates by the department of motor vehicles.

3.     The temporary shade structure is designed and will be located in such a manner that it will not create a sight distance hazard.

4.     No temporary shade structure shall encroach into the public right-of-way.

5.     The area occupied by the temporary shade structure is paved and in compliance with Section 17.140.160.A.2.

6.     The temporary shade structure is a light weight metal frame with canvas or fabric-like vinyl covering that does not trigger the need for a building permit.

B.     Temporary shade structures, including the frame and covering, shall be well maintained. Any worn, torn, faded, bent, or graffiti marred structure or covering, if located within public view, whether or not it was authorized with an administrative zoning permit, shall be removed. (Ord. 4968 § 79, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.170 Trailer used as residence.
During the construction of a permanent residence on a lot pursuant to a valid building permit, the director may grant permission to an owner or caretaker to use a trailer or recreation vehicle as a temporary residence on the lot during construction of the residence, subject to the approval of a temporary use permit as described in Chapter 17.75 of this title. The permit shall be approved for a period of not more than six (6) months, unless extended by the director. All required permits to temporarily place the trailer or recreation vehicle on the lot, including connection to utilities, shall be obtained. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.225.180 Transition service centers and emergency shelters.
A.    Transition service centers or emergency shelters, as defined in Chapter 17.105, may be located on properties in the C-M and M zones, subject to the approval of a site development plan permit (SDP), and processed in accordance with Chapter 17.65 and the following requirements. Transition service centers or emergency shelters may be located in the C-G and C-R zones, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit (CUP).

B.     The following development standards and operational procedures shall be applicable in the review of an SDP or CUP proposed for a transition service center or an emergency shelter—either temporary or permanent.

1.     Development Standards.

a.     A detailed site plan shall be submitted to the department of community development and accepted for review upon a determination that the application is complete, including the payment of the applicable processing fee.

b.     The applicant shall submit a detailed operation plan. The operation plan shall include, but not be limited to, the maximum client occupancy consistent with applicable building and fire codes; the number of case managers and security personnel; the hours of operation; and a description of all case management programs and their objectives.

c.     The applicant shall submit an exterior lighting plan in accordance with Section 17.130.150.

d.     The plan shall reflect sufficient off-street parking spaces to accommodate support staff and vehicles.

e.     All activities, except outdoor recreational activities, shall be conducted totally within an enclosed building or other structures in compliance with applicable fire and building codes.

f.      Other development standards as determined through the review process.

2.     Operation Procedures.

a.     All clients must be referred to the center/shelter by a recognized social service agency. No drop-in clients will be accepted.

b.     No clients under the influence of or in possession of illegal drugs, drug paraphernalia, alcohol or weapons will be accepted.

c.     All clients shall comply with the center/shelter behavioral rules at all times. Failure to comply may result in expulsion from the center/shelter.

d.     No loitering, sleeping or camping shall be permitted outside the center/shelter or on any adjacent properties in violation of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

e.     All clients shall participate in case management programs presented by the shelter/center or any affiliated social service agency or service provider.

f.      Other operational procedures as determined through the review process.

(Ord. 5018 § 115, 2015)

 

17.225.185 Emergency housing pilot project.
Emergency housing units may be allowed on properties in residential zones including the MU Overlay (mixed use) zone, subject to the approval of an Administrative Zoning Permit (AZP), and processed in accordance with Chapter 17.40 and the following requirements, and subject to the following criteria.

A.    Definitions.

1.     Emergency housing unit. An emergency housing unit means either a unit on wheels as defined in section 17.225.185 (B)(4)(a), or as an emergency sleeping cabin as defined in El Cajon Municipal Code section 15.04.105 and the California Building Code. This does not include tents, membrane structures, mobile homes, or recreational vehicles.

2.     Non-governmental institutional use. A non-governmental institutional use means a use dedicated to serving the community through social, health, cultural, and religious means.

B.     Development Standards.

1.     Property shall be a minimum of one and one half (1.5) acres and front on a primary or secondary thoroughfare as shown on the City’s General Plan map.

2.     Primary use of the property shall be a non-governmental institutional use as defined in section 17.225.185 (A)(2).

3.     Housing units shall meet the underlying zone’s primary setbacks and be separated from each other by a minimum of six (6) feet.

 

4.     Housing units may be allowed in two forms: on wheels or standard construction as defined in the California Building Code and El Cajon Municipal Code section 15.04.105. In either case, there shall be no more than six (6) units on the subject property.

a.     On wheels standards.

i.      Licensed and registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles and meets American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 119.2 or 119.5 requirements;

ii.     Towable by a bumper hitch, frame-towing hitch, or fifth-wheel connection. Cannot (and is designed not to) move under its own power (no RVs);

iii.    No larger than allowed by California State Law for movement on public highways;

iv.    Has at least seventy (70) square feet of first floor interior living space; and

v.     Has basic functional areas that support normal daily routines such as cooking, sleeping, and lavatory if lavatories are not provided on the subject property in accordance with the operational standards in this section.

b.     Standard construction shall be subject to the California Building Code and El Cajon Municipal Code section 15.04.105, except there shall be no use of generators for electricity.

c.     A detailed management plan shall be required and included with the Administrative Zoning Permit application. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the number of case managers and security personnel; the hours of operation; resident screening procedures; on-site supportive services; cleaning protocols; rules; property management; and a description of all case management programs and their objectives.

d.     Sufficient off-street parking spaces shall be provided to accommodate the primary use and the emergency housing operation.

e.     All activities, except outdoor recreational activities, shall be conducted totally within an enclosed building or other structures in compliance with applicable fire and building codes.

f.      Other development standards may be required as determined through the review process.

5.     Operational Standards.

a.     Occupants of any emergency units shall be limited to homeless individuals in El Cajon and recognized as such by San Diego County Health Services or organizations providing homeless prevention and assistance services.

b.     Occupant’s length of stay shall not exceed ninety (90) days.

c.     On-site security shall be provided on a twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, basis.

d.     All residents and visitors must check in with on-site security to access the site.

e.     Services will be designed to provide basic needs including shelter, sanitation, food, case management and wrap around services, restrooms, and showers facilities, all of which shall be operated by an organization experienced with providing such services.

f.      There shall be no unauthorized loitering, sleeping or camping on the subject property or on any adjacent properties in violation of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

 

C.     This pilot project shall sunset on December 31, 2023, unless extended by the City Council after holding a public hearing in accordance with the El Cajon Municipal Code and governing state statutes. Once this ordinance sunsets, all emergency housing operations shall cease and all housings units shall be removed within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 5103 § 3, 2020)

 

17.225.190 Off-site outdoor automobile sales.
Up to ten off-site outdoor sales events for the sale of automobiles, including but not limited to passenger vehicles, trucks, motorhomes, recreational vehicles, and motorcycles, may be permitted in one calendar year on a qualifying property in the C-R zone, subject to approval of a minor conditional use permit processed in accordance with Chapter 17.50 of this title. In no case shall a single outdoor sales event last longer than 72 hours. Off-site outdoor automobile sales events shall only occur on qualifying properties in the C-R zone that are at least 15 acres in size. (Ord. 4984 § 80, 2013)

 

17.225.200 Alternative lending.
The purpose of this section is to regulate the location of those businesses engaged in alternative lending in the city of El Cajon in order to maintain the city’s character, the diversity and vitality of the community’s commercial areas, and the quality of life of El Cajon residents. It is presumed that establishing or preserving an appropriate and balanced mix of commercial businesses will more effectively serve to achieve this purpose as a strategy to maintain the economic health of the community’s business districts, and will promote the redevelopment of the city.

A.    All alternative lending establishments as defined in Section 17.105.020 shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this title, meet all location requirements, and satisfy all pertinent conditions.

B.     The following location requirements shall be applicable:

 

 

1.     No alternative lending establishment shall be located within 2,640 feet of any other alternative lending establishment.

2.     No alternative lending establishment shall be located within 500 feet from any school, college, university, religious facility, park or playground.

3.     No alternative lending establishment shall be located in, or within 500 feet of the boundaries of Specific Plan No. 182.

4.     No alternative lending establishment shall be located within the boundaries of Specific Plan No. 462.

5.     For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured between the closest property lines of the affected locations or boundaries. (Ord. 5033 §§ 43, 44, 2015; Ord. 5015 § 8, 2014)

 

17.225.210 Tasting rooms.
A tasting room as an accessory use to a primary alcoholic beverage production use may be permitted subject to the following standards:

1.     The tasting room may not exceed fifteen percent of the production gross floor area.

2.     The tasting room may only sell product that is produced on-site.

3.     The hours of the tasting room are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. unless authorized by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5018 § 116, 2015)

 

17.225.220 Farmers markets.
A farmers market may be permitted with approval of an Administrative Zoning Permit and is subject, but not limited, to the following standards:

1.     Comply with all federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to operation, use and enjoyment of the market premises.

2.     All farmers markets must have a designated market manager authorized to direct operations of all vendors participating in the market on the site of the market during all hours of operation.

3.     Farmers market and each of the vendors must obtain and maintain all required operating and health permits, licenses, and certificates of insurance, and these documents shall be in the possession of the farmers market manager or the vendor, as applicable, on the site of the farmers market during all hours of operation.

4.     Farmers markets must have established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of farmers market, hours of operation, maintenance, insurance, security requirements and responsibilities, and appointment of a market manager.

5.     The farmers market manager must provide sufficient trash receptacles. All farmers market shall provide containers for composting, recycling, and solid waste removal in accordance with El Cajon’s Municipal Code Section 13.10.

6.     Any food service shall comply with the standards of the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health.

7.     All farmers markets must provide a minimum of one vehicle parking space for each vendor stall.

 

8.     One portable restroom must be provided for every 250 persons. (Ord. 5033 § 45, 2015)

 

17.225.230 Microbrewery.
A microbrewery may be permitted with approval of a conditional use permit subject, but not limited, to the following standards:

1.     The primary use of the property must be that of a brewery, dedicated solely to the manufacturing of beer.

2.     The subject building must be less than 10,000 square feet.

3.     The sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption is permitted for only those products manufactured on-site.

4.     The establishment may include a tasting room and/or restaurant. (Ord. 5033 § 45, 2015)

 

17.225.240 Food trucks.
A food truck may be permitted with approval of an administrative zoning permit subject, but not limited, to the following standards:

1.     The applicant must obtain and maintain a County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health permit.

2.     The food truck operator must maintain a valid business license.

3.     The food truck must be operated strictly within private property.

4.     No verbal solicitation of business is permitted.

5.     No amplified sound or loudspeakers are permitted.

6.     No selling or serving of alcoholic beverages is permitted.

7.     All equipment associated with the food truck must be contained within the truck.

8.     The area in and around the food truck must be maintained clean and free of litter at all times.

9.     A trash and recycling container must be provided for patrons in an area that does not impede pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

10.   No furnishings are permitted outside of the food truck.

11.   No obstruction for pedestrian, vehicular traffic or business access is permitted. (Ord. 5033 § 45, 2015)

Chapter 17.230 MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
17.230.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to regulate the establishment and operation of motion picture theatres. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.230.020 Conditional use permit required.
The establishment of a motion picture theatre requires approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 and Chapter 17.145 of this title. Each and every requirement listed herein that applies to motion picture theatres shall also apply to adult motion picture theatres. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.230.030 Motion picture theatre defined.
The term “motion picture theatre” shall include, but is not limited to:

A.    Any premises in which motion pictures, films, digital video images, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown as the principal use of the premises or are shown as an adjunct to some other business activity which is conducted on the premises and constitutes a significant portion of business, and wherein such films are shown an average of 20 percent or more of the establishment’s regular business hours, and not to include school or public auditoriums used generally for noncommercial purposes on an infrequent basis, or

B.     A room which contains one or more “motion picture booths,” which shall be defined as an activity to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, computers, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at one time. Such a room containing the described booths may be commonly described as a “peep show establishment.” (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.230.040 Development standards and operational requirements.
Motion picture theaters shall be developed and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning, building and fire safety code requirements. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.235 PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITIES
17.235.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the development and operation of personal storage facilities, also known as self-storage or mini-warehouse facilities. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.020 Conditional use permit required.
A conditional use permit shall be required for the establishment and operation of a self-storage facility and such conditional use permit shall only be authorized in compliance with the land use tables identified in Chapter 17.145 of this title. The conditional use permit shall be processed as described in Chapter 17.50 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.030 Conduct of use.
With the exception of motor vehicles and boats, all storage shall occur within a completely enclosed building. (Ord. 5018 § 118, 2015)

 

17.235.040 Prohibited activities.
The following uses and activities are expressly prohibited at self-storage facilities:

A.    Vehicle repairs.

B.     Manufacturing.

C.     The conduct of any business activity other than the operation of the self-storage facility and any approved accessory services. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

 

17.235.050 Caretaker unit.
A self-storage facility may include a single caretaker’s unit subject to the parking requirements listed in this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.060 General development standards.
A self-storage facility shall satisfy all of the development standards for the zone in which it is located and all other general development standards listed in this title except as specifically modified by this chapter. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.070 Parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:

A.    One parking space per every 250 square feet of gross floor area dedicated to office use. Such parking shall be provided in close proximity to the office.

B.     Two (2) parking spaces for the caretaker’s unit. Such parking shall be provided in close proximity to the caretaker’s unit.

C.     At least two (2) parking spaces located in close proximity to exterior doorways or elevator entrances leading to storage units with internal access from common hallways.

D.    The planning commission may require additional parking based upon the physical design and proposed floor area of the self-storage facility. (Ord. 5018 § 120, 2015; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.080 Loading areas.
Self-storage facilities shall provide adequate loading areas for all storage units. Such loading areas shall have a minimum width of 10 feet, shall be located directly adjacent to all exterior doorways providing direct access to individual storage units, and shall be clearly marked and signed as loading areas. The loading areas shall be provided separate from and in addition to any required emergency vehicle access lanes, or on-site driveway aisles. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.090 Fences, walls, and gates.
Self-storage facilities may include fences, walls, and gates as permitted in the zones in which they are located. Where justified, the planning commission may approve walls or fences with a greater height. However, no such fence or wall shall obstruct the visibility of motorists. Automated security gates shall be permitted but shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from the public right-of-way and shall not impede or obstruct the required parking and loading areas or the required emergency vehicles access. (Ord. 5018 § 122, 2015)

 

17.235.100 Trash and recycling enclosures.
Self-storage facilities shall provide at lest one (1) double binned trash and recycling enclosure designed in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.130.160. Such enclosures shall be placed in a convenient location for the use of self storage patrons. Additional trash and recycling enclosures may be required based upon the physical design and proposed floor area of the self-storage facility. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

17.235.110 Landscaping.
Landscaping shall be required for self-storage facilities pursuant to the requirements of Section 17.195.100. However, landscaping shall not be required in loading areas. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.235.120 Truck, trailer and moving van rentals.
Truck, trailer, and moving van rentals may be authorized at self-storage facilities provided that rental trucks and trailers are parked on-site in designated parking areas that are outside of the parking, loading, and emergency access lanes required for the self-storage use. Furthermore, trucks and trailers may not be parked in areas that are visually prominent as viewed from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.240 TOBACCO SHOPS, SMOKE SHOPS AND ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOPS
17.240.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the location and operation of retail purveyors of tobacco and tobacco products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances, hookahs, and electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops in the city of El Cajon in order to maintain the city’s character, the diversity and vitality of the community’s commercial areas, and the quality of life of El Cajon residents. It is presumed that establishing or preserving an appropriate and balanced mix of commercial businesses will more effectively serve to achieve this purpose as a strategy to maintain the economic health of the community’s business districts and its suburban ambiance, and will promote the redevelopment of the city’s downtown area. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.020 Findings.
The city council of the city of El Cajon finds and determines that:

 

A.    The proliferation of tobacco shops and smoke shops (including lounges where customers can consume tobacco or other substances by inhalation through hookahs and electronic vapor devices) in the commercial areas of the city of El Cajon has a deleterious effect on the vitality of a strong central business area, and a downtown area, removing from the stock of commercial properties those properties that could be better utilized for local retail operations that would complement the existing and future commercial activities;

B.     The over-concentration of tobacco shops and smoke shops, and smoking and vapor substance inhalation lounges, would suppress economic activity in the city’s commercial areas by limiting vital investment and the potential redevelopment of existing commercial areas;

C.     On-site advertising of tobacco products tends to create unsightly commercial operations, which businesses are aesthetically displeasing and tend to contribute to visual blight;

D.    The location of tobacco shops and smoke shops, and smoking and vapor substance inhalation lounges, adversely impacts certain sensitive uses in the city of El Cajon; and

E.     The over-concentration of tobacco shops and smoke shops, and smoking or inhalation lounges, would tend to attract groups of visitors who would tend to loiter outside such shops, creating health hazards from secondhand smoke in the congregation of their patrons, and further creating safety hazards when loitering in an area of such shops. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.030 Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the “Tobacco Shops, Smoke Shops and Vapor Inhalation Shops Regulations Code.” (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.040 Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings as provided in this section. Where words or terms are not defined in this section they shall have the meanings ordinarily ascribed to them or as may be further defined in Chapter 17.105 of this title. Should any word, term or phrase defined in this section conflict with any other word, term or phrase defined in this title, the definitions provided in this section shall apply.

“Advertising” means printed matter that calls the public’s attention to things for sale.

“Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold, as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

“City” means the city of El Cajon.

“City manager” means the city manager of the city or the city manager’s designee.

“Creation of a tobacco or smoke shop establishment” means:

1.     The opening or commencement of any such establishment as a new establishment; or

2.     The conversion of an existing establishment, to a tobacco or smoke shop establishment as defined in this chapter; or

3.     The relocation of any such establishment.

“Electronic vapor device” means any device with a heating element, a battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the user in a manner that simulates smoking tobacco products, shisha, herbs, or any other product that produces smoke.

“Electronic vapor inhalation substance products” means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers, vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic vapor devices.

“Electronic/vapor substance inhalation lounges” are defined as those businesses where customers can smoke or inhale vapor from electronic/vapor substance inhalation products, commonly known as “electronic cigarettes,” “e-cigarettes,” “e-cigars,” “e-cigarillos,” “e-pipes,” “e-hookahs,” “electronic nicotine delivery systems,” and other similar devices.

“Electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops” are defined as those businesses that either devote a substantial portion of its display area (i.e., fifteen percent or more of floor space) or devote more than sixteen cubic feet of shelf space, for the display of electronic/vapor substance inhalation products, commonly known as “electronic cigarettes,” “e-cigarettes,” “e-cigars,” “e-cigarillos,” “e-pipes,” “e-hookahs,” “electronic nicotine delivery systems,” and other similar devices, as well as such cartridges, substances and additives used to experience the sensation of smoking vapors, tobacco and non-tobacco substances.

“Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer for consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

“Hookah” means a pipe commonly, but not always, made of glass, used for vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, non-flavored tobacco, shisha, dried fruits, or other substances in which vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin before inhalation.

“Minor” means any individual who is less than eighteen years old.

“Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social, or other similar purpose, the net proceeds from the operation of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

“Public playground/park/recreation area” means an area to which the public, and particularly minors, come to participate in athletic or recreational activities, whether or not such activities are supervised or organized. Such areas include, but are not limited to, publicly owned and maintained parks, athletic fields, playgrounds, picnic areas, any outdoor premises or grounds owned or operated by the city, a public or private school, child care center, and any youth or recreational facilities such as the Boys’ and Girls’ Club, YMCA and YWCA, that contains any play or athletic equipment used or intended to be used by minors.

“School” means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or which is maintained for preschool or day care services. This definition includes a day care center, nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university.

“Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee.

“Tobacco product” means (1) any product containing tobacco leaf including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth; (3) any electronic vapor device, electronic vapor inhalation substance, and hookah; (4) any plant, weed, or plant product that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth in smoke or vapor form, using any tobacco paraphernalia as defined in Chapter 8.33 of this Code, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

“Tobacco retailer” means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales, rentals, or other give-aways of tobacco products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances, and hookahs are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

“Tobacco or smoke shop” means any store, stand, booth, concession, or other place that either devotes a substantial portion of its display area (i.e., fifteen percent or more of floor space) to tobacco products, or devotes more than sixteen cubic feet of shelf space, for the display or sale of tobacco or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption or use. This definition includes electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances and hookahs.

“Transfer of ownership or control of a tobacco or smoke shop” means:

1.     The sale, lease or sublease of such establishment; or

2.     The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in such establishment, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

3.     The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of such establishment, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control.

“Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, that dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

“Zoning Code” means Title 17 of the municipal code of the city of El Cajon, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.050 Tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop conditional use permit required.
No person shall cause or permit the creation, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor inhalation shop without first obtaining and maintaining a conditional use permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.060 Tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop conditional use permit.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the planning commission shall review the application to determine if the applicant has complied with the development standards set forth in this chapter. If the applicant has complied with such standards, the planning commission shall grant the conditional use permit. The required findings listed in Section 17.80.060 of this title relating to variances shall be of no force and effect when considering an application for a conditional use permit for a tobacco or smoke shop. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.070 Development standards—General and specific.
An application for a conditional use permit shall be approved by the planning commission upon a determination that all of the following standards have been met and the findings listed in Section 17.50.060 of this title can be made:

A.    The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop will be located within a permitted zone. Tobacco or smoke shops, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops may be located only within the O-P zone, the C-N zone, the C-G zone, and/or the C-R zone. No such establishment shall be permitted to locate in any area outside such zoning classifications.

B.     The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop will meet the following minimum spacing and proximity requirements:

1.     No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other such shop.

2.     No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land zoned for residential use.

3.     No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop shall be located within 600 feet of any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land uses:

a.     Religious facility;

b.     Courthouse;

c.     Day nursery;

d.     Public playground/park/recreation area;

e.     School;

f.      Vocational or professional institution; or

g.     Institution of higher education, including community or junior college, college, or university.

4.     Nothing in this chapter prohibits the location of tobacco or smoke shops, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop within retail shopping centers in the above-specified commercial zones if such activities have their only frontage upon enclosed malls or malls isolated from direct view from public streets, parks, schools, churches or residentially zoned property. However, the spacing requirements in this subsection above shall apply to tobacco or smoke shops, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops located within such a mall.

5.     No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop located in a building sharing one or more common walls with another retail or commercial establishment, or sharing common attic space with any other use, shall permit smoking anywhere on the premises.

C.     The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop is in substantial compliance with the requirements of all health and safety codes, including, but not limited to, the building code, fire code, electrical code, mechanical code and plumbing code. Unless delay is caused by refusal of applicant to schedule or permit timely inspection, substantial compliance shall be verified no later than 30 days following the application or the applicant shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with such requirements for the purposes of permit issuance.

D.    The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop is in substantial compliance with the development standards for the commercial zone in which the establishment is to be located, and with the general provisions of Chapter 17.130 relating to development standards and of Chapter 17.190 relating to sign regulations, except that, to the extent that provisions of this chapter may conflict or be more restrictive, this chapter shall control.

E.     The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop meets the following minimum specific standards:

1.     No person or business shall engage in the sale of tobacco and electronic vapor device products without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products that has wording similar to:

 

“THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, HOOKAHS, AND ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICES AND PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING TO BE 26 YEARS OF AGE AND YOUNGER.”

 

The letters of the sign shall be at least one-quarter inch high.

2.     No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to this article shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without requesting and examining identification of customers appearing to be 26 years and younger for the purpose of establishing the purchaser’s age as 18 years or greater, unless the seller has some other clear or convincing basis for determining the buyer’s age.

3.     No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

4.     It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.

5.     No person, business or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain, or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance, or use on his, her or its premises, any tobacco vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any tobacco product.

6.     It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to distribute free tobacco products or promotional items, except in enclosed areas where minors are not permitted.

7.     In addition to the standards in this chapter, each tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop shall comply with each and every provision of Chapter 8.33 of this code. No person shall obtain a tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop permit for a tobacco or smoke shop unless that person first or concurrently obtains a tobacco retailer’s license under Chapter 8.33. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.080 Measure of distance.
Distance, without regard to intervening structures, shall be:

A.    A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any two tobacco or smoke shops or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops; and

B.     A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of a tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop to the closest property line of a religious facility, courthouse, day nursery, public playground/park/recreation area, school, residential zone, vocational or professional institution, institution of higher education, including community or junior college, college, or university. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.090 Statement of nonconforming tobacco or smoke shops, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops, lounges.
A.    All tobacco or smoke shops, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops or lounges, which were established prior to the adoption of this chapter and that do not conform to all of the provisions of this chapter shall be brought into conformance or abated as provided in Chapter 17.120 of this title.

B.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or lounge, legally operating at the time this chapter becomes effective, shall be abated solely on the basis of its proximity to a parcel of land containing the following specific land uses:

1.     Residential;

2.     Religious facility;

3.     Day nursery;

4.     Courthouse;

5.     Public playground/park/recreation area;

6.     School;

7.     Vocational or professional institution;

8.     Institution of higher education, including community or junior college, college, or university; or

9.     Another tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.100 Public hearing.
Applications for conditional use permits for a tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop by a property owner or his or her agent, shall be processed in accordance with Chapters 17.25 and 17.50 of this title, as applicable. Procedures for modification, suspension or revocation of a tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop conditional use permit shall be conducted pursuant to Chapters 17.35 and 17.50 of this title, as applicable. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.110 Findings and decision.
Within the period of time required by this title, upon the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall announce its findings and decision by resolution. Such resolution shall grant an application for a tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop permit if the standards in Section 17.240.070, and findings are made pursuant to Section 17.50.060 and shall deny an application for a tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop permit if one or more of the standards in Section 17.240.070 are not met and the findings pursuant to Section 17.50.060 are not all made. Such resolution shall state the facts and findings supporting any modification, suspension or revocation of an existing tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop permit. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.120 Notice of decision.
Within five (5) days of the passage of a resolution as described in Section 17.240.110, the planning commission shall cause all of the following to be done on the same day:

A.    Notify the applicant of its action by mailing a copy of such resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon the application;

B.     File a copy of such resolution with the city clerk;

C.     Forward a copy of such resolution to the city council. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.130 Tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop permit—Grant or denial, modification, suspension, or revocation.
The resolution of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.30 of this title. The only grounds for such an appeal shall be either that all of the requirements set out in Section 17.240.070 have been met or that the criteria in Section 17.240.070 have not been met. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.140 Hearing—Subpoena of witnesses.
The city clerk, at the request of the city manager, or upon his or her own initiative, or upon the written request of the applicant or permittee, shall issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses at such hearing.

Any person served with such subpoena shall attend such hearing. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.150 Hearing—Swearing of witnesses—Presentation of evidence.
At such hearing, the city council may, at its discretion, require witnesses to be sworn. The applicant or permittee, or his or her agent, may present evidence in support of the issuance or continuance of his or her permit. Any other person may, at the discretion of the city council, be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.160 Violation—Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014) 

 

17.240.170 Violation—Each day deemed separate offense—Public nuisance.
Each person found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which a violation of any section of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable as provided for in Section 17.240.160. Any use or occupation of any building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall constitute a public nuisance.

 

17.240.180 Non-retaliation.
A.    No person or employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provision of this chapter.

B.     No person shall intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person because such other person seeks to attain compliance with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.190 Conflicts with other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. Nor shall this chapter be construed to be cause for breach of any pre-existing private contract, or cause for interference with regulations imposed by state or federal law or related to interstate commerce. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

 

17.240.200 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason declared to be void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council hereby declares that it would have enacted this chapter regardless of the invalid or proscribed section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase. (Ord. 5012 § 3, 2014)

Chapter 17.243 PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA
17.243.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word is not defined in this section, the common and ordinary meaning of the word shall apply. All references to state law shall refer to the act, statute, or regulation as may be amended from time to time:

A.    “AUMA” refers to the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act approved by the voters on November 8, 2016.

B.     “Commercial marijuana activity” includes both “commercial cannabis activity” and “commercial marijuana activity” as those terms are defined/set forth in Business and Professions Code sections 19300.5 and 26001, and means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of marijuana or marijuana products. “Commercial marijuana activity” also includes the activities of any business or nonprofit licensed by the State or other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code.

C.     “Concentrated cannabis” shall have the same meaning “cannabis concentrate” as defined in Business and Professions Code section 19300.5, and includes manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s potency.

D.    “Cultivation” shall have the same meaning as that set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001, and shall include any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

E.     “Delivery” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001 and shall include the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform, whether owned and controlled by the retailer or independently licensed, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a retailer of marijuana or marijuana products.

F.     “Dispensary” means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana, whether medical or otherwise, is made available to or distributed by or distributed to one (1) or more of the following: a primary caregiver; a qualified patient; or a patient with an identification card; or any other individual regardless of status defined or not defined. A marijuana dispensary, medical or otherwise, is prohibited in all zones within the city’s jurisdictional limits. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such use.

 

G.    “Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is at all times secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors.

H.    “Identification card” has the same meaning as defined in Health and Safety Code section 11362.7(g).

I.      “Indoors” means within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

J.      “Marijuana” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code section 11018 and shall include all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Marijuana” shall also be construed to include, but not be limited to, “cannabis” as defined in Business and Professions Code section 19300.5. “Marijuana” does not include:

1.     “Industrial hemp,” as defined by Food and Agricultural Code section 81000 or Health and Safety Code section 11018.5.

2.     The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

K.    “Marijuana product” means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to concentrated cannabis, or an ingestible, topical, inhalable, or otherwise consumable product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis, and other ingredients.

L.     “MCRSA” shall collectively mean the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as contained, codified, enacted, and signed into law on October 9, 2015, as Assembly Bill No. 243, Assembly Bill No. 266, and Senate Bill 643, and as amended by Assembly Bill 21 in 2016. The MCRSA was formerly known as the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act.

M.    “Outdoors” means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

N.    “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

O.    “Personal cultivation” means cultivation of marijuana conducted by an individual strictly for that individual’s personal use, possession, processing, transporting, or giving away without any compensation whatsoever in accordance with this Code and State law, including but not limited to Health and Safety Code sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, and in accordance with Health and Safety Code sections 11362.7 and 11362.765. Except as herein defined, personal cultivation does not include, and shall not authorize, any cultivation conducted as part of a business or commercial activity, including cultivation for compensation or retail or wholesale sales of marijuana.

P.     “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling.

Q.    “Storage” means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana, whether medical or otherwise, is stored either temporarily or permanently. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Marijuana storage shall not include the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof by any “qualified patient,” or “person with an identification card,” as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.7 so long as it is located at the residence of the qualified patient or person with an identification card. (Ord. 5065 § 14, 2017)

 

17.243.020 Prohibitions.
A.    Commercial Marijuana Activity. Commercial marijuana activity is expressly prohibited in all zones in the City of El Cajon. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or allow commercial marijuana activity anywhere within the City. In addition, this subsection is meant to prohibit all activities for which a State license may be required pursuant to the AUMA or the MCRSA. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required under the AUMA or the MCRSA.

B.     Property Owners. A property owner shall not rent, lease, or otherwise permit any business that engages in commercial marijuana activity to occupy real property in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial marijuana activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City.

C.     Deliveries. To the extent not already prohibited by subsection A of this section and Chapter 9.47 of this Municipal Code, delivery of marijuana or marijuana products to or from the City of El Cajon is expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any delivery of marijuana or marijuana products where the delivery either originates or terminates within the City.

D.    Outdoor Cultivation. To the extent not already prohibited by subsection A, outdoor marijuana cultivation is expressly prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas of the City of El Cajon. (Ord. 5065 § 14, 2017)

 

17.243.030 Indoor Cultivation.
The prohibition in subsection 17.243.020(A) shall not prohibit the indoor cultivation of six (6) or fewer live marijuana plants within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence, to the extent such cultivation is authorized by State law and is in strict compliance with the requirements set forth below:

A.    Private marijuana cultivation is permitted only within fully enclosed and secure structures, or areas or rooms within a private residence, inaccessible to minors. Cultivation areas shall be secured by lock and key or other security device which prevents unauthorized entry and shall not be visible from a public right of way.

B.     Private marijuana cultivation shall be limited to six (6) plants total, regardless of stage of gestation, whether immature or mature, regardless of how may qualified residents reside at the private residence.

C.     Private marijuana cultivation, including any lighting, plumbing, or electrical components used for cultivation, shall comply with Title 15 of the El Cajon Municipal Code. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, etc.) or CO2 and Ozone generators for marijuana cultivation is prohibited. Any fully enclosed and secure structure, or area or room within a residence used for the cultivation of marijuana must have proper ventilation and shall not create a humidity or mold problem in violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state health and safety codes.

D.    Cultivation shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if the cultivation produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor, or vibration that is or it’s effect is either detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life or property by other persons.

E.     The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. These rooms shall not be used for marijuana cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping, and bathing.

F.     Cultivation of marijuana shall not displace required off street parking, or violate any other provisions of the El Cajon Municipal Code.

G.    Written consent of the property owner must be obtained prior to the commencement of cultivation.

 

17.243.040 Permissive Zoning.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to the effect that the City’s permissive zoning scheme allows any other use not specifically listed therein. (Ord. 5065 § 14, 2017)

 

17.243.050 Enforcement.
The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity provided, however, persons violating this section shall not be subject to criminal liability under this section solely to the extent such conduct or condition is immune from criminal liability pursuant to State law, including the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Health and Safety Code section 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana Program (Health and Safety Code section 11362.7 et seq.), or the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, as they may be amended.

A.    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a violation.

B.     Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any provision of this subdivision any violation may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of this code.

C.     Any person violating this section is subject to a civil action brought by the city attorney, punishable by a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per day for each violation. Any continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense for each day of the violation.

D.    Violations of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

E.     In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 5065 § 14, 2017)

 

17.243.060 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid. (Ord. 5065 § 14, 2017)

Chapter 17.245 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
17.245.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “wireless ordinance.” (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.020 Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of this section is to establish standards for the siting, development, and maintenance of wireless communications facilities and antennas defined in Chapter 17.105. The regulations set forth herein are intended to protect and promote the public health, safety, community welfare and the aesthetic quality of the city as set forth within the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, while concurrently allowing for the efficient development of a wireless communications infrastructure in accordance with the guidelines and intent of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. Finally, because the wireless communications industry utilizes unique technologies that are in a constant state of change, it is intended that these regulations be appropriate for the analysis of various siting and facility circumstances. (Ord. 5018 § 124, 2015)

 

17.245.030 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all wireless communications facilities proposed to be located in any residential, office, commercial or industrial zone except as provided below in Section 17.245.060. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.040 Permits required.
A conditional use permit processed in accordance with Chapter 17.50 of this title shall be required for all wireless communications facilities proposed to be located in any residential zone. Further, a conditional use permit shall be required for any proposed freestanding facility, including collocation facilities, in any commercial, office or industrial zone. A site development plan permit processed in accordance with Chapter 17.65 of this title shall be required for any architecturally integrated facility in commercial, office or industrial zones only, and any new collocated facilities added to a collocation wireless communications facility approved by a conditional use permit and accompanied by either a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report. Subject to the determination of the director, any modification to existing wireless facilities may require an amendment of the applicable conditional use permit or site development plan. (Ord. 5081 § 37, 2019.)

 

17.245.050 Application requirements.
In addition to meeting standard application submittal requirements for conditional use permits pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this title, or site development plans pursuant to Chapter 17.65 of this title, all applications shall include the following:

A.    Provide a description of the services that the applicant proposes to offer or provide at the proposed site;

B.     Provide documentation certifying the applicant has obtained all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission and, if applicable, the California Public Utilities Commission, to provide the services proposed in connection with the application;

C.     Submit a visual impact analysis consisting of photo-simulations, a photographic montage, elevations or other visual or graphic illustrations of the proposed wireless communications facilities, including antennae, which includes proper coloration and blending of the facility with the proposed site and surrounding area;

D.    Identify the geographic service area for the proposed site, including a map showing the site and the associated “next” cell sites within the network. Describe how the proposed site fits into and is necessary for the company’s service network and include possible alternative locations;

E.     Provide a written report of the assessment of all potential alternative sites, as well as a statement that an effort was made to attempt co-location at another site;

F.     Provide signal strength and wireless coverage maps depicting the strength of wireless signals in the proposed project area. Provide one map depicting existing signal strengths and provide another map depicting the signal strength anticipated with operation of the proposed facility. (Ord. 5018 § 126, 2015; Ord. 4984 § 84, 2013; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.060 Exceptions.
Satellite dish antennas described in Section 17.225.120 of this title are exempt from the requirements of this section. In addition, fixed wireless service antennas are not required to meet the provisions of this chapter and are exempt from review by the planning commission and city council. Also, amateur radio antennas, as defined in 47 CFR 17.3, are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.070 Director’s determination.
Following the review of any application, the director may determine that a conditional use permit is necessary because the proposed project will have a substantial effect on the surrounding area or because the wireless communications facility is of sufficient size to warrant the consideration of the planning commission. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.080 Development and design standards.
Every proposed wireless communications facility shall satisfy the following development and design standards:

A.    The installation of wireless communications facilities shall not reduce the number of required parking spaces on any proposed sites in any zone.

B.     All wireless communications facilities and accessory equipment shall meet the required setbacks of the underlying zone, except that in any residential zone, the minimum setback for any antenna or equipment building from any property line shall be twenty (20) feet. Furthermore, any wireless facility located in a commercial or manufacturing zone shall maintain a setback of twenty (20) feet from any adjacent residentially zoned property.

C.     Each service provider with a wireless communications facility in the city shall obtain a city business license.

D.    All proposed wireless communications facilities shall be located so as to minimize their visual impact to the maximum extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, screening and camouflage, as well as landscaping, to be compatible with adjacent uses, existing architectural elements, topography, neighborhood landscaping, and building materials, and other site characteristics.

E.     Architecturally integrated wireless communications facilities shall satisfy the following development and design standards:

1.     Shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure or building;

2.     Shall be constructed at the minimum height possible while complying with the building height requirements of this title to serve the service area and be designed to minimize their visibility from surrounding areas;

3.     Shall be integrated architecturally to match the style and character of the structure they are attached to, in conformance with Chapter 17.180; and

4.     May be developed as a steeple, spire, clearstory, or similar architectural projection in accordance with section 17.130.115.

F.     Freestanding facilities shall be discouraged unless no reasonable alternative is possible. This type of facility shall satisfy the following development and design standards:

1.     Shall be of a stealth design only (e.g., piece of art/sculpture, clock tower, flag pole, tree or other interesting, appropriate and compatible visual form). They shall be painted and designed to blend in with the surrounding area. Landscaping necessary to minimize the visual effect of a stealth freestanding facility shall be provided;

2.     Shall be designed to the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed wireless facility; and

3.     Shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height.

G.    Wireless facility support structures such as equipment buildings, cabinets, cables, air conditioning units and fencing, shall be painted and textured to match the surrounding physical area and screened with landscaping in order to minimize visual impacts.

H.    No advertising signs shall be placed on any facilities or equipment. (Ord. 5081 § 39, 2019.)

 

17.245.090 Operation and maintenance.
All wireless communications facilities shall comply with the following operational and maintenance standards in order to obtain an appropriate level of compatibility:

A.    Air conditioning units and noise generating equipment shall comply with the noise standards as stated in Section 17.115.130(C) of this title;

B.     In residential zones, security lighting shall only be illuminated by a timing device with shielding installed to limit light exposure on neighboring properties;

C.     All wireless communications facilities and related equipment shall be maintained in good condition and free from trash, debris, and graffiti and any other form of vandalism. Any damaged wireless communications facilities or equipment shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible so as to minimize dangerous conditions or visual blight;

D.    Wireless communications facilities containing landscaping elements shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Damaged, dead or decaying landscaping shall be promptly replaced;

E.     In residential zones, routine equipment maintenance shall only be conducted during the hours of 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. In all other zones, routine maintenance may be conducted at any time;

F.     Emergency maintenance shall only be conducted during power outages or equipment failure;

G.    In residential zones, non-emergency visits, for scheduled upgrades, other than as described above in subsection (E) of this section, shall require 72-hour notice to the city and adjacent neighbors. No more than one (1) scheduled upgrade shall be permitted every 12 months; and

H.    An annual statement that the wireless communications facility conforms to the current FCC safe exposure standards shall be submitted to the department of community development. (Ord. 5033 §§ 48, 49, 2015; Ord. 4968 § 86, 2011; Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.100 Discontinuation of wireless communications facilities.
Any service provider discontinuing operations of wireless communications facilities located within the city for an uninterrupted period of six (6) months, shall promptly remove such abandoned or discontinued facilities unless the service provider notifies the city in writing of their intention to maintain the facility. The city will consider this written request in determining the status of the facility. The service provider shall remove or cause the removal of the wireless communications facility, including all antennae, cables, cabinets, equipment buildings, poles and support equipment, within 30 calendar days of its termination of operations. If the service provider fails to remove the facility, the subject property owner will be required to have the facility removed. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

 

17.245.110 Revocation of permit.
Wireless communications service providers and their operational facilities shall comply with all conditions of approval in the applicable application(s) and the standards set forth in this title, as well as other applicable provisions of this code, at all times. Failure to comply with any condition of approval or standard in this title shall constitute grounds for possible revocation in accordance with Chapter 17.35 of this title. (Ord. 4950 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 17.250 SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE STORES AND PAWN SHOPS
17.250.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the location and operation of businesses engaging in the purchase of secondhand merchandise or taking secondhand merchandise in for pawn in the city of El Cajon in order to maintain the city’s character, the diversity and vitality of the community’s commercial areas, and the quality of life of El Cajon residents. It is presumed that establishing or preserving an appropriate and balanced mix of commercial businesses will more effectively serve to achieve this purpose as a strategy to maintain the economic health of the community’s business districts, and will promote the redevelopment of the city. The intent is to avoid overconcentration and apply performance standards to limit the impacts of these uses on surrounding areas. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

 

17.250.020 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all pawn shops, secondhand merchandise stores or kiosks as defined in Section 17.105.020. This chapter does not apply to businesses who allow for the trade in of these items for the purchase of similar items as an accessory use. Thrift or resale stores are exempted. (Ord. 5033 § 51, 2015)

 

17.250.030 Conditional use permit required.
All pawn shops, secondhand merchandise stores or kiosks, to which this chapter is applicable shall obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.50 of this title and satisfy all pertinent requirements, performance standards, and conditions. In addition, all pawn shops, secondhand merchandise stores or kiosks are subject to approval of a special operation license as provided in Chapter 5.16 and to the provisions of Chapter 5.48. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

 

17.250.040 Continuation of nonconforming use.
Existing businesses operating lawfully prior to the establishment of this ordinance shall be deemed nonconforming uses and may continue to operate subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.120 of this title. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

 

 

17.250.050 Location requirements.
A.    No pawn shop, secondhand merchandise store or kiosk shall be located within 2,000 feet of another pawn shop or secondhand merchandise store or kiosk.

B.     No pawn shop, secondhand merchandise store or kiosk shall be located within 500 feet of any residentially zoned property, school, college, university, religious facility, park or playground.

C.     No pawn shop, secondhand merchandise store or kiosk shall be located within, or within 500 feet of the boundaries of Specific Plan No. 182.

D.    No pawn shop, secondhand merchandise store or kiosk shall be located within the boundaries of Specific Plan No. 462.

E.     Pawn shops, secondhand merchandise stores or kiosks located in shopping malls on sites of 15 acres or more in size are exempt from the location requirements.

F.     For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured between the closest property lines of the affected locations. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

 

17.250.060 Performance standards.
A.    All pawn shops, secondhand merchandise stores and kiosks shall be designed, constructed, and operated to conform to all of the following performance standards:

1.     Windows shall remain transparent/not obstructed during hours of operation except for window signs as allowed in Section 17.190.140;

2.     Exterior areas of the premises and adjacent parking lots shall be provided with sufficient lighting in a manner that provides adequate illumination while not spilling onto surrounding residential and commercial properties;

3.     At least two high definition 24-hour time lapse security cameras and recording devices may be required to be installed and properly maintained on the exterior of the building at locations recommended by the police department capable of color recording and storing a minimum of 30 days of continuous video. All criminal and suspicious activities recorded on this surveillance equipment must be reported to local law enforcement. To the extent allowed by law, the establishment operators may be required to provide any tapes or other recording media from the security cameras to the police department; and

4.     That it complies with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city business license fees and special operation license operating standards. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

 

17.250.070 Required findings.
In addition to the findings listed in Section 17.50.060, the planning commission shall approve the issuance of a conditional use permit to allow for a pawn shop, secondhand merchandise store or kiosk upon making the following findings:

A.    The proposed establishment meets the locational requirements of this chapter and will not result in an overconcentration of pawn shops, secondhand merchandise stores or kiosks in any commercial corridor.

B.     The proposed establishment is not located in what has been determined to be a high-crime area or where a disproportionate number of police service calls occur.

C.     The proposed establishment will comply with the applicable performance standards. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

 

17.250.080 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid. (Ord. 5015 § 9, 2014)

Chapter 17.255 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
17.255.010 Intent and purpose.
It is the policy of the City of El Cajon, pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Federal Fair Housing Act, the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, to provide people with disabilities, reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of these provisions is to provide a process for making requests for reasonable accommodation to land use and zoning decisions. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

17.255.020 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to any person who is qualified as a “disabled person” under the ADA, or who is otherwise qualified to receive reasonable accommodation under any of the Housing Acts specified in Section 17.85.010. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

17.255.030 Scope and extent.
A request for a reasonable accommodation to the rules, policies, practices, and procedures regulating the siting, development or use of housing may include, but is not limited to, yard area encroachments for ramps, handrails, or other such accessibility improvements; hardscape additions, such as widened driveways, parking area or walkways that would not otherwise comply with required landscaping or open space area provisions; and building addition(s) required strictly for accessibility accommodation. If an applicant needs assistance in making the request or any appeals associated with the request, the director shall provide reasonable assistance necessary to ensure the process is accessible to the applicant. No application fee shall be collected for reasonable accommodation requests filed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

17.255.040 Authority to apply.
Any individual with a disability or person acting on their behalf may submit a request in writing to the director for reasonable accommodation. The request shall include an application and other materials required by the director. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

 

17.255.050 Authority to approve.
A reasonable accommodation request may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the director. The director may, at his or her discretion, refer a reasonable accommodation request to the planning commission, which may approve, conditionally approve, or deny such permits. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

17.255.060 Required findings.
In determining the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the director shall consider the following factors:

1.     The applicant making the request for reasonable accommodation is an individual protected under the Housing Acts specified in Section 17.85.010.

2.     The accommodation is necessary to make a specific dwelling unit(s) available to an individual protected under the Housing Acts specified in Section 17.85.010.

3.     There is no other reasonable alternative, consistent with the Zoning Code, which would allow equal access to a specific dwelling unit(s).

4.     The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

5.     The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program, policy, and/or procedure.

6.     There are no other factors deemed relevant to the determination according to the Housing Acts specified in Section 17.85.010. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

17.255.070 Notice of decision.
The applicant for a reasonable accommodation request shall be notified in writing of the decision of the director to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. In the event that the director refers the permit application to the planning commission, the applicant shall be notified in writing and the notice shall include the date and time of the planning commission meeting. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

 

17.255.080 Appeals.
The action of the director or the planning commission in approving, conditionally approving, or denying a reasonable accommodation request may be appealed pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 17.30 of this title. Planning commission decisions shall include findings to support the issuance or denial of this permit consistent with Section 17.85.060. (Ord. 5018 § 127, 2015)

Chapter 17.260 AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
17.260.010 Intent and purpose.
It is the purpose of the airport overlay zone to implement the requirements of the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field Airport Land Use Compatibility Plans (ALUCP). The ALUCPs regulate non-aviation land use and development on and around the airports. All development projects and land use actions within the airport overlay zone must be consistent with the ALUCPs for Gillespie and Montgomery Fields. The airport overlay zone is a mechanism to ensure that the requirements of the ALUCPs are satisfied for land use and development projects in the City of El Cajon. The ALUCPs address the following specific impacts and issues of compatibility, each of which are defined in the ALUCPs:

A.    Airspace Protection (hazards to aircraft operations);

B.     Safety (hazards to life and property in and around the airports);

C.     Noise (noise sensitive uses are regulated and/or restricted around airports); and

D.    Overflight Annoyances (notification requirements to property owners and prospective buyers). (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.020 Applicability.
The airport overlay zone applies to all properties located within the Airport Influence Areas of the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field ALUCPs. Those areas are reflected on the El Cajon Zoning Map with designations of “RA1” and “RA2.” RA1 represent Review Area 1 of the Gillespie Field ALUCP. RA2 represents Review Area 2 for both the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field ALUCPs. No part of Montgomery Field Review Area 1 is in the City of El Cajon. Moreover, the only policies of the Montgomery Field ALUCP which apply within El Cajon are the policies related to airspace protection. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.030 Procedures for Project Review and Approval.
The City of El Cajon shall be responsible for reviewing and approving all land use and development proposals within the airport overlay zone except as otherwise provided by state and/or federal law. In reviewing and approving land use and development proposals within the airport overlay zone, the city shall apply the same procedures that would be used outside the airport overlay zone, except as otherwise required by this title and/or the applicable ALUCP. Prior to approval, all land use and development proposals within the airport overlay zone shall be found to be consistent with the applicable policies of the applicable ALUCP. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.040 Airport Land Use Commission.
Prior to approval by the city, certain land uses and development projects within the airport overlay zone require a determination of consistency from the Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) of the San Diego County Regional Airport Authority. Those projects include:

A.    Amendments to the general plan, specific plans and amendments, and zone changes or zoning code amendments within an Airport Influence Area that affect airport land use compatibility policies;

B.     Projects determined to be a potential hazard to air navigation by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA);

C.     Proposals for airport expansions or changes to runways or runway protection zones;

D.    Proposals for the construction of new airports or helicopter pads;

E.     Non-aviation-related development or land uses on airport land;

F.     Any proposed development or land use in Safety Compatibility Zone 1 of the Gillespie Field ALUCP;

G.    Projects which exceed the density or intensity limits in Table III-2 of the Gillespie Field ALUCP (Safety Compatibility Criteria); and

H.    Any development or land use proposal determined by the Planning Manager to be potentially incompatible with the applicable ALUCP. (Ord. 5033 § 53, 2015)

 

17.260.050 Airspace protection.
ALUCPs include airspace protection policies reflecting both federal and state law. The airspace protection policies are intended to ensure that structures and land uses do not cause hazards to flying aircraft within the airport vicinity. Hazards to flight include but are not limited to:

A.    Physical obstructions to navigable airspace;

B.     Wildlife hazards, particularly bird strikes; and

C.     Visual or electronic interference with aircraft navigation or communications.

Prior to approval by the city, any land use or development proposal with structures exceeding the FAA Height Notification Boundary, or the Part 77 Airspace Surfaces, or located within an area of Terrain Penetrations to Airspace Surfaces, as depicted on Exhibit III-3 of the ALUCPs, shall require a “Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation” from the FAA. See Policy 3.5 of the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field ALUCPs for additional information about airspace protection policies. (Ord. 5033 § 53, 2015)

 

17.260.060 Self-Certification.
Projects subject to the Airspace Protection policies described in Section 17.260.050 and Policy 3.5 of the ALUCPs may elect to “self-certify” that the project will not create a hazard to air navigation, thus avoiding the requirement for FAA notification and the corresponding Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation. The City of El Cajon may not require FAA notification and Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation if the project applicant provides certification by a professional, licensed by the State of California to prepare construction documents, that pursuant to Section 77.9 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the proposed structure(s) would be shielded by existing structures of a permanent and substantial character, or by natural terrain or topographic features of equal or greater height, and would be located in the congested area of the city, where it is evident beyond all reasonable doubt that the structure(s) so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air navigation. However, the ability to self-certify is at the discretion of staff on a case-by-case basis, and the director shall have the authority to require FAA notification and a Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation, and a determination of consistency from the ALUC, for any project that exceeds the criteria established in ALUCP Policy 3.5. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.070 Gillespie Field Airport Land.
The Gillespie Field airport is owned and operated by the San Diego County Department of Public Works. It includes the aviation areas of the airport in addition to adjacent non-aviation areas that are zoned for industrial uses. All proposals for non-aviation-related land use actions and/or development projects on airport land require a determination of consistency from the Airport Land Use Commission prior to their approval by the City of El Cajon. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.080 Gillespie Field Special Development Standards.
Uses and developments on portions of the airport land at Gillespie Field are subject to special standards not contained elsewhere within the El Cajon Municipal Code, or the ALUCPs. These special standards are divided among three categories: Aviation Areas, Industrial Parks, and Performance Standards. The special standards supplement the land use, development, and performance standards in this title for development on airport land. The special development standards for Gillespie Field are available at the offices of the Planning Division at City Hall. Wherever a conflict exists between the provisions of this title, and the provisions of the special development standards, the more restrictive standards shall prevail. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.090 Safety Compatibility Policies; Density and Intensity.
Within the RA1 designation, the allowable density of residential uses and the allowable intensity of non-residential land uses and developments are subject to the safety compatibility policies contained in the Gillespie Field ALUCP. These safety compatibility policies prohibit or restrict certain sensitive or hazardous land uses. They also restrict the residential density and non-residential intensity of land use and development within the safety compatibility zones around the airport. These density and intensity restrictions are in addition to the other land use and development regulations contained in this title. The density and intensity restrictions are summarized in Table III-2 (Safety Compatibility Criteria) of the Gillespie Field ALUCP. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.100 Overflight Notification.
The ALUCPs require notification for potential buyers of new residential units in areas subject to frequent fly-overs by aircraft. As such, new residential development within the area depicted on Exhibit III-4 of the Gillespie Field ALUCP (Compatibility Policy Map: Overflight) shall require the recordation of an overflight notification document as a condition of project approval. A separate overflight notification document is not required where an avigation easement is required, as indicated on Exhibit III-6 (Avigation Easement and Overflight Notification Areas). See Policy 3.6 of the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field ALUCPs for overflight notification requirements. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.110 Noise Compatibility Policies.
The Gillespie Field ALUCP contains policies intended to protect noise sensitive land uses from the sound created by flight operations. These policies are distinct from the performance standards for noise that are contained in Section 17.115.130 of this title. See Policy 3.3 of the Gillespie Field ALUCP for airport noise compatibility policies. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.120 Avigation Easements.
The Gillespie Field ALUCP requires property owners to grant an avigation easement to the airport operator for certain projects in certain parts of the airport influence area. The types of projects requiring avigation easements are listed under Policy 2.11.5, and on Exhibit III-6 (Avigation Easement and Overflight Notification Areas) of the Gillespie Field ALUCP. Exhibit III-6 identifies the areas where avigation easements may be required. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.130 Non-Conforming Uses and Developments.
Land uses and developments which may otherwise conform to all the requirements of the El Cajon Municipal Code may not conform to the requirements of the applicable ALUCPs. Chapter 17.120 of this title includes provision for restoring and expanding nonconforming uses and structures. However, those provisions are not applicable to land uses and developments within the airport overlay zone to the extent that those uses and developments conflict with the provisions of the ALUCPs. See Policies 2.11.2 and 2.11.3 of the Gillespie Field and Montgomery Field ALUCPs for policies related to nonconforming uses and developments. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

 

17.260.140 Existing Uses and Developments.
Legitimately established land uses and developments are not subject to the provisions of the ALUCPs unless they are expanded and/or intensified. Moreover, an existing land use can be replaced by a new and/or different land use, which may or may not be in conformance with the ALUCPs, as long as the replacement use is not an intensification of land use beyond that which had previously existed. However, if a land use is discontinued for a period of 24 consecutive months, it may only be re-established in conformance with the applicable ALUCP. See Section 2.2.18 of the Gillespie Field ALUCP for a definition and policies related to existing land uses. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)

17.260.150 Open Land Requirements.
The ALUCPs include “open land” requirements for projects of 10 acres or more in RA1. “Open land,” for the purpose of airport land use compatibility planning, refers to areas where light aircraft can make controlled emergency landings. See ALUCP Policy 3.4.9 for open land requirements. (Ord. 5018 § 128, 2015)



