TITLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 1 - CODE ESTABLISHED; PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 1-1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Gustine, California Municipal Code" and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Gustine Municipal Code." 
(Code 1966, § 1-1.01) 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-1-2. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1966, § 1-3.02)  
Sec. 1-1-3. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-1.04, 1-1.05)  
Sec. 1-1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)	Annexing property into the city. 
(2)	Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)	Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)	Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)	Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)	Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(8)	Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(9)	Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10)	Amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property. 
(11)	Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(12)	Dedicating, establishing naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(13)	Establishing the grade or any street or sidewalk. 
(14)	Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(15)	Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations. 
(16)	That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)	That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)	The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 1966, § 1-1.09)  
Sec. 1-1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)	Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (title, chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Gustine, California Municipal Code is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
(c)	If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (title, chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Gustine, California Municipal Code is hereby created to read as follows: …." 
(d)	All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article, chapter or title number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.  
Sec. 1-1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be included from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)	Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)	Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the code. 
(4)	Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to titles, chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
(5)	Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Sec. 1-1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is not an infraction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)	A violation of this Code is an infraction only if so stated. A person convicted of a violation of this Code that is an infraction shall be punished by: 
(1)	A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2)	A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year; 
(3)	A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)	With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)	With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-2.01—1-2.05) 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, Government Code § 36900 et seq.  
Chapter 2 - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 1-2-1. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. This Code shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Gustine, Merced County, California. 
City council, council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the City of Gustine, California. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Gustine, California Municipal Code, as designated in section 1-1-1. 
Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day, and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6800. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	"Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	"Either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Merced County, California. 
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Director of public works, street superintendent. The terms "director of public works" and "street superintendent" are synonymous. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Health department. The term "health department" means the county health department. 
Health officer. The term "health officer" means the county health officer. 
Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
In the city. The term "in the city" means all territory within the city limits and all territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction. 
Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code § 12. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 14. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6804. 
Number. Terms in the singular include the plural. Terms in the plural include the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 13. 
Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath, and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 15. 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 17. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription by mark. The term "signature" or "subscription" include a mark when the signer or subscriber can not write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 16. 
State. The term "state" means the State of California. 
Street. The term "street" includes any alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, road, highway, viaduct or other public thoroughfare dedicated and open to public use as such. 
Tenant or occupant. The terms "tenant and "occupant, as applied to premises include any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 11. 
Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6805. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 68031. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-3.06, 1-3.07, 1-3.13)  
Sec. 1-2-2. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)	A history note appearing in parenthesis after a section in this Code indicates the legislative history and is a declaration by the city council that the section to which the history note applies is a restatement or reenactment of an original ordinance or amendment thereof. Cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(Code 1966, § 1-3.04)  
Sec. 1-2-3. - Territorial applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided, this Code applies within the city limits and to such other territory over which the city has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1966, § 1-3.06)  
Sec. 1-2-4. - Severability. 
The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the council declares that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. 
(Code 1966, § 1-1.06)  
Sec. 1-2-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)	The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal.  
TITLE 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2-1-1. - Adoption and design. 
The common seal of the city is hereby adopted and described as follows: There shall be a picture of a cow engraved on the seal, surrounding which, in the margin of the seal, shall appear the words: "Gustine City, California, Incorporated November 11, A.D. 1915." 
(Code 1966, § 2-5.01) 
State Law reference— City seal generally, Government Code §§ 34501, 34501.5; custodian of seal, Government Code § 40811.  
Sec. 2-1-2. - Appeals of administrative decisions to council. 
(a)	Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof. 
(b)	The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 14 days after receipt of written notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than 30 days after the date of such action. 
(c)	The city clerk shall forthwith set such matter for hearing before the council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The council may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-4.01—1-4.03)  
Sec. 2-1-3. - Service of notices. 
(a)	Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the Code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as it appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(b)	Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-3.10, 1-3.11)  
Chapter 2 - CITY COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City councils generally, Government Code § 36801 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-2-1. - Generally. 
The city council is elected by the people of the city. It has the powers granted by law. 
State Law reference— City council required, Government Code § 36501(a); general powers of city council, Government Code § 37100 et seq.  
Secs. 2-2-2—2-2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to establish rules for conduct of its proceedings, Government Code § 36813. 
 
Sec. 2-2-31. - Mayor. 
The mayor is elected by the people of the city. Such position shall be elected every two years with the term commencing at the first meeting following the general election certification. The mayor shall serve as the presiding officer of the meetings, responsible for the maintenance of order and decorum at all meetings. 
(Ord. No. 447, 12-16-2008) 
State Law reference— Selection of mayor, Government Code § 36801; mayor as presiding officer, Government Code § 36802; rights of mayor as councilmember, Government Code § 36803.  
Sec. 2-2-32. - Mayor pro tempore. 
A mayor pro tempore shall be elected from among the councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore shall be elected every two years and shall preside when the mayor is absent. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code §§ 36801, 36802.  
Sec. 2-2-33. - Regular meetings; time and place. 
The city council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesdays of each month. The regular meeting time and location shall be established by resolution of the city council. When the day for any regular meeting falls on a city holiday, such meeting shall be at the same hour and place on the next succeeding day. 
(Code 1966, § 2-1.01; Ord. No. 425, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 428, § 4, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 457, 2-15-2011) 
State Law reference— Regular meetings, Government Code § 36805; meetings to be held at place designated by ordinance, Government Code § 36808.  
Sec. 2-2-34. - Quorum. 
Three voting members of the council shall constitute a quorum. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 36810.  
Sec. 2-2-35. - Meetings to be public; exceptions; closed sessions. 
All meetings shall be public, excepting closed sessions pursuant to state law. The city councilmembers who are disqualified from participation with respect to a matter to be discussed in closed session shall be excluded from the closed session and shall not knowingly receive any confidential communications with respect thereto. 
State Law reference— Open meeting requirements, Government Code §§ 36808, 54950 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2-36. - Failure to vote. 
Every councilmember should vote unless disqualified by reason of conflict of interest. A councilmember who abstains from voting acknowledges that a majority of the quorum may decide the question voted upon.  
Sec. 2-2-37. - Tie vote. 
Tie votes or a vote lacking the required number of affirmative votes shall constitute "no action," and the matter voted upon remains before the council and is subject to further council consideration. If the city council is unable to take action on a matter before it because of a tie vote or the lack of the required number of votes, the city clerk shall place the item on the next regular meeting of the city council for further consideration. If after subsequent consideration, the vote remains tied or the required affirmative votes are not obtained, the vote shall be deemed to result in failure of the pending motion or a denial of the requested action.  
Chapter 3 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
ARTICLE 1. - YOUTH INVOLVEMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-3-1. - Established. 
There is hereby created and established the Gustine Youth Involvement Commission. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-7-2005)  
Sec. 2-3-2. - Members: appointment: terms: qualifications: removal. 
The commission shall consist of seven members who shall serve for the term of their appointment or until a successor is selected. 
Two of the members shall be appointed by the council and shall serve for a term of one year and two years respectively. 
Two of the members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the commission, and said members shall serve for a term of one year and two years respectively. 
Two members shall be elected by a majority of the general student membership of the Gustine High School, and each shall serve a term of one year. 
The mayor, with approval of the council, shall appoint one member of the council to serve as an ex officio member of the commission without the right to vote. The term of an ex officio member shall correspond to the person's term on the council. 
Each member of the commission may serve two full terms. A commission member eligible for reappointment may not be a party to the nominating process. Should a vacancy occur, the body whole which appointed that member creating such a vacancy shall have the power to appoint the replacement. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-7-2005)  
Sec. 2-3-3. - Compensation. 
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-7-2005)  
Sec. 2-3-4. - Officers and committees. 
The commission shall elect from among its members a chairman and may appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. The commission may also create such committees as it deems necessary for the performance of its duties and may delegate to such committees such investigations, studies, and other administrative duties as it may deem advisable. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-7-2005)  
Sec. 2-3-5. - Meetings. 
The commission shall meet upon the call of the chairman but in no event less than quarterly. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-7-2005)  
Sec. 2-3-6. - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the powers to: 
(1)	Coordinate and constructively encourage youth counseling and youth services programs in the city; 
(2)	Carry out the object of the commission program as a community cooperative effort, accepting referrals from the police, schools, parents, churches, and students themselves; 
(3)	Carry out the functions of the commission program, including counseling and guidance, exploring alternatives to meet a variety or practical youth needs and a concerted program to train local volunteers to be more effective in advising, counseling, and communicating with the youth of the community; 
(4)	Assist in the planning of a youth involvement commission program for the community, promote and stimulate public interest therein, and to that end solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of the city, county, Gustine school district, and other public and private agencies interested therein; 
(5)	Recommend for hire, to the council of the city, a counselor/coordinator on job specifications to be agreed upon by the commission and recommend approval by the council of the city the acquisition and maintenance of appropriate facilities to house the counselor/coordinator and his volunteer help; 
(6)	Advise the council of the city on any agreements it may enter into with the county and/or any other political entities and/or other entities in respect to the operation and maintenance of youth counseling and youth services programs and facilities; and 
(7)	Consider the annual budget for the commission during the process of its preparation by the commission's counselor/coordinator and present such budget to the council along with recommendation thereon. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-7-2005)  
Secs. 2-3-7—2-3-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 4 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-4-1. - Personnel system. 
The city council will adopt a personnel system to be administered by the city manager. The preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualification for each class shall be included in the personnel rules. 
(Code 1966, § 2-6.01)  
Secs. 2-4-2—2-4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - CITY MANAGER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City managers, Government Code § 34851 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-4-31. - Office established. 
The office of the city manager of the city is hereby created and established. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.201)  
Sec. 2-4-32. - Conflicts with employment contract. 
The provisions of this article apply in the absence of contrary provisions in the city manager's employment contract with the city. 
State Law reference— Appointment of manager and general eligibility requirements, Government Code § 34855.  
Sec. 2-4-33. - Appointment; term of office. 
The city manager shall be appointed by the council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.202)  
Sec. 2-4-34. - Eligibility. 
No person elected as city councilmember shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.203)  
Sec. 2-4-36. - Residence. 
Residence in the city at the time of the appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment; provided, however, that within 180 days thereafter, the city manager shall become a resident of the city, or the council shall declare the office of city manager to be vacant. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.204) 
State Law reference— Residency at time of appointment not required, Government Code § 34855.  
Sec. 2-4-37. - Full-time employment required. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.208)  
Sec. 2-4-38. - Compensation and expense allowance. 
(a)	The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the council shall from time to time determine and fix by contract with the city manager. Such compensation and expense allowance shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate. 
(b)	The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under the direction of the council. Reimbursement shall be made, however, only when a verified itemized claim setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested has been presented to the council for approval. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.206)  
Sec. 2-4-39. - Removal. 
(a)	The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three-fifths vote of the whole council, at a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of this section. 
(b)	In the event of the intended removal of the city manager by the council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him, and the reason therefor, at least 30 days before the effective date of his removal. 
(c)	After furnishing the city manager with a written notice of intended removal, the council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to a requested hearing. 
(d)	Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of a notice of intended removal, he may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the council. Thereafter, the council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the 30-day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
(e)	In removing the city manager, the council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to permit the city manager to present to the council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to the action of the council. 
(f)	Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city, at which election a member of the council is elected. The purpose of this subsection is to permit any newly elected member of the council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of such 90-day period, the provisions of this section as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-4.212—2-4.217)  
Sec. 2-4-40. - City manager pro tempore. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event of the absence or disability of the city manager and his failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of the absence or disability of the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.205)  
Sec. 2-4-41. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the council except as otherwise provided in this article. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, he shall also have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	Law enforcement. To enforce all laws and ordinances of the city. 
(2)	Direction of employees. To control, order, and give directions to all the heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through the department heads of such officers and employees. 
(3)	Appointment, removal, and promotion of employees. To appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers and employees of the city except the city clerk, city attorney, and city treasurer. 
(4)	Reorganization of offices, positions, and departments. To recommend to the council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments, or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of the efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the city's business. 
(5)	Legislation enactment recommendations. To recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient. 
(6)	Attendance at council meetings. To attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom except when his removal is under consideration. 
(7)	Financial reports. To keep the council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. 
(8)	Budget and salary plans. To prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the council for its approval. 
(9)	Purchase of supplies. To purchase all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the council except on the report and approval of the city manager. 
(10)	Investigations. To make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division thereof, to investigate any contract or the proper performance of any obligation of the city, and to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city. 
(11)	Enforcement of franchises and permits. To see that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the council are faithfully performed and observed. 
(12)	Supervision of public property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the council. 
(13)	Council instructions. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance, resolution, or other action of the council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.207)  
Sec. 2-4-42. - Attendance at commission, board, and committee meetings. 
The city manager, upon his own volition or upon the direction of the council, may attend any and all meetings of commissions, boards, or committees created by the council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards, or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof. He shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.209)  
Sec. 2-4-43. - Relationship with council. 
The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the council, and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.210)  
Sec. 2-4-44. - Cooperation of city officers. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer, and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by the laws and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4.211)  
Secs. 2-4-45—2-4-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Appointment; term of office. 
The city clerk shall be appointed by the council for a term of four years. 
(Ord. No. 448, 12-16-2008)  
Secs. 2-4-51—2-4-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - CITY TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Appointment; term of office. 
The city treasurer shall be appointed by the council for a term of four years. 
(Ord. No. 449, 12-16-2008)  
Chapter 5 - DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-5-1. - Ratification. 
All departments in existence on the adoption date of this Code are ratified and confirmed.  
Chapter 6 - FINANCE  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-6-1. - Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt. 
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be accumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 1-2.06)  
Sec. 2-6-2. - Enterprise funds. 
All money received from the collection of use fees for sewer, water and refuse services shall be placed into accounts designated for the operation of those specific activities. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-2.301, 3-2.302)  
Secs. 2-6-3—2-6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - PURCHASING PROCEDURE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), adopted August 5, 2008, amended article 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article 2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 3-7.02—3-7.14. 
State Law reference— Local purchasing policies required, Government Code § 54201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-6-31. - Adoption of purchasing system. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-32. - Purchasing officer. 
There is hereby created the position of purchasing officer. The purchasing officer shall be appointed by the council. The duties of purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-33. - Authority. 
The purchasing officer shall have authority to: 
(1)	Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this subchapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the Council. 
(2)	Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment. 
(3)	Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city. 
(4)	Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases. 
(5)	Prepare and recommend to the council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city. 
(6)	Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules. 
(7)	Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products. 
(8)	Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations. 
(9)	Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications. 
(10)	Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use. 
(11)	Maintain a bidders list, vendors catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. 
(12)	The purchasing officer shall present to and for the city council approval of expenditures greater than $10,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-34. - Exemptions from centralized purchasing. 
(a)	The purchasing officer with approval of the council may authorize, in writing, any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies and equipment independently of the purchasing department; but the purchasing officer shall require that such purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this subchapter and shall further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. 
(b)	Cooperative purchases with the state are hereby authorized. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-35. - Requisitions and purchase orders. 
(a)	Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. 
(b)	Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase order. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to establish open accounts for the purchase of minor supplies and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-36. - Use of petty cash. 
All individuals requiring petty cash reimbursement or advance petty cash disbursals shall be required to fill out the appropriate claim form. Receipts shall be required to substantiate all purchases. No petty cash shall be dispensed without the approval of the department head and the purchasing officer or designee. All receipts for advance petty cash must be returned within two days. Disbursements from petty cash shall not exceed $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-37. - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. The normal purchasing procedures as provided for under this article may be dispensed with only for the purchase of supplies, equipment or services necessary to provide an essential city-supplied service affecting the public health, safety or welfare. Waiver of said procedure may only occur when the normal purchasing procedure would cause an undue delay in the procurement of the items to insure emergency services are provided. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-38. - Bidding. 
(a)	Informal and formal bidding procedures. Public projects, as defined by Cal. Public Contract Code § 22002, and in accordance with the monetary limits described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission), shall be let to contract by procedures described in Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22030 et seq. 
(b)	Procedures not established by the Act. When the Act does not establish a procedure for bidding public projects, the procedures described in this section and/or Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 20160 et seq. shall govern. 
(c)	Contractors list. Lists of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Public Contract Code § 22034 and criteria promulgated from time to time by the Commission. 
(d)	Award to low bidder; no bids. 
(1)	All contracts must be awarded to the lowest bidder. 
(2)	If two or more bids are the same and lowest, the city may perform public projects with city employees or through a negotiated contract without further compliance with this section. 
(e)	Notice inviting informal bids. 
(1)	Preparation of notice. When a public project anticipated to fall within the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the Commission) is to be performed, the city shall prepare a notice of the opportunity to bid, which describes the project in general terms, states the time and place for the submission of bids, and describes how to obtain more detailed information about the project. 
(2)	Mailing of notice. 
a.	The city shall mail the notice to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with subsection (c). 
b.	It may also be mailed to all construction trade journals, as specified by the Commission in accordance with Cal. Public Contract Code § 22036. 
c.	Other contractors and/or construction trade journals may also be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids. 
d.	Mailing shall be completed at least ten days before bids are due. 
(f)	Award of informally bid contracts. The city manager, community development director, or finance director are authorized to award informal contracts as defined in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032, except those described in subsection (m). 
(g)	Bids exceed informal bidding limit. If all informal bids received exceed the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the commission), and the city determines that the cost estimate was reasonable, the city may award the contract at up to the limit described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22034(f), by resolution approved by a four-fifths vote of the city council. 
(h)	Bid documents for formal bids. The city council shall adopt plans, specifications and working details for all public projects anticipated to fall outside the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the commission). 
(i)	Notice inviting formal bids. 
(1)	Preparation of notice. When a public project anticipated to fall outside the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the commission) is to be performed, the city shall publish a notice inviting formal bids in a newspaper of general circulation as described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22037. 
(2)	Mailing of notice. 
a.	The notice shall also be mailed to all construction trade journals, as specified by the commission in accordance with Cal. Public Contract Code § 22036. 
b.	Other contractors and/or construction trade journals may also be notified, at the discretion of the department soliciting bids. 
c.	Mailing shall be completed at least 30 days before bids are due. 
(j)	When contractors list has not been prepared; proprietary product or service. Notwithstanding subsections (e) and (i): 
(1)	If the city has not prepared a list of contractors for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent to each of the construction trade journals specified by the commission. 
(2)	If the product or service is proprietary in nature, such that it can be legally obtained only from a certain contractor(s), the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor(s). 
(k)	Contracts for maintenance and other work. Contracts for maintenance, as defined by Cal. Public Contract Code § 22002, and for any other work that does not fall within that section's definition of public projects, may be bid pursuant to the informal bidding procedures described in subsection (e), and the formal bidding procedures in subsection (i). 
(l)	Rejection of bids; re-solicitation; use of city employees. 
(1)	If the city intends to reject all bids, it must mail the apparent low bidder a written notice of the city's intent to reject the bid, at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the bids will be considered. 
(2)	After rejecting all bids, the city may: 
a.	Abandon the project; 
b.	Readvertise the project; or 
c.	Perform the work with city employees, after a four-fifths majority of city council has passed a resolution, declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees. 
(m)	Emergency procedures. When an emergency necessitates repair or replacement, contracts shall be awarded pursuant to the procedures described in Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22035 and 22050. 
(n)	Uniform cost accounting procedures. Whenever the city uses its own employees to perform a public works or maintenance project valued at more than the monetary limit on informal bidding projects described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the commission), it must implement the uniform construction cost accounting policies and procedures described in Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22043 et seq. and the commission's policies and procedures manual. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-39. - Formal contract procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of estimated value greater than $25,000.00 shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein. 
(1)	Notice inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
a.	Published notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated by the city as places for posting public notices. 
b.	Bidders' list. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list or who have requested their names to be added thereto. 
c.	Bulletin board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. 
(2)	Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security, provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(3)	Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. 
(4)	Rejection of bids. In its discretion the council may reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids. 
(5)	Award of contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein. 
(6)	Tie bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. 
(7)	Performance bonds. The council shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-40. - Open market procedure. 
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of $25,000.00 or less may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market without observing the procedure prescribed by section 2-6-39 formal bid procedure. 
(1)	Minimum number of bids. Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(2)	Notice inviting bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone, and by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. 
(3)	Written bids. Sealed written bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer who shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record while so kept shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-41. - Inspection and testing. 
The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-42. - Contracting for professional services. 
(a)	Procurement of certain professional services. The services of certain professions that involve extended analysis, the exercise of discretion and independent judgment in their performance, and an advanced, specialized type of knowledge, expertise, or training customarily acquired either by a prolonged course of study or equivalent experience in the field, shall be procured in accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section. 
(b)	Selection procedure. 
(1)	Conditions for use. Services provided under emergency procurements are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(2)	Statement of qualifications. Persons engaged in providing professional services as described in subsection (a), may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional services. 
(3)	Public announcement and form of request for proposals. The city manager, or designee, through a request for qualifications, shall give adequate notice of the need for such services. 
(4)	Discussions. The city manager, or designee, may conduct discussions with any consultant who has submitted an interest to determine such consultant's qualifications for further consideration. Consultants shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion. 
(5)	Award. Award shall be made to the consultant determined in writing to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair and reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Sec. 2-6-43. - Surplus supplies and equipment. 
All departments shall submit to the city manager, at such times and in such form as prescribed, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The city manager shall have the authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any officer or agency, or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2008)  
Chapter 7 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-7-1. - Declaration of purpose. 
(a)	The city council finds that the enforcement of this code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety, and quality of life. The council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of administrative and judicial remedies is critical to gain compliance with code regulations. Failure to comply with enforcement actions may ultimately require the city attorney to file litigious action to gain compliance. 
(b)	The city council finds there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of this code and applicable state codes. The council further finds that an administrative citation program is an appropriate alternative method of enforcement for such minor violations. 
(c)	The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. 
(d)	The administrative citations process set forth in this title does not apply to continuing violations of this Code that pertain to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-2. - Authority. 
Any person violating any provision of this Code, or applicable state code, wherein such violation consists of an action or failure to act which if sustained may result in the assessment of a fine, may be issued an administrative citation by the enforcement official as provided in this chapter. 
(1)	The enforcement official shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this code and applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private property (when such private property owner or manager has been served notice of being out of compliance), and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies as may be available under this code or applicable state codes. 
(2)	The enforcement official is authorized to enter upon any property or premise to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this code or applicable state codes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations and surveys necessary to the performance of their enforcement duties. These may include the taking of photographs, or collection of samples, or other physical evidence, or the recording of interviews. All such takings, examinations, inspections, gatherings, or surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. Should a respondent refuse permission to enter to inspect, the enforcement official may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in California Code of Civil Procedures (CCCP) §§ 1822.50—1822.59. 
(3)	Each and every day a minor violation of this code or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(4)	A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of administrative citation issued by the enforcement official and shall be payable directly to the city, and shall be deposited to the code enforcement fund established pursuant to section 2-7-3. 
(5)	Such civil penalty as is assessed in accordance with subsection (2) shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-3. - Code enforcement fund established. 
All fees, costs, reimbursements, or monies received pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be placed in a special fund which is created and established for such purposes and which shall be known as the 'code enforcement fund.' Sums collected under this title shall be appropriated and allocated as determined by the city manager for the specific purpose of reimbursement of costs incurred and for continued code enforcement activities first, and may be applied as directed to the city general fund thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-4. - Civil violations, injunctions, and civil penalties. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by this code, any provision of this code may be enforced by an injunction issued by the superior court upon a suit brought by the city. As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this code, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of five hundred dollars per violation of this code for each day during which any person commits, continues to commit, allows, or maintains a violation of any provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Secs. 2-7-5, 2-7-6. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-7-7. - Purpose and intent. 
This article establishes an enforcement mechanism for all violations of the City Code and appropriate state codes. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-8. - Definitions. 
Administrative citation means an official notification, on an appropriate form as established by this article, of violation of any provision of the City Code or appropriately enforced state code. Said citations shall require correction of the violation and impose fines upon the responsible party. 
Enforcement official, for purposes of this title, the enforcement official shall be defined as the chief of police, or his/her duly appointed and sanctioned representative. 
Responsible party means any person who exercises legal and/or physical control over a property or business premises within the city and/or has the ability to correct City Code or applicable state code violations. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-9. - Administrative citation specifications. 
Fines for violations of the City Code or appropriate state code will be assessed through an administrative citation, issued by the enforcement official. The citation form shall be in a format approved by the city manager, and shall provide as a minimum: 
(1)	A header block, declaring the citation to be a city administrative citation. 
(2)	Each citation shall be individually numbered, and no number shall be duplicated on another citation. 
(3)	Each citation shall have an information block, providing for the following information to be entered upon issuance as appropriate: 
a.	Day, date, and time of issuance. 
b.	Report number. 
c.	Location. 
d.	Name, D.O.B., ID#. 
e.	Height, weight, hair, eye, ethnicity/sex. 
f.	Address, phone. 
g.	Vehicle license #, year model, month/year of reg., make, color, style. 
(8)	Issuing officer's name and ID number. 
(4)	A violations block, designating which codes is being cited by code number, violation description, and fine amount. As pre-approved by the chief of police, a percentage of the codes enforced may be pre-designated on the citation, their application to an individual circumstance being indicated by a check box. The violations block shall also include adequate space to enter several non-predesignated violations, along with the appropriate fine amounts. 
(5)	A fine summary block, in which the fines indicated in the violations block are totaled as to amount. 
(6)	A payment block, designating where fines shall be paid, within what time period, and what additional penalties may be assessed for failure to meet time constraints. This block shall also include notice as to the appeal process, and shall designate not only the process by which to initiate an appeal, but time limitations therewith as follows, said statement being presented in all caps and boldface type, to wit, "NOTICE! FAILURE TO REQUEST AN APPEAL WITHIN TEN DAYS OF ISSUANCE OF THIS CITATION WILL BE CONSIDERED A WIAVER OF YOUR RIGHT TO APPEAL." 
(7)	A service block, indicating by check box if the citation was posted at the scene, personally served, or mailed. Notices that are designated as 'served' shall be deemed to have been served by issuing officer. 
(8)	Citations shall be published as three-part carbon forms, with the top two forms being forwarded upon completion to the chief of police for enforcement administration, and the bottom copy to be served to the offender in a manner prescribed in this title. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-10. - Manner of service. 
Citations shall be issued in the following order of preference: 
(1)	Personal service. The enforcement official personally serves administrative citation on the offending party. When such service occurs, receipt by the individual served is not required, and failure to acknowledge receipt is not a defense, nor will it mitigate penalties assessed. 
(2)	Posting on unattended vehicle. When such vehicle is obviously being operated, posting in a conspicuous place (such as under a windshield wiper) shall be considered as service having been affected. 
(3)	Service by mail. When citation is to be issued to the owner of a business or private property where an alleged violation occurred, but the owner is not present, notice may be sent by certified mail to the business address or tax role address respectively. Such posting by certified mail shall be deemed to have been effected service for purposes of this title. 
(4)	Posting in a conspicuous place. When a property owner is not available, and a verifiable mailing address is not attainable or certified mail has been returned as non-deliverable, posting the citation in a conspicuous place relative to the alleged offense is acceptable. In such cases, a report specifying attempts to contact the responsible party shall be generated, and forwarded with the citation for processing. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
ARTICLE 3. - APPEAL HEARING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-7-11. - Process of appeal. 
Any recipient of an administrative citation shall the have the right to challenge the validity of the citation by requesting an appeal. 
(1)	Appeals shall be made within ten calendar days of the issuance of a citation. If the deadline for filing the appeal falls on a weekend or city holiday, the deadline shall be extended through the next business day. Counted days for appeal shall be considered to have passed for purposes of filing at 5:00 p.m. daily. 
(2)	Appeals must be made in writing on a form provided by the city specifying the basis for the appeal in detail. Details of the form referred-to in this section shall be specified in section 2-7-12. Upon accepting of an appeal request, a photocopy of the appeal form will be immediately returned to the appellant. 
(3)	Appeal requests must be accompanied by a posting in cash, or by certified check or money order, the full amount of any fines and administrative fees potentially to be levied as a result of the issuance of the citation, or a hardship waiver as defined in section 2-7-13 in the alternative. 
(4)	Failure to file for an appeal request within the allotted time will be deemed a forfeiture of appeal rights. 
(5)	In the event of exigent circumstance, an appellant who fails to meet timeliness requirements may request, and the city manager may grant, an appeal filing extension beyond the normal ten-day limitation. Such requests must be made in writing to the city manager directly, with the justification for requiring a longer than the ten day appeal period specified. Under such circumstances, the appellant will be notified in writing within ten days of a finding of additional time for appeal granted, with a new filing date, or additional time for appeal denied. No explanation of reasoning used in granting or denying the request for appeal extension need be provided by the city manager, and the determination of the city manager is final. 
(6)	Once an appeal request has been accepted, the city shall notify the appellant of the date, time, and location of the appeal hearing within 30 days. Such notification shall be made in a manner as to allow appellant ten days notice prior to the hearing. 
(7)	The city planning commission shall act as the appeals board. 
(8)	The failure of any person with an interest in sustaining the appeal to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. 
(9)	Should a person with an interest in sustaining the appeal fail to be present for the appeal hearing for any reason, such hearing shall be conducted in absentia, and the findings of the hearing panel shall obtain. 
(10)	Failure to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute an waiver of rights to contest the accompanying administrative citation and the imposition of the fine. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-12. - Appeals form. 
On appeal of an administrative citation, assuming appeal is being filed within approved time constraints, the city shall provide an appeals form, which form shall contain the following information: 
(1)	A heading block, designating said form as an administrative citation appeals form. The heading block shall identify the form as originating from the city and shall provide the city's contact address, phone number, and fax number. 
(2)	An appellant identifier block which shall include space for the appellant's name, address, phone number, citation number, and date of citation issue. 
(3)	A "basis for appeal" block, which shall provide room to list each charge being appealed, as well as a detailed explanation of the basis for the appeal. A notation should be made that additional explanation may be attached on a separate sheet if necessary. 
(4)	A deposit acknowledgement block designated as "For city personnel only", stating that one of two conditions has been met; either a deposit for the full amount of potential fines and fees in cash, certified check, or money order has been accepted and receipted by the city, or a hardship waiver as defined in section 2-7-13 is attached. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-13. - Hardship waiver. 
Any recipient of an administrative citation who requests an appeal hearing and is financially incapable of filing the required deposit may file a request with the city manager for a hardship waiver of the advance deposit requirement. 
(1)	Requests for hardship waivers shall be filed with the request for appeal hearing, and shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city manager of the person's actual inability to file the required deposit. 
(2)	The city manager shall either grant or deny the request for a waiver within ten calendar days of receipt of such request. Such determination shall be annotated on the waiver request by the city manager as either granted or denied, and returned to the appellant. No explanation of the basis for determination shall be required. The decision of the city manager is final. 
(3)	If the request for hardship waiver is denied, all required fines and fees shall be deposited within ten days of the date of denial, or 30 days from the date of the issuance of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
(4)	If the request for hardship waiver is granted, but the administrative citation is upheld by the planning commission, the fine and all fees must be paid within ten calendar days of completion of the hearing, or additional fines and administrative collection fees may attach. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-14. - Hearing process. 
The chairman of the planning commission shall conduct a fair and orderly hearing and accept evidence on which persons commonly would rely in the conduct of their business affairs. 
(1)	At the appeal hearing, the appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, including witnesses, concerning the alleged violation. Any other interested party, including but not limited to a property or business owner being sanctioned or adversely affected by the issue at hand, employees, or neighbors may also he heard. 
(2)	Appellant may be represented by council at his or her own expense. 
(3)	Appellant or council may not cross examine witnesses, but may ask questions of the hearing board which they, in turn, may use to query principals in the allegations as they see fit. 
(4)	The administrative citation and any additional reports submitted by the issuing officer shall constitute prima facia evidence of the facts contained in these documents. The planning commission may subpoena testimony of the issuing officer at their discretion. 
(5)	The planning commission may take the matter under submission, or may continue the hearing and/or request additional information as pertains. 
(6)	The planning commission shall by majority vote determine whether to affirm or dismiss the administrative citation. The planning commission may not reduce, waive, or conditionally reduce the fines established by the city. 
(7)	The chairman of the planning commission shall publish findings based on deliberations conducted relevant to the hearing, clarifying the affirmation or dismissal of the administrative citation and the reasons therefore. The city shall preserve all exhibits submitted by the parties to the hearing for a period of thirty days. Determination of findings shall be advised to appellant in person at the conclusion of the hearing if a determination has been made, and shall be mailed by certified mail within ten days of conclusion of the hearing if determination is taken under consideration. The decision of the planning commission in determining the affirmation or dismissal of the administrative citation is final, without right of further administrative appeal. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-15. - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of the appeals board on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the municipal court in the city in accordance with the timeliness and other provisions set forth in Government Code § 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Secs. 2-7-16, 2-7-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 2-7-18. - Administrative start-up costs. 
The city, with the approval of the city manager, shall seed the code enforcement fund with initial start-up capital of $2,000.00 from the general fund, to be repaid to the general fund upon a declaration of fund solvency by the city manager. This seed money shall be used to print administrative citations, purchase office supplies, and publish documents as required in the initial start-up of the fund. The fund, once solvent, should be self-sustaining. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-19. - Budget and operations costs. 
Operating costs for enforcing the administrative citation program shall be drawn from the code enforcement fund, as maintained by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-20. - Fine schedule. 
The city council shall by resolution approve a fine schedule for violations of City Code and appropriate state codes. 
(1)	The fine schedule shall specify fines and increases in fines for subsequent violations of the same regulation by the same person within a one-year period. 
a.	A schedule of fines for infractions under state or City Code shall be published specifying amounts associated with specific offenses. Such fines shall double for a second offense, and quadruple for third offenses and for each subsequent offense thereafter within a one-year period. Where a fine amount is not specified, an assumed fine of $50.00 shall apply. In such cases, a second offense shall within a year shall be $100.00, and third and subsequent offenses within a year shall be $200.00. 
b.	Fines for misdemeanors enforced under this section shall be $125.00 first offense, $250.00 second offense, and $500.00 third offense or subsequent offenses within a one-year period. 
(2)	The city council shall annually review the fine schedule and make changes as deemed appropriate, at a time to be determined by the city manager. 
(3)	Late payment penalties shall also be determined and specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-21. - Payment of fines. 
Payment of fines and assessed fees shall be paid directly to the city within 30 working days from the date of the issuance of the administrative citation unless the citation is appealed, in which case the fine and fees, if any, shall be paid from submitted deposits if the planning commission affirms the citation, or within ten calendar days after such a finding if a hardship waiver has been granted. 
(1)	Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. 
(2)	Any person who fails to pay any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the date that fine is due shall also be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment penalties as set forth in the fine schedule. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-22. - Right of recovery. 
The city shall have the right to impose administrative fees to cover costs of correction or abatement when a public nuisance or other violation of city or applicable state codes is enforced. The city may collect these fees, as well as any past due administrative citation or late payment charges by use of all available legal means, to include but not limited to the withholding of city services or placement of liens pending satisfaction of the debt to the city. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-23. - Records. 
It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to maintain records related to the enforcement of the administrative citation program, with the exception of code enforcement fund records, which shall come under the purview of the city manager. The city manager shall allocate appropriate funding from the code enforcement fund to the chief of police to cover reasonable costs of maintenance of required records. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-24. - Supplies and support materials. 
The chief of police shall bear the responsibility of maintaining supplies and support materials necessary to the administration of the administrative citation program. Such supplies shall include, but not be limited to the printing of citations and publication of appropriate manuals, forms and public information documents. The city manager shall allocate funding as needed from the code enforcement fund to cover the costs of these expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-25. - Citation control. 
Citations shall be accounted-for by number, and a record of issuance of citation by number block shall be maintained by the chief of police. Any citation, which is voided, shall include all parts of the citation, with a short memo to the chief of police explaining the reason for the voiding. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-26. - Program administration. 
It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to develop a system for processing citations in a manner as will properly account for providing alleged violators with due process, tracking records, and storing evidence as required. The chief of police shall keep the city manager apprised of the state of operations of the administrative citation program by exception, or at any time as may be requested by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-7-27. - Report required. 
Any administrative citation which alleges a violation deemed a misdemeanor under city or applicable state codes shall require the generation of an attendant standard police report by the issuing officer. 
(Ord. No. 438, 7-1-2008)  
TITLE 3 - ENVIRONMENT  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 3-1-1—3-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - PUBLIC NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, Government Code § 38771 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 3-2-1—3-2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL PROHIBITION AND ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 3-2-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private property means buildings as well as lands. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.201)  
Sec. 3-2-32. - Public nuisance; declaration. 
Anything which is injurious to the health, is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, and which affects at the same time as an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, including any dirt, rubbish, weeds, or rank growth upon private property or the sidewalks in front of such property of such character as to be or become unsanitary, a fire menace, or otherwise objectionable, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.202) 
State Law reference— Authority to declare what constitutes a nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Sec. 3-2-33. - Resolution to abate. 
Whenever any such public nuisance exists upon any private property or the sidewalks in front of such property, the council shall pass a resolution directing the director of public works to have such nuisance abated. Such resolution shall refer to such property by street and number or by such other means as will enable the property to be easily identified and located. The resolution shall state the character of the nuisance to be abated. Any number of parcels of private property or sidewalks, whether they are contiguous or otherwise, may be included in the same resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.203) 
State Law reference— Authority to abate nuisances, Government Code § 38773.  
Sec. 3-2-34. - Notice to abate. 
(a)	Posting. After the passing of the resolution, the director of public works shall post a notice in front of or upon each parcel of property of which the nuisance exists. This notice shall be headed "Notice to Abate Nuisance" and shall be in the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE 
Notice is hereby given that on the ____________ day of 20 ____________ , the city council of the City of Gustine passed a resolution declaring that a public nuisance exists upon or in front of certain private property, the particular character of the nuisance and the location of the property being described as follows: _____
_____
_____
_____
_____
Such public nuisance shall be abated by the removal thereof within ten days from the posting of this notice; otherwise, the same shall be removed by the director of public works, and the expense assessed upon the private property from which or in front of which the same is removed. Such expense shall constitute a lien upon such private property until paid. 
Dated and posted on _____ 20 ____________ . 
	_____
Director of Public Works 
 
(b)	Personal delivery or mailing. A copy of such notice shall be delivered personally or by registered mail to the reputed owner or agent of each of the respective parcels of private property referred to, whereupon the director of public works shall make a file with the city clerk an affidavit certifying to the time, form, and manner of posting and giving such notice. If the name and address of any reputed owner or agent are unknown to the director of public works, the posting of the notice on the property shall be deemed sufficient. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.204)  
Sec. 3-2-35. - Abatement by the city; right of entry. 
After the delivery or posting of such notice, ten days shall be allowed each owner of the private property within which to abate the nuisance. If such nuisance is not abated within ten days, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to abate the property, and such director or assistants are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for such purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.205)  
Sec. 3-2-36. - Abatement by city; report of costs; assessment. 
(a)	Report of costs. The director of public works shall keep an account of the cost of abating any public nuisance where the work is done by him or his assistants. The director of public works shall render an itemized report to the council showing the cost of such work upon or in front of each separate lot or building, which cost he shall assess against each parcel of property, respectively. 
(b)	Delivery to property owner. At least three days prior to submitting such report and assessment to the council, the director of public works shall personally deliver a copy thereof to one of the occupants, agents, or reputed owners of the property affected, if known. 
(c)	Posting. If such private property is unoccupied or if the reputed owner is unknown, the director of public works shall post a copy of the itemized report upon or immediately in front of such property for a period of at least three days. Such copy shall contain a notice of the time when the report and assessment shall be submitted to the council for approval and confirmation. On or before ten days after the delivery or posting of such notice, the director of public works shall file with the city clerk an affidavit certifying to the time, form, and manner of giving or posting the notice. 
(d)	Protest. At any time not later than the hour set for the hearing the report of costs and assessment, any owner of the property liable to be assessed for such work may make a written protest against the work or the assessment, or both. Such shall be in writing and delivered to the clerk of the council. 
(e)	Hearing. At the time set for hearing the report of costs and assessment, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests so made, and the decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. The council may adjourn such hearing from time to time. The report of costs and assessment so made as modified by the council shall be confirmed by motion or resolution and entered in the minutes. 
(f)	Lien. As confirmed by the council, such assessments shall constitute a lien on the parcels of property affected for the amounts so imposed. Copies of the confirmed assessments shall be delivered to the director of public works by the clerk of the council, and it shall be the duty of the director of public works to add the respective amounts of such assessments to the bills for regular municipal taxes next to be levied and collected against the respective parcels of private property so assessed. Such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes of the city are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties for delinquency and the same procedure for the foreclosure and sale as is provided for enforcing the collection of ordinary municipal taxes in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.206) 
State Law reference— Collection of expenses of nuisance abatement, Government Code § 38773.1.  
Secs. 3-2-37—3-2-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - VEHICLE ABANDONMENT AND ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 3-2-50. - General abandoned vehicles as nuisances. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code (VC) to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-51. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as set out in this section: 
Highway means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
Owner of the land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-52. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)	A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the highway or other public or private property; 
(2)	A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 
(3)	Nothing in this section authorizes the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provision of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-53. - Nonexclusivity of regulation. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the city and/or county. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by this city/county, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-54. - Officer designated. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the vehicle abatement officer as designated by the (city manager or designated agency head responsible for abandoned vehicle abatement operations in the designated city and/or county). In the enforcement of this chapter, such officers and deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-55. - Authority of private contractor. 
When the council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to remove vehicles pursuant to this chapter, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-56. - Administration costs. 
The council shall, from time to time, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-57. - Authority of vehicle abatement officer. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperable vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city/county, the vehicle abatement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-58. - Abatement notice of intention. 
(a)	A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE" 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
"As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to, license or VIN number, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of (ordinance or municipal code Chapter number)." 
"You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the city and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located." 
"As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the city council of the city of within such 10-day period, the city manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing." 
NOTICE MAILED: _____ 
_____
City Manager 
City of _____ 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE" 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle - notice should be given to both if different.) 
"As the last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number)." 
"You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by removing said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of the mailing of this notice." 
"As the registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. If such request is not received by the city council of the city of within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing." 
Notice Mailed: _____ 
_____
City Manager 
City of _____ 
(b)	A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if (1) the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waive further interest in the vehicle or part thereof, or (2) all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)	The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed; 
(2)	The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than $300.00 by the police chief of the city of or his/her designee; 
(3)	The department of building and safety has determined that the vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; 
(4)	The property owner has signed a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; and 
(5)	The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
(c)	If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (b)(2), prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof. If the vehicle or part thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, automobile dismantler's yard or public disposal area within 12 days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-59. - Public hearing requested. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city's/county's vehicle abatement officer within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and cost of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing, which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city/county shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-60. - Public hearing—Procedure action. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the planning commission, which shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning the vehicle's location on the private property or public property. The planning commission shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial. 
The planning commission may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. This may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in the opinion of the hearing officer, the circumstances justify the delay. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, and by resolution order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that (s)he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the planning commission shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner. 
If an interested party makes a written presentation to the planning commission, but does not appear, (s)he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-61. - Vehicle disposal. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision, as required by section 3-2-58, whichever date is later, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to 5004 VC, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-62. - Notice to department of motor vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles by the persons authorized to remove the vehicle identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-63. - Cost recovery. 
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to section 3-2-56 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Government Code Section 25845 or 38733.5 and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other county taxes. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-64. - Act of abandonment—Infraction. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon, store, leave, or permit the abandonment, storing, or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative upon any private property or public property, including highways, within the city for a period in excess of 72 or more consecutive hours unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-65. - Refusal to abate—Infraction. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law, where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-66. - Constitutionality. 
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, or phrase of this chapter for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 3-2-67. - Interference with abatement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse admittance to persons authorized by this article to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. Failure to allow persons authorized by this article to enter upon private property to enforce the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Chapter 3 - SEPTIC TANKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Individual sewage disposal systems, Water Code § 13280 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-3-1. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7.07) 
State Law reference— Infractions, Government Code § 36900.  
Sec. 3-3-2. - Enforcement. 
The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may perform all acts necessary or proper to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7.06)  
Sec. 3-3-3. - Inspections. 
The city shall be responsible for inspections. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7.04)  
Sec. 3-3-4. - Fees. 
All fees associated with this chapter shall be set by resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7.05)  
Sec. 3-3-5. - Construction. 
No septic tank may be constructed within the city without written permission from the council. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7.02)  
Sec. 3-3-6. - Septic tank standards. 
The standards for the construction of septic tanks published in the "Guidelines for Waste Disposal from Land Developments," adopted December 15, 1972, by the state regional water quality control board, or as may be revised or supplemented, are hereby incorporated in and made an applicable part of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-7.03)  
TITLE 4 - LAND DEVELOPMENT  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4-2-1—4-2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local planning, Government Code § 65100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-2-31. - Established. 
The planning commission is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 65100. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.201) 
State Law reference— Planning commission authorized, Government Code § 65101.  
Sec. 4-2-32. - Membership. 
(a)	The planning commission shall consist of five members appointed by the council for terms of four years. Terms commence on January 1 and expire on December 31. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint one member of the council to serve as an ex officio member of the commission without the right to vote. The term of an ex officio member shall correspond to the person's term on the council. 
(b)	Any appointive member of the planning commission may be removed from the commission by a majority vote of the council. Any member of the commission who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission without due cause shall be automatically removed. 
(c)	A member of the planning commission may resign from the commission by filing a written statement with the city clerk stating that he resigns from the commission. The resignation shall become effective at the time of filing such written statement, and such member shall thereupon cease to be a member of the commission, and a vacancy shall exist. 
(d)	Vacancies on the planning commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(e)	Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-2.203—2-2.207; Ord. No. 428, § 5, 6-7-2005) 
State Law reference— Planning commission membership, Government Code § 65101.  
Sec. 4-2-33. - Officers and meetings. 
(a)	The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among the appointed members. Officers shall hold office for one year or until their successors are appointed. 
(b)	The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. At least three members shall approve any action or recommendation to the council relating to rezoning, amendments to the general plan or planning and zoning provisions set forth in this title, conditional use permits, tentative parcel and subdivision maps, and variances from ordinances as may be acted upon by the commission. In all other cases, a majority vote of those members present will be followed. 
(c)	Special meetings of the planning commission may be called at any time by the chairperson or by any three or more members of the commission. If personal notice cannot be given, written notice shall be mailed to such members at least 24 hours prior to the meeting, unless the notice requirement is waived in writing by a member. 
(d)	The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and keep a public record of its transactions, resolutions, findings, and determinations, subject to the approval of the council. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-2.203, 2-2.208—2-2.211)  
Sec. 4-2-34. - Duties. 
The planning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers, and privileges specified and provided by state laws or by city laws and resolutions. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.210) 
State Law reference— Planning commission functions, Government Code § 65103.  
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Airport Approaches Zoning Law, Government Code § 50485 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-3-1. - Authority. 
It is necessary to create an airport zoning chapter, in conformity with the Airport Approaches Zoning Law (Government Code § 50485 et seq.), for the purpose of conserving and promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare by preventing destruction or impairment of the utility of the airfield and the public investment therein. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.01)  
Sec. 4-3-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of aircraft and utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 50485.1. 
Flight hazard means any structure or natural growth or use of land which obstructs or restricts the air space required for the safe flight of aircraft in landing, takeoff, or maneuvering at or in the vicinity of the airport. 
Landing area means that part of the airport that is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft. 
Nonconforming use means any structure, natural growth, or use of land which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this chapter, or any amendment thereto, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Structure means any object constructed or installed by man including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.02)  
Sec. 4-3-3. - Zones. 
To carry out the purposes of this chapter, all of the lands surrounding airports are hereby divided into height-limiting zones, the boundaries of which and the height applicable thereto are shown on the official maps on file in the office of the city clerk. Such maps are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference, subject to amendments thereof as may be necessary. Such amendments shall be entered on the official maps and kept up-to-date at all times. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.03)  
Sec. 4-3-4. - Height limit. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or natural growth shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in the height-limiting zones to a height in excess of the height specified therefor or established for such zone as shown on the official map of the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.04)  
Sec. 4-3-5. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land within any airport approach zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft; make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and other lights; result in glare in the eyes of the flyers using the airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or otherwise endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.05)  
Sec. 4-3-6. - Nonconforming uses. 
The regulations prescribed in sections 4-3-4 and 4-3-5 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or natural growth not conforming to the regulations on March 20, 1968, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which has begun prior to March 20, 1968, and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two years thereafter. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.06) 
State Law reference— Nonconformities, Government Code §§ 50485.8, 50485.10.  
Sec. 4-3-7. - Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect any structure, or increase the height of any structure, or permit natural growth, or use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter may apply to the planning commission for a variance therefrom. Such variance may be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.07) 
State Law reference— Variances, Government Code § 50485.10.  
Sec. 4-3-8. - Permits. 
(a)	Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land, and no structure or natural growth shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any of the height-limiting zones unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each such application shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or natural growth would conform to the regulations prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit applied for shall be granted. 
(b)	Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure, or natural growth may be replaced, substantially altered, or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted within any of the specified height-limiting zones, a permit shall be secured authorizing such replacement, change, or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of a flight hazard, or permit a nonconforming use, or natural growth to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on March 20, 1968, or than it was when the application for a permit for replacement, change, or repair of the existing use, structure, or natural growth shall be granted. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.08)  
Sec. 4-3-9. - Hazard marking and lighting. 
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of sections 4-3-7 and 4-3-8, if such action is considered advisable to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and reasonable in the circumstances, may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or natural growth in question to permit the airport facility, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft pilots the presence of a flight hazard. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.09)  
Sec. 4-3-10. - Amendments and changes. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good practice justify such action, the planning commission, upon its own motion, may, or upon the verified application of any interested person or group, shall, initiate proceedings to change the regulations established by this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 50485.10.  
Sec. 4-3-11. - Filing of applications. 
(a)	Applications for variances or changes thereto shall be made in writing to the planning commission and in such form as is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may provide forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be provided therein. No application shall be received unless it complies with such requirements. 
(b)	Applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.11)  
Sec. 4-3-12. - Filing fees; investigations. 
(a)	Fees. All federal, county, and city governments and their agencies shall be exempt from the payment of any and all filing fees. Before accepting any application for filing, the city shall charge and collect from any nonpublic agency, group, or individual the following fees for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this chapter: For each application for a variance, a fee as established by resolution shall accompany the application. 
(b)	Investigations. The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members such investigations of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to ensure that the action to each such application is consistent with the intent and purposes of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.12)  
Sec. 4-3-13. - Notices. 
The planning commission at its next regular meeting following the receipt in proper form of any application for a variance shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon to be held not less than 12 days nor more than 45 days thereafter. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearings, public notices shall be given of such hearings in the following manner: 
(1)	By one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Such notice shall state the nature of the request, the location of the property involved, and the time and place of the hearing; and 
(2)	By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the owners of the property adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application and to the airport facility, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the assessment rolls of the county. Such notice shall state the nature of the request, the location of the property involved, and the time and place of the hearing. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.13)  
Sec. 4-3-14. - Public hearing. 
(a)	Public hearings as provided for by the provisions of this chapter shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required by section 4-3-13. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. 
(b)	A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued, provided that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.14)  
Sec. 4-3-15. - Findings. 
(a)	Within 35 days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard. The planning commission shall announce and record its action by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the planning commission upon which it bases its decision. 
(b)	Within ten days after final action by the planning commission on an application for a variance, its recommendations and report, if any, shall be delivered to the council. 
(c)	The council, after receipt of the report and recommendation from the planning commission, shall hold a final hearing thereon. The manner for setting the date for such hearing, giving of notice, and conducting such hearing shall be the same as prescribed for hearings by sections 4-3-13 and 4-3-14 by the planning commission. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be approved unless reversed by a majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.15)  
Sec. 4-3-16. - Administrative agency. 
The planning commission is hereby designated the administrative agency charged with the duty of administering and enforcing the regulations prescribed by the provisions of this chapter. The duties of the planning commission shall include that of hearing and deciding on permits pursuant to the provisions of section 4-3-8. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.16)  
Sec. 4-3-17. - Penalties. 
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated by the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.17) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, Government Code § 36900 et seq.  
Sec. 4-3-18. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where the provisions of this chapter impose a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of land than is imposed or required by any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 9-3.18)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate construction, Government Code § 38660. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-4-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Gustine Building Code, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 437, § 3, 11-20-2007)  
Sec. 4-4-2. - Application. 
This code shall be the exclusive source of regulations for all new construction and any alterations, repairs, relocations, or reconstruction of any building or any portion thereof including any electrical, mechanical, gas, plumbing, or fire protection equipment installed on any property or used on or within any building. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 3, 11-20-2007)  
Sec. 4-4-3. - Conflicts with other laws, rules, etc. 
In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the state, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety shall be a violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 3, 11-20-2007)  
Secs. 4-4-4—4-4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— California Building Standards Law, Health and Safety Code § 18901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-4-31. - Adoption of International, Uniform, and National Codes. 
The following publications are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this Code, except as expressly amended or superseded by the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)	Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA. 
Section 204 of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 204 Board of Appeals. 
The City Council is hereby designated as a Board of Appeals to make correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the Administrative Authority. Any person dissatisfied with any decision of the building official may appeal in writing to the City Council of the the City of Gustine, which statement shall specify the ground of such dissatisfaction and shall set forth the address of appellant to which notice may be sent by mail. At the next regular meeting after filing of such appeal, the City Council shall set the same for hearing for a time not later than the next regular meeting of the Council and shall notify the appellant by mail of the time and place of such hearing, and such hearing may take such evidence as it shall deem proper, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the building official with a duplicate copy to the appellant. The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required by council to substantiate his claims. The decision of the City Council on such appeal shall be final. 
(2)	California Building Code, 2013 Edition, based on the 2012 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 2 vol. 1 & 2 of the California Code of Regulations including the following appendices: 
Appendix chapter H—Signs 
Appendix chapter I—Patio Covers 
Appendix chapter J—Grading 
(3)	California Electrical Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, based on the 2011 National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 3 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(4)	California Mechanical Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, based on the 2012 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 4 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(5)	California Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, based on the 2012 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 5 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(6)	California Energy Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 6 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(7)	California Historical Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 8 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(8)	California Fire Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, based on the 2012 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 9 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(9)	California Existing Building Code, 2013 Edition, Appendix Chapter A1 of the 2012 International Existing Building Code as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 10 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(10)	California Referenced Standards Code, 2013 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 12 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(11)	Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA. 
(12)	Reserved. 
(13)	Reserved. 
(14)	California Residential Code, 2013 Edition, based on the 2012 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the California Building Standards Commission in the California Building Standards Code, title 24, part 2.5 of the California Code of Regulations including the following appendices: 
Chapter H—Patio covers. 
(15)	California Green Code 'CALGreen' - 2013 Edition of title 24, part 11, as approved and copyrighted by the International Code Council (ICC), 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. 
(Ord. No. 437, §§ 1, 3, 11-20-2007; Ord. No. 456, § 1(Att. A), 11-16-2010; Ord. No. 464, § 2, 1-1-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 437, §§ 1, 3, adopted November 20, 2007, repealed and reenacted § 4-4-31 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 4-4-31 pertained to adoption, and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 8-1.01, 8-4.01, 8-6.01, 9-10.01, 8-11.01, 8-12.01, and Res. No. 2002-1845, adopted November 4, 2002. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.  
Sec. 4-4-32. - Fees. 
The fees for permits, inspections and other services under the publications adopted in this article shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-1.02, 8-6.02) 
State Law reference— Limitations on fees, Government Code § 66014.  
Sec. 4-4-33. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or who shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein shall, for each and every separate violation and noncompliance, respectively, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of the provisions of this article or the building code shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and any such person shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defect within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days prohibitive conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of such penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-1.03, 8-4.03, 8-6.03, 8-10.02, 8-11.03, 8-12.03)  
Sec. 4-4-34. - Liability. 
The provisions of this code shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting from defective work, nor shall the city, or any official, employee or agent thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the review or inspection authorized by the provisions of this code of any permits or certificates issued under this code. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 3, 11-20-2007)  
Secs. 4-4-35—4-4-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - BUILDING MOVING AND RELOCATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-4-71. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to the provisions of this article, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein shall, for each and every separate violation and noncompliance, respectively, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this article shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and any such person shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defect within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days the prohibitive conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of a penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of a prohibitive condition. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.26)  
Sec. 4-4-72. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building inspector or director of public works in carrying out the provisions of this article may, within five days after such decision, appeal to the council by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk. The council shall hold a hearing on the matter and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.25)  
Sec. 4-4-73. - Trimming trees; charges. 
If the moving of any building requires any tree trimming, such tree trimming shall be performed by a street trimmer designated by the director of public works, and a charge in the amount per hour established by resolution shall be made for the services of such tree trimmer. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.19)  
Sec. 4-4-74. - Inspections; charges. 
Every building or structure, or section or portion thereof, which is moved over, upon, along, or across any street shall be moved under the inspection and supervision of the director of public works. The director of public works shall appoint an inspector for the moving of any building or structure and of each section or portion thereof; provided, however, that if two or more buildings or structures, or two or more sections or portions thereof, are being moved at the same time along a route so situated that one person can inspect the same, only one person shall be appointed therefor. Such inspection and supervision in each case shall be for such time as the director of public works shall deem necessary for the performance of such service, and a charge in the amount established by resolution for each two hours, or fraction thereof, shall be made for the time required for such inspection and supervision. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.20)  
Sec. 4-4-75. - Police escorts; charges. 
The director of public works shall notify the chief of police of the time of moving the building through the public streets. If the chief of police determines that the protection of the public requires a police escort, he shall provide such escort, and a charge per hour established by resolution, or fraction thereof, shall be made for such police escort. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.21)  
Sec. 4-4-76. - Protection of streets. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of any house mover, when required by the director of public works, to cause boards of sufficient strength to carry the load without breaking to be placed under all the rolls or wheels to serve as a runway for such rolls or wheels during the moving of any building or structure, or section or portion thereof, along every street improved in any other manner than by Portland cement, concrete, asphalt, or brick, and at no time shall such rolls or wheels be permitted to revolve except upon such board runway when the same is required by the director of public works. 
(b)	The director of public works may direct that steel or rubber-tired dollies may be used where any building or structure is moved on any unimproved or oil gravel street. 
(c)	If the equipment of the house mover is not sufficient for the work required, or if the street or the use of such street or the property of any public utility shall be at any time endangered or damaged by such moving, or if such house mover or his servants or employees at any time violate any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions of the house mover's permit required by the provisions of this article, either as to the size or dimensions of the building or structure being moved or the route of such moving or otherwise, the inspector shall report such fact to the director of public works, and when properly authorized by the director of public works, the inspector shall be empowered to stop the progress of such moving. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.22)  
Sec. 4-4-77. - Damages to streets; charges for repairs. 
If any street is damaged by reason of the moving of any building or structure, or section or portion thereof, the director of public works shall do such work as may be necessary to restore the street to as good a condition as the street was in prior to such damage, and shall charge the cost thereof to the house mover to whom the permit was issued for the moving of such building or structure, or section or portion thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.23)  
Sec. 4-4-78. - Warning lights. 
No person moving any building or structure, or section or portion thereof, over, upon, along, or across any street, alley, or sidewalk shall fail, neglect, or refuse to keep a red light burning at all times between sunset and sunrise at each corner of such building or structure, or section or portion thereof, and at the end of any projection thereon while the same, or any part thereof, is located in or upon any street, alley, or sidewalk. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.24)  
Secs. 4-4-79—4-4-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOVING PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-4-101. - Required. 
No person shall move any building or structure, or any portion thereof, over, upon, along, or across any public street, alley, or sidewalk without a written permit therefor from the director of public works. Such permit may be referred to as a house mover's permit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.01)  
Sec. 4-4-102. - Applications. 
A separate application for a house mover's permit upon a form furnished by the director of public works shall be filed and a separate permit obtained for the moving of each separate building or structure, or portion of a building or structure. Each application for such permit shall show the following information: 
(1)	The kind of building or structure to be moved; 
(2)	The street location or other identifying description to which the building or structure is proposed to be moved; 
(3)	The route over, along, across, and upon which such building or structure, or section or portion thereof, is to be moved; 
(4)	The number of sections in which the building or structure is to be moved; and 
(5)	The time when the building or structure is proposed to be moved and the time within which the removal is to be completed. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.02)  
Sec. 4-4-103. - Application fees. 
No house mover's permit shall be granted by the director of public works until the applicant shall have paid to the director of public works an application fee established by resolution for each permit requested. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.03)  
Sec. 4-4-104. - Investigation of routes. 
The director of public works, upon the receipt of an application for a house mover's permit shall immediately notify the chief of police that such application has been filed. The director of public works shall investigate the route designated in the application to ascertain whether the moving of the building can be made without damage to the trees adjacent to such route. If the moving would damage such trees, he shall prescribe another route which will not cause such damage. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.04)  
Sec. 4-4-105. - Fees. 
(a)	Fees. There shall be deducted from the deposits provided for in section 4-4-106 the sum established by resolution as a permit fee. 
(b)	Exemptions. No permit fee shall be required for the moving of temporary buildings or structures over the public streets or alleys if such buildings or structures are to be used for governmental purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.05)  
Sec. 4-4-106. - Deposits. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, no permit shall be issued to any house mover pursuant to the provisions of this article until the applicant therefor shall have deposited the sum established by resolution with the director of public works. 
(b)	Any house mover may make and maintain with the director of public works a general deposit in the amount established by resolution, which general deposit shall be used for the same purpose as the special deposit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, and while such general deposit is maintained such house mover shall not be required to make such special deposit, but shall be required to comply with all the other provisions of this article. 
(c)	In addition to the deduction for a permit fee, as provided in section 4-4-105, there shall also be deducted from each deposit the cost of the service of the inspector provided for in section 4-4-74, the cost of the tree trimmer provided for in section 4-4-73, the cost of the police escort provided for in section 4-4-75, and the cost of repairs, if any, made by the director of public works, as provided in section 4-4-77. The remainder of such deposit, if any, shall be refunded to the person making such deposit or to his assigns. 
(d)	If the deposit made pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not be sufficient to pay the costs of the services of the inspector, the police escort, the tree trimmer, and the repairs, if any, the person making such deposit shall, upon demand, pay to the director of public works a sufficient sum to cover all such costs. Upon the failure to pay such sum, it may be recovered by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-2.06, 8-2.07)  
Sec. 4-4-107. - Issuance; conditions. 
No house mover's permit shall be issued by the director of public works until the building inspector has first issued to the owner of the premises to which the building is to be moved a relocation permit to relocate the particular building upon such premises. The applicant for a house mover's permit shall first furnish evidence that such relocation permit has been issued when such relocation permit is required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.08)  
Secs. 4-4-108—4-4-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RELOCATION PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-4-131. - Required. 
No person shall relocate any building or structure, or any portion thereof, upon any premises in the city without a permit therefor from the building inspector. Such permit may be referred to as a relocation permit. No relocation permit shall be required if the building or structure is to be moved to a place located outside the city or if the building or structure is to be used by a governmental agency for a governmental purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.09)  
Sec. 4-4-132. - Application. 
(a)	Every application to the building inspector for a relocation permit shall be in writing upon a form furnished by the city clerk and shall set forth such information as the building inspector may reasonably require in order to carry out the purposes of this article. The application shall have attached thereto the following: 
(1)	A photograph of the building; 
(2)	A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building; and 
(3)	A plan of reconstruction. 
(b)	Upon the filing of the application for a relocation permit, the city clerk shall refer the matter to the building inspector who shall conduct such investigation as may be necessary to determine whether or not such permit should be issued and the conditions which may attach to the permit when issued. If the building inspector shall be required to go outside the city for such purpose, there shall be an additional charge per mile established by resolution. 
(c)	Such application shall be filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an application fee in the amount established by resolution. Such application fee shall be in addition to the regular building permit fee required by the building code adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 1 of this title. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-2.10—8-2.12)  
Sec. 4-4-133. - Denial. 
No permit shall be issued to relocate any building or structure which, in the opinion of the building inspector, is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous, or which is infested with pests or is insanitary, or which, if it be a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation, or which is so dilapidated, defective, insanitary, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of 300 feet from the proposed site, or if the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning regulations of the city, or if the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any fire district regulation or by any other law or regulation. If the unlawful, dangerous, or defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction cannot practicably and effectively be made, the permit shall be denied. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2.13)  
Sec. 4-4-134. - Bonds. 
(a)	No relocation permit shall be issued by the city clerk unless the applicant therefor shall first post with the city clerk a bond executed by the owner of the premises where the building or structure is to be located as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety. The bond, which shall be in form joint and several, shall name the city as obligee and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, plus ten percent, of the work required to be done in order to comply with all the conditions of such relocation permit, as such cost is estimated by the building inspector. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may post a bond executed by the owner as principal, and which is secured by a deposit in cash in the amount named in this section for a surety bond, and conditioned as required in the case of a surety bond. Such bond, as so secured, shall be referred to as a cash bond for the purposes of this article. 
(b)	Every bond posted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)	Each and all of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
(2)	All of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time limit specified in the relocation permit or, if no time limit is specified, within 90 days after the date of the issuance by the director of public works of the house mover's permit provided for in this article. The time limit specified in this subsection or the time limit specified in any permit may be extended for good and sufficient causes by the building inspector. No such extension of time shall be valid unless in writing, and no such extension shall release any surety upon any bond. 
(c)	The term of each bond posted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion, to the satisfaction of the building inspector, of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. Such completion shall be evidenced by a statement thereof signed by the building inspector, a copy of which shall be sent to any surety or principal upon request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof which may have been used or deducted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-2.14—8-2.16)  
Sec. 4-4-135. - Issuance and conditions; remedies for breach of conditions. 
(a)	If the condition of the building or structure to be relocated, in the judgment of the building inspector, admits of practicable and effective repair, the permit may be issued subject to appropriate conditions as provided in this section. 
(b)	If the granting of a permit is not prohibited by the provisions of section 4-4-133, the building inspector may, after the necessary investigation, authorize the city clerk to issue a relocation permit and in authorizing such permit, may impose such terms and conditions as he may deem reasonable and proper including, but not limited to, the requirements of the changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure to the end that the relocation thereof shall not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district within a radius of 300 feet of the proposed site to which such building or structure is to be moved. 
(c)	Whenever the building inspector shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, a written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety of the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. 
(d)	After the receipt of such notice, the surety shall, within the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing therein, pay over to the building inspector the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to ten percent of the estimated cost. Upon the receipt of such moneys, the building inspector shall proceed by such mode as he deems convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of such sum in hand therefor. 
(e)	If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default, as provided in this section, shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time specified, the building inspector shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceedings whatever to use the cash deposit, or any portion of such deposit, to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise in the discretion of the building inspector. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work, plus ten percent thereof. 
(f)	When any default has occurred on the part of the principal under the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section, the surety shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure and to clear, clean, and restore the site. If the surety shall default, the building inspector shall have the same option. 
(g)	In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit, the surety, any person employed or engage on its behalf, the building inspector, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or to demolish the building or structure. 
(h)	No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises by any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the city engaging in the work of completing, demolishing, or removing a building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-2.17, 8-2.18)  
Secs. 4-4-136—4-4-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - BUILDING NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 4-4-171. - Conformance with article provisions. 
All space and house numbering in the city shall be made to conform with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.01)  
Sec. 4-4-172. - Supervision. 
All space and building numbering shall be under the supervision and direction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.02)  
Sec. 4-4-173. - Duty of owners and occupants. 
(a)	All entrances to buildings and enclosures from the public streets of the city shall be numbered as provided in this article, and the duty of such numbering is hereby imposed upon the owner and also upon the occupant of the building or enclosure to which any such entrance belongs or appertains. 
(b)	All owners or persons in charge of buildings or enclosures shall cause the proper numbers to be placed upon such buildings or enclosures in conformity to the numbers required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.03)  
Sec. 4-4-174. - Size and location of numbers. 
The appropriate numbers in figures not less than two inches high shall be placed upon the building or enclosure or in some conspicuous place which is visible from the street in front of such building or enclosure. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.04)  
Sec. 4-4-175. - Numbers allotted per block. 
One hundred numbers are hereby allotted to each block, including the two sides of a street, a number to each and every 12½ feet of frontage. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.05)  
Sec. 4-4-176. - Odd and even numbers. 
The even numbers shall be on the south and east sides of the streets, and the odd numbers shall be on the north and west sides of the streets. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.06)  
Sec. 4-4-177. - Streets running north and south. 
On streets running north and south, the numbers in full blocks shall begin with numbers one and two on the respective sides of the numbered streets, beginning at North Avenue. The numbers shall run consecutively upward, as affected by the provisions of section 4-4-175 allotting 100 numbers to each block, south from North Avenue, and so arranged that the numbers from one to 99 shall lie between North Avenue and First Avenue. The numbers 100 to 199 shall lie between First Avenue and Second Avenue, and so continuing to South Avenue. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.07)  
Sec. 4-4-178. - Avenues running east and west. 
On avenues running east and west, the numbers in full blocks shall begin with numbers one and two on the respective sides of the numbered avenues, beginning at East Avenue. The numbers shall run consecutively upward, as affected by the provisions of section 4-4-175 allotting 100 numbers to each block, west from East Avenue, and so arranged that the numbers from one to 99 shall lie between East Avenue and First Street. The numbers 100 to 199 shall lie between First Street and Second Street, and so continuing to West Avenue. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.08)  
Sec. 4-4-179. - Removal or destruction of numbers. 
Any person removing, destroying, or mutilating any correct number placed as required by the provisions of this article shall immediately replace the same with another such number to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3.09)  
ARTICLE 5. - SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS 
 
Sec. 4-4-180. - Intent. 
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 2(Att. A), 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 4-4-181. - Application of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 2(Att. A), 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 4-4-182. - Definitions. 
Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 2(Att. A), 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 4-4-183. - Placards. 
(a)	The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached. 
(1)	INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
(2)	RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
(3)	UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
(b)	The ordinance number from which this section derives, the name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
(c)	Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 2(Att. A), 11-16-2010)  
ARTICLE 6. - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR PERMITTING PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 4-4-184. - Purpose. 
Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
(Ord. No. 468, 8-4-2015)  
Sec. 4-4-185. - Definitions. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)	E-mail, 
(2)	Facsimile. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
(1)	A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)	A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
(3)	A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)	A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
Solar energy system has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 468, 8-4-2015)  
Sec. 4-4-186. - Permitting process. 
The expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with the applicable requirements contained in title 4, chapter 4, Buildings and Building Regulations, of the Gustine Municipal Code and all of the following: 
(1)	The department shall develop a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
(2)	The checklist and required permitting documentation shall be published on a publically accessible internet website. 
(3)	As allowed by available resources, the department shall allow for electronic submittal of a permit application and associated documentation and shall allow electronic signature in lieu of a wet signature. 
(4)	Upon confirmation, by the department that the application and supporting documentation are complete and meet all requirements of the California Building Standards Codes, the department shall approve the application and issue all required permits. 
(Ord. No. 468, 8-4-2015)  
Sec. 4-4-187. - Inspection process. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited, streamlined permitting process shall only require one inspection, unless the installation is found to be out of compliance with the California Building Standards Codes or a separate fire safety inspection is required. Inspection requests shall be made in compliance with title 4, chapter 4, Buildings and Building Regulations, of the Gustine Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 468, 8-4-2015)  
Chapter 5 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 443A, adopted September 2, 2008, the subdivision provisions have been removed from this Code and are now housed in a separate publication. 
 
Chapter 6 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 443A, adopted September 2, 2008, the zoning provisions have been removed from this Code and are now housed in a separate publication. 
 
Chapter 7 - PUBLIC FACILITY IMPACT FEE 
 
Sec. 4-7-1. - Title. 
This subchapter shall be known and cited as the public facility impact fee ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 4-7-2. - Purpose. 
(a)	The city has experienced population growth creating an impact and additional demand for services from the existing infrastructure, facilities, and services and this trend is continuing. Furthermore, past infrastructure funding sources such as property taxes and federal revenue sharing funding have been substantially reduced so that current funding sources are no longer adequate. Since new development generates a need for new infrastructure such as parks, roads, bridges, traffic signals, water wells, police, and public works facilities. It has been determined that development should pay for the increased costs of this need. In addition, there is an urgent need for the construction of new or additional police facilities and general government facilities that may consist of the improvement to and expansion of the existing city hall. The provisions of this subchapter are adopted to promote the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to implement the goals and objectives of the general plan of the city. 
(b)	Public facility impact fee shall be applicable to the lands within the city as well as lands within its sphere of influence. The city shall enter into an agreement with Merced County board of supervisors to cause the fees to be collected by the county for lands outside of the city limits and within its adopted sphere of influence and transfer of funds to the city. 
(c)	Particularly, the provisions of this subchapter are adopted for the following reasons: 
(1)	To provide an adequate and constant method for the financing of the unfunded portion of needed systems development costs throughout the city, reasonably related to projected community growth. 
(2)	To promote the orderly and efficient expansion of public improvements to adequately meet the domestic and economic needs of the community and to minimize adverse fiscal and environmental impacts of new development. 
(3)	To insure the continuation of necessary services including, but not limited to police and general administrative services. 
(4)	To establish equitable methods for minimizing public facility and service costs to the city associated with new development. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 4-7-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this subchapter, and resolutions adopted thereto, certain words shall have the following meanings: 
Building means any new structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, including those moved into the city limits; but not including any outdoor tanks, towers, carports, or other similar structures. 
Church means structures primarily designed as a place for public worship. 
Commercial means those uses designated as permitted or conditional uses in the commercial zoning districts of this Code except where such uses involve the manufacture or assembly of a product or warehousing. 
Day care center means structures (other than a family day care center) in which persons not of the immediate family are provided with care for compensation for a portion of the day not exceeding 12 hours in any 24-hour period, as defined by the state. 
Hospital means an institution where the ill or injured may receive medical, surgical, or psychiatric treatment, nursing care, food and lodging, and the like. 
Impact and systems development means: 
(1)	Any building, structure, or other improvement constructed or renovated by the city upon property owned by or under its control. 
(2)	Any initial equipment or piece of equipment and other initial, unfunded costs necessary to service new growth or new development. 
Industrial means those uses designated as permitted or conditional uses in the industrial or manufacturing zoning districts of this Code, excluding all those uses which are permitted in any of the other zones as set forth in the zoning code of the city, excepting warehouses. 
Multi-family dwelling means a residential dwelling unit that cannot be sold individually (for example, must be sold with at least one other dwelling unit on a single parcel of land). 
Non-residential un-enclosed structure. Classification un-enclosed structure shall be a structure open at a minimum on two to three sides, with no electrical, water, or sewer connections to the structure. Where the un-enclosed structure has electrical or water or sewer or any combination thereof shall be subject to the full development impact fee as established. 
Private school means includes those uses other than public uses offering educational services and/or vocational training to students aged five years or older but excluding child care facilities. 
Public facility fee means the fee charged for all new construction, including the expansion of and/or the addition to an existing, nonresidential structure, to mitigate the unfunded portion of the determined impact of the development. 
Residential care home means structures designed for use as a convalescent hospital, or a retirement home, or a 24-hour care center for seven or more persons in addition to members of the family. 
Residential dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having only one kitchen. 
Single-family dwelling means a residential dwelling unit that may be sold individually. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 451, § 1(Exh. A), 11-17-2009)  
Sec. 4-7-4. - Establishment of fees. 
A public facility fee, as established from time to time by the city council by resolution, shall be due and payable as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 4-7-5. - Applicability of provisions. 
(a)	The systems development fee is intended to apply to all residential construction and to all reconstruction, alteration, modification, and additions which create additional dwelling units unless otherwise exempted under this section. 
(b)	The systems development fee is intended to apply to the building area of all new nonresidential construction and to additional building area due to reconstruction, alteration, modification, and additional nonresidential buildings. 
(c)	Square footage shall be determined by adding the number of square feet of space on each floor or level. 
(d)	The fees imposed by this subchapter shall not be applicable to those lots on which a structure was previously situated but which was destroyed by fire or other natural disaster, or which was removed or demolished, provided: 
(1)	That a building permit to rebuild is obtained within one year of the destruction, demolition or removal of the structure. 
(2)	That the permit to rebuild is obtained by the owner of record as of the date of the destruction, demolition or removal of the structure. 
(3)	That the exemption will apply only to the extent that the permit to rebuild is for the same number or fewer dwelling units (or, in the case of nonresidential uses, the same number of square feet) as previously existed. The fees imposed by this subchapter shall be applied to the extent that the permit is for more units (or more square feet) than previously existed. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 4-7-6. - Existing fees. 
Existing fee not affected by the adoption of impact and system development fees. The fees will be paid prior to issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 4-7-7. - Systems development fund established. 
All of the systems development charges collected shall be placed in one or more special funds which are hereby created and established for such purposes and which shall be known as the public facility impact and systems development funds. Sums collected under this chapter may be expended for any "impact or systems development" as defined in section 4-7-3, provided that such expenditure from the funds has been authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 443B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-2-2008)  
TITLE 5 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 5-1-1—5-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - BUSINESS LICENSES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-2-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means professions, trades, occupations, and each and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood which shall include any person manufacturing products or selling goods, wares, merchandise, or services of any description within the city, either as a sole business or in connection with some other business. 
Business enterprise means soliciting or taking orders for, or selling or offering to sell, any goods, wares, merchandise, articles, insurance, advertising, or professional or other services in the city or delivering within the city any goods, wares, merchandise, articles, or papers of any description in the course of business or as a part of a business transaction, whether such transaction was commenced in the city or not. 
Fixed place of business means premises occupied for the particular purpose of conducting a business at such premises and which is regularly kept open for that purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending to such business, and which premises so used for such business may have been, or may hereafter be, acquired by the owner of such business, either by the ownership of such premises or by a bona fide lease thereon, the owner of such business having a bona fide intention to conduct such business in the city on a permanent, and not a transient, basis. 
Manufacturing means every person engaged in the making or processing of animal or other products or materials within the city whose principal outlet for such items is wholesale rather than retail. 
Premises for lease means any lot, trailer or mobile home pad, apartment unit, cabin unit, dwelling unit, commercial or industrial unit, or similar type rental unit for which any consideration is received for its use. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.101)  
Sec. 5-2-2. - Required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, establish, maintain, or carry on any business enterprise whatever in the city without first obtaining a license from the city. The conducting or operation by any person of any business or business enterprise, as defined in section 5-2-1, without having an unrevoked license from the city to do so, fully paid and in effect at the time, and without complying with any and all regulations of such business set forth in this chapter shall be deemed unlawful and a separate violation of the provisions of this chapter for each and every day such business is so carried on. 
(b)	A license and license taxes are required for the following businesses and business enterprises, if conducted from a fixed place of business: 
(1)	Every person engaged in selling goods, wares, merchandise, or services of any description in the city. 
(2)	Every person engaged in any kind of manufacturing in the city. 
(3)	Every person who delivers goods, wares, or merchandise within the city. 
(4)	Every person engaged in the leasing of premises consisting of four or more units within the city. 
(c)	The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not be deemed or construed as applying to any person engaged in any business set forth in this section solely as an employee of any other person lawfully conducting business in the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.102, 3-1.128, 3-1.203) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, Business and Professions Code § 16001 et seq.  
Sec. 5-2-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)	No person shall be exempt from the necessity of procuring a license to do business in the city. License taxes, however, shall not be charged for licenses for the following persons: 
(1)	War veterans who are exempt by the laws of the state from payment of a license tax; 
(2)	Persons transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal corporations of such license taxes as are prescribed in this chapter; 
(3)	Persons selling produce grown or manufactured by their own labor within the limits of the city; 
(4)	Persons soliciting or taking orders for goods, wares, or merchandise as a wholesaler from bona fide retail merchants in the city; and 
(5)	Persons conducting dances, concerts, lectures, parties, rummage sales, or entertainment when all the receipts are appropriated exclusively for any church, school, or religious, benevolent, patriotic, or other public or beneficial purpose of a local character within the city. 
(b)	Any person claiming an exemption from the payment of license taxes pursuant to the provisions of this section shall first present satisfactory evidence to the city clerk that such person is entitled to the exemption. Such evidence shall include a written statement, under oath, setting forth such facts and giving such information as the city clerk may require. Such persons shall comply with all the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.126) 
State Law reference— Authority to require business licenses, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq.  
Sec. 5-2-4. - Applications. 
(a)	All applications for licenses shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished by the city clerk and shall state all the facts necessary and proper to be known and stated for the issuance of such license, including the following: 
(1)	The kind or character of the business or business enterprise; 
(2)	The location of the business or business enterprise; 
(3)	The full name and residence of the proposed licensee; 
(4)	The period of time such business or business enterprise is intended to be continued or for which the proposed license is to be issued; and 
(5)	Such other facts or information as the city clerk may require. 
(b)	All applications for licenses shall be verified by the applicants. 
(1)	Determinations of business classifications. The city clerk shall determine the business classification of the applicant; provided, however, that any person may appeal to the council from the decision of the city clerk as to the classification. The council, after hearing such appeal, shall fix and determine the classification and the amount of tax required for such license. The determination of the council shall be final. 
(2)	Form. Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be upon forms furnished by the city clerk and shall set forth and contain the name of the licensee and of the business licensed, the period of time covered by such license, the amount of the license tax, if any, payable for such license, and such other information as the city clerk may deem necessary or proper. 
(c)	The information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be confidential. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.103, 3-1.104, 3-1.107, 3-1.108)  
Sec. 5-2-5. - Issuance. 
(a)	Upon receiving a proper application for a license containing the necessary information, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue such license to every person paying a license tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or to any person entitled to such license. No license shall be issued until there is a showing that the licensee will comply with all laws and ordinances. 
(b)	Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city clerk shall present such notice of appeal to the council at the first meeting of the council after the filing thereof. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.109, 3-1.110)  
Sec. 5-2-6. - Boxing and wrestling matches, carnivals and similar businesses. 
The licenses for boxing and wrestling matches, carnivals, circuses, dances, dog and pony shows, merry-go-rounds and skating rinks shall not be issued until approval has been given by the city manager. Conditions may apply to such licenses.  
Sec. 5-2-7. - Expiration. 
Licenses required by the provisions of this chapter expire at the end of the calendar year for which they were issued. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.116)  
Sec. 5-2-8. - Transfer or assignment. 
No license granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.112)  
Sec. 5-2-9. - Exhibiting. 
Every person having a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the license when applying for a renewal of such license and whenever requested to do so by any police officer or by any officer authorized to issue or inspect licenses or to collect license fees. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.111)  
Sec. 5-2-10. - Revocation. 
The city clerk may revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon good cause shown. No license shall be revoked until after a hearing before the council, notice of which hearing shall be given the licensee not less than five days in advance of the date of such hearing. The notice shall either be delivered to the licensee personally, be left at his place of business if he conducts his business in a fixed, bona fide, and established place in the city, or be mailed to him at the mailing address stated on his license application. Upon the revocation of a license, the council, in such cases as it deems proper, may order refunded to the person whose license is revoked the cash bond and any prepaid license taxes of such person, but if the revocation of a license is for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or other regulations of the city, the cash bond shall be forfeited to the city, and the refund shall not exceed the amount of the prepaid license taxes. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.113)  
Sec. 5-2-11. - Enforcement of chapter provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk, the chief of police, and all other lawfully authorized officers and employees of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to make collections of the license taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.127)  
Secs. 5-2-12—5-2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - LICENSE TAXES 
 
Sec. 5-2-41. - Regulatory measure. 
The provisions of this article are enacted for municipal or regulatory purposes and are not intended to raise revenue. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.201)  
Sec. 5-2-42. - Amount. 
The amount of all license taxes shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.116, 3-1.202, 3-1.203)  
Sec. 5-2-43. - Due dates. 
Licenses shall be due and payable to the city on an annual basis. If daily or monthly licenses are necessary, those are due and payable to the city monthly and daily, as set by resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.116)  
Sec. 5-2-44. - Place of payment. 
All license taxes shall be payable in advance in lawful money of the United States at the office of the city clerk or at such other place as shall be from time to time lawfully designated by resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.115)  
Sec. 5-2-45. - Errors in determination. 
In no case shall any error by the city clerk in stating the amount of the license tax prevent the collection of the amount which shall be actually due, with all costs, from any licensee or from any person commencing or carrying on any business enterprise within the city without a license. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.114)  
Sec. 5-2-46. - Debt to city; suits for collection. 
(a)	The amount of any license tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person engaged in any business in the city without having secured the required license from the city to do so, or who shall fail to pay in full the license taxes provided in this chapter, shall be liable to legal action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such license tax, plus any court costs incurred by the city. 
(b)	The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any unpaid license taxes. 
(c)	The provisions of this section shall not prevent a civil prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.118)  
Sec. 5-2-47. - Compromising claims due. 
The city clerk shall have the power to compromise any claim as to the amount of license tax due. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.119)  
Sec. 5-2-48. - Delinquencies. 
(a)	Whenever a license tax set forth in this chapter is not paid when due in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, such license tax shall be increased by adding ten percent to the principal amount of the tax each month such license tax remains unpaid subsequent to its due date. 
(b)	No personal demand or notice to any person owing license taxes or additions for delinquencies as provided in this section shall be necessary in order that such person incur or be charged with the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.117)  
Sec. 5-2-49. - Required statements; examination of books; information confidential. 
(a)	No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth in such statement, nor shall the filing of the statement preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the city clerk, his deputies, or authorized employees of the city who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for a license as may be necessary, in their judgment, to verify or ascertain the amount of license tax due. 
(b)	All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records for such purpose. 
(c)	The information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be confidential. 
(d)	In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the city clerk shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days and in such event to waive any penalty which would otherwise have accrued. 
(e)	If any person shall fail to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if, after demand therefor made by the city clerk, such person shall fail to file a corrected statement, the city clerk may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as the city clerk may be able to obtain. 
(f)	If such determination is made, the city clerk shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. 
(g)	Such person, within ten days after the mailing or serving of such notice, may make an application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made within the time prescribed, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be set for a hearing before the council within 15 days thereafter. The city clerk shall give at least ten days' notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing in the manner prescribed in subsection (f) of this section for the service of the notice of assessment. 
(h)	The council shall consider all the evidence produced, and written notice of its findings, which shall be final, shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed in subsection (f) of this section for the service of the notice of assessment. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.120—3-1.122)  
Chapter 3 - AMUSEMENT ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT GAME MACHINES 
 
Sec. 5-3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement arcade means any place or premises containing five or more amusement game machines. 
Amusement game machine means a coin-operated machine or device which, whether mechanical, electrical, or electronic, shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin, token, or similar object and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement. The term "amusement game machine" includes devices commonly referred to as "pinball machines" and "video game machines." 
(Code 1966, § 5-9.01)  
Sec. 5-3-2. - Certain machines excepted. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Vending machines. Any vending machine so designed and so operated as to sell and deliver merchandise only, equivalent in market value to the value of the coins deposited, without the payment or delivery of anything except the merchandise therein kept for sale; 
(2)	Children's amusement machines. Any coin-operated amusement machine or device especially designed and operated solely for the amusement of children (such as, but not limited to, mechanical animal and vehicle rides); 
(3)	Pool and billiard tables. Any coin-operated pool or billiard table which requires a coin to release the balls but on which table the game of pool or billiards is played in the traditional manner by the use of cues and balls; 
(4)	Shuffleboards. Any coin-operated shuffleboard table which requires a coin to operate the scoreboard but on which table the game of shuffleboard is played in the traditional manner without the use of any mechanical or electronic device; and 
(5)	Jukeboxes. Any machine commonly referred to as a jukebox and so designed and so operated as to play music only when a coin or coins are deposited therein. 
(Code 1966, § 5-9.02)  
Sec. 5-3-3. - Petition for license. 
No amusement arcade license shall be issued without the approval of the council. Whenever any person desires such a license, such person shall petition the council for a license therefor, which petition shall state the name of the applicant, the character and location of the proposed business, and any other information, which the council may by resolution, require. On consideration of such petition, the council may authorize the license to be issued in whole or in part or rejected in whole or in part. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.106)  
Sec. 5-3-4. - Permit. 
(a)	Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, servant, or employee, to operate any amusement game machine without having a permit to operate amusement game machines as specified in this section. 
(b)	Application. Applications for permits to operate amusement game machines shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, giving his name, business address, business or occupation, age, and other such information as may be required by the chief of police. Such applications shall be filed with the city clerk with the filing fee therefor. The city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police for an investigation and decision. If the chief of police finds from an examination of the application and such further facts as may officially be brought to his attention that the application is in proper form and that the business therein applied for may be carried on without damages to the public peace, health, or safety, the chief of police shall approve the application and issue the permit applied for; but if he finds that the business cannot be carried on without damages to the public peace, health, or safety, he may deny the application. 
(c)	Fee. The filing fee for a permit to operate amusement game machines shall be as set by resolution for each calendar year, payable in advance. 
(Code 1966, § 5-9.03)  
Sec. 5-3-5. - Statement of operation. 
A statement of operation shall be provided in addition to the application for a conditional use permit for an amusement arcade business containing the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the establishment; 
(2)	The name and address of the owner, partner, or corporate officers of the establishment; 
(3)	The number of amusement game machines to be placed at the establishment; 
(4)	The name and address of the distributor or supplier of the amusement game machines; 
(5)	A statement setting forth the manner and method of providing adult supervision at the establishment and the name of each adult supervisor; 
(6)	A statement setting forth the number of off-street parking spaces and storage facilities for automobiles, bicycles, skateboards, and other modes of transportation; 
(7)	A statement setting forth any arrests or convictions of the owner, partner, or corporate officers of the establishment for crimes involving minors within the past ten years. Arrests or convictions may be the cause for the denial or revocation of an application; and 
(8)	Such other information as may be required by other city divisions for the determination of the applicant's qualifications. 
(Code 1966, § 5-9.04)  
Chapter 4 - BINGO[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Bingo, Penal Code § 326.5. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bingo means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card that conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo includes cards having numbers or symbols that are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All preprinted cards shall bear the legend, "for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance." 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.01) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(o).  
Sec. 5-4-2. - Records; inspections. 
Licensees shall keep and maintain full records and accountings and shall detail the amount of money obtained from the players, the amount of money or value of prizes given for each game played, and the disposition of any funds generated by the conduct of bingo games. The city shall have the right to inspect such records at any reasonable time. The city manager may request such records when the licensee applies to renew its annual license. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.09)  
Sec. 5-4-3. - Licensee to own or lease premises where conducted. 
An organization licensed to conduct bingo games shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that organization. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(d)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(f).  
Sec. 5-4-4. - Use of profits. 
(a)	With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Those profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. 
(b)	With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not within subsection (a) of this section. Those proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
(1)	The proceeds may be used for prizes. 
(2)	A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 20 percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or $2,000.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. 
(3)	The proceeds may be used to pay license fees. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(g), (h)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(j), (k).  
Sec. 5-4-5. - Hours of operation. 
No bingo game shall be conducted before 7:00 a.m. nor after 2:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(d))  
Sec. 5-4-6. - Only members of licensee organization to operate games. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization that organized it. Those members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such a game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of a bingo game. This section does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the organization conducting the game. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(f)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(h).  
Sec. 5-4-7. - Games to be open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just the members of the nonprofit charitable organization. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(e)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(g).  
Sec. 5-4-8. - Players to be physically present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(i)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(m).  
Sec. 5-4-9. - Prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game, which is held. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(j)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(n).  
Sec. 5-4-10. - Minors. 
No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(b)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(e).  
Sec. 5-4-11. - Intoxicated persons. 
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.10(c))  
Secs. 5-4-12—5-4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 5-4-41. - Required. 
No bingo game shall be allowed, played, or conducted without a license first being obtained from the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.02)  
Sec. 5-4-42. - Application. 
(a)	An application for a bingo license shall be filed in the office of the city manager. The application for such license shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the organization to which the license will be issued; 
(2)	The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, who shall be a duly authorized representative of the applying organization; 
(3)	The name, address, and telephone number of the president or chief officer of the organization, which intends to conduct any bingo game; 
(4)	The person who has the custody of the financial records of the bingo games, which records are required by the provisions of this chapter, and the location of such records; 
(5)	The intended location where the bingo game is to be held; 
(6)	The day or days of the week or specific dates upon which the bingo games are to be conducted and the hours thereof; 
(7)	A schedule of the fees or charges to be collected from the players for each bingo game or for the different varieties of bingo games to be conducted; and 
(8)	A statement that the place where the bingo games are to be conducted is the regular meeting place of the organization conducting such games, or that such organization has no such meeting place and will conduct the bingo games on premises owned or controlled by a tax-exempt organization, as described in this chapter. 
(b)	Each application for a bingo license shall be accompanied by a written resolution of the governing board or body of the organization which is to conduct such games, such resolution being signed by the president or presiding officer of such organization and its secretary, authorizing the application for a bingo license. 
(c)	Each application for a bingo license shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the state franchise tax board or by the Internal Revenue Service certifying the tax-exempt status of the organization applying for such license. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.03)  
Sec. 5-4-43. - Fees. 
All applications for bingo licenses shall be accompanied by an application fee as set by resolution, no part of which shall be refundable, and which shall be collectible annually. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.04(a)) 
State Law reference— Authorized fee, Penal Code § 326.5(l).  
Sec. 5-4-44. - Investigations. 
(a)	The city manager shall verify the tax-exempt status of the applying organization and shall verify that the place where the bingo game will be conducted is the place where the applying organization usually meets or conducts its business, or that the applying organization has no such meeting place and will conduct the bingo game on property owned or controlled by a tax-exempt organization. 
(b)	The city manager shall forward the application to the chief of police, who shall investigate whether: 
(1)	The conduct of such bingo games at the times, and at the place indicated will not disturb the peace of the neighborhood and will not create substantial traffic or parking problems; and 
(2)	Neither the applying organization nor any person listed in the application has violated any laws and regulations of the city regarding building, fire, health, or safety and that the applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of facts in his application or any other documents required by the city to be submitted in conjunction with the application. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.04(b), (c))  
Sec. 5-4-45. - Issuance. 
(a)	Licenses for bingo games shall be granted only to organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701l and to mobile home park associations and senior citizen organizations; provided, however, that in all cases the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 326.5(a). 
(b)	The city manager shall not issue a bingo license to any applicant if the city manager or the chief of police cannot certify any one of the findings required by this chapter to be made or if it appears from the application that the conduct of such games would be in violation of any of the terms, conditions, and requirements of this chapter. No license shall be issued without approval of the council. 
(c)	Whenever any person desires such a license, such person shall petition the council, which petition shall state the name of the applicant, the character and location of the proposed business, and any other information which the council may by resolution require. On consideration of such petition, the council may authorize the license to be issued in whole or in part or rejected in whole or in part. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.106, 5-7.05(a), (b))  
Sec. 5-4-46. - Term. 
No bingo game licenses shall be effective only for the calendar year, or part thereof, in which issued. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.02)  
Sec. 5-4-47. - Transfer. 
No bingo license shall be transferable. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.05(c))  
Sec. 5-4-48. - Suspension. 
(a)	Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
(b)	Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	The order issued under subsection (a) of this section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five days after the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. If the licensee fails to request, in writing, a hearing before the city manager within such five-day period shall result in revocation of such license. 
(d)	Upon such a request by the licensee, whose license has been suspended under subsection (a) of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten days after the receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to such suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation. 
(e)	Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 5-7.06)  
Sec. 5-4-49. - Revocation. 
(a)	Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered under section 5-4-48, the license may be revoked; provided, however, that the licensee may appear before the city manager, at the time fixed by the city manager, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to such licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the revocation. 
(b)	Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager. 
(c)	Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific grounds on which it is based. The council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon, and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his appeal. The determination of the council on the appeal shall be final. 
(d)	Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year after the date of such revocation; provided, however, that if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701l, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of the reinstatement of such exemption. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5-7.07, 5-7.08)  
Chapter 5 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE SCHOOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and regulation of massage parlors authorized, Government Code § 51030 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bona fide nonprofit club means any fraternal, charitable, religious, benevolent, or other nonprofit organization having a regular membership association primarily for mutual social, mental, political, and civic welfare, to which organization admission is limited to the members and guests, and revenue accruing therefrom is used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of such organization, and which organization or agency is exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Laws of the United States as a bona fide fraternal, charitable, religious, benevolent, or nonprofit organization, and in which massage or bath services are provided incidental to its primary operation. 
Health officer means that person designated by the city as health officer or his authorized representative. 
Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of, the external parts of another human body or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. The term "massage" shall also include the giving of any bath as set forth in the definition of the term "public bathhouse" of this section. 
Massage establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definitions of massage or public bathhouse in this section. Any establishment engaged in or carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage and bathhouse, shall be deemed a massage establishment. 
Masseur or masseuse means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage, unless otherwise excepted. 
Outcall massage service means to engage in or carry on massage for a fee, not at a massage establishment or school of massage, but at a location designated by the customer or client, except that this shall not include any massage performed under the direction of a qualified practitioner of the healing arts, chiropractics, or physical therapy. 
Public bathhouse means any place, including a private club or organization, except as otherwise provided, wherein any person engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, the giving or furnishing of Russian, Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor, electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat, salt, Japanese, sauna, fomentation, or electric baths or baths of any kind whatever, excluding ordinary tub baths or showers where an attendant is not required. The term "public bathhouse" includes a day spa. 
Recognized school of massage means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 180 class hours to be given in not less than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning, and which school has been approved pursuant to Education Code § 29025. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.02)  
Sec. 5-5-2. - Legislative purpose. 
The purpose and intent of the council in enacting this chapter is that the public health, welfare, safety, and interests require the licensing and regulation of the establishments, services, and persons defined in section 5-5-1 by providing minimum building, health, and sanitation standards for such establishments and by providing minimum qualifications for persons performing such services. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.01)  
Sec. 5-5-3. - Exceptions. 
(a)	This chapter does not apply to a cosmetologist, barber, or to a person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of Business and Professions Code div. 2 (Business and Professions Code § 500 et seq.) when engaging in such practice within the scope of his license. 
(b)	A bona fide nonprofit club or organization or its employees shall not be required to obtain a permit but shall conform to all applicable building, health, fire, and zoning laws and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.19)  
Sec. 5-5-4. - Inspections. 
The police department, building inspector, and health officer shall from time to time, but not less than twice each year, make an inspection of each massage establishment in the city for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.17)  
Sec. 5-5-5. - Business license. 
No license for a massage establishment shall be issued without the approval of the council. Whenever any person desires such a license, such person shall petition the council for a license therefor which petition shall state the name of the applicant, the character and location of the proposed business, and any other information, which the council may by resolution require. On consideration of such petition, the council may authorize the license to be issued in whole or in part or rejected in whole or in part. 
(Code 1966, § 3-1.106)  
Sec. 5-5-6. - Required facilities. 
(a)	The following provisions apply to massage establishments: 
(1)	The construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be in accordance with the state and city building codes. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with such codes. 
(2)	Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female and shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(3)	Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or the vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(4)	All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be provided with adequate light and ventilation as approved by the health officer. Such approval shall be given upon a showing of compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the total required window area shall be openable. 
(5)	To allow for adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms, and areas provided for the use of patrons not served directly by a required window, skylight, or mechanical system of ventilation shall be constructed so that the height of the partitions does not exceed 75 percent of the floor to the ceiling height of the area in which they are located. 
(6)	No cubicle, room, booth, or area within a massage establishment which is used for giving massages shall be fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(7)	All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
(b)	A school of massage shall have the same facilities as required for a massage establishment. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.11)  
Sec. 5-5-7. - Operating requirements. 
(a)	Every portion of a massage establishment or school of massage, including appliances, apparatus, and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)	All masseurs, masseuses, instructors, and trainees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments, the use of which is restricted to the massage establishment. A separate dressing room for each sex shall be maintained on the premises, with individual lockers for each employee or trainee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(c)	Each massage establishment and school of massage shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in an approved and sanitary manner. Each massage table shall be provided with clean sheets and towels prior to each use. No towels or sheets shall be laundered or dried in any massage establishment. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linens and paper towels. 
(d)	Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and shower compartments shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant after each use. 
(e)	No massage establishment or school of massage, whether located in any building originally constructed for residential or sleeping purposes or not, shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.12)  
Sec. 5-5-8. - Registers of permits and number of employees. 
The operator of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any city police officer or health officer. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.13)  
Sec. 5-5-9. - Employment restrictions and requirements. 
(a)	Age of employees. It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager, or other person in charge of any massage establishment or school of massage to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(b)	Employee permits required. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage establishment or school of massage to ensure that each person employed shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.15)  
Sec. 5-5-10. - Signs. 
Every permittee of a massage establishment or school of massage shall post the following signs in a conspicuous place printed in bold letters not less than one inch in height: 
(1)	A statement of the rates to be charged for all massage services to be performed. No sum shall be charged for such massage services greater than that shown on the rate card; and 
(2)	A statement that the premises are subject to inspection without notice by authorized officials of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.16)  
Sec. 5-5-11. - Alcoholic beverages. 
No massage establishment, school of massage, or any employee or trainee thereof shall sell, serve, furnish, keep, or possess any alcoholic beverage on the premises. 
(Code 1966, § 5-8.20)  
Chapter 6 - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Mobile food preparation units, Health and Safety Code § 114285 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile kitchen means any vehicle defined in the Vehicle Code, from which food, beverage, or product is offered for sale to the public, operating only for specific periods of time during designated hours. 
(Ord. No. 407, § 1(A), 8-2-1999)  
Sec. 5-6-2. - Licenses and inspections. 
(a)	Each mobile kitchen shall have a current state department of motor vehicle inspection sticker affixed to the lower righthand side of the windshield, a current, valid county health inspection sticker affixed to the lower righthand side of the windshield, and a current valid city police department inspection sticker affixed to the left side of the rear of the mobile kitchen. 
(b)	Each mobile kitchen licensed to conduct business in the city shall be annually inspected by a state consumer affairs certified automotive repair/inspection facility. The vehicle inspection shall include brakes, tires, all lighting equipment, horn device, adequate mirrors, seat belts, and steering. A safety certificate must be obtained for every licensed vehicle certifying the vehicle is in safe operating condition. The safety certificate must then be presented to the city with a copy routed to the police department. 
(c)	The owner or operator of a mobile kitchen shall obtain a business license and any other required permit from the city clerk prior to commencing operation. 
(Ord. No. 407, § 1(C), 8-2-1999)  
Sec. 5-6-3. - Operations. 
(a)	A mobile kitchen may be operated only in manufacturing districts (M) except otherwise by special permission of the city council during approved festivals, parades, and other public events providing it meets with all health, safety, insurance, and licensing requirements. 
(b)	A mobile kitchen shall operate only during designated lunch and dinner periods, not to exceed three consecutive hours in one designated manufacturing location. Food service shall be "take out" only and a dining area with tables and/or chairs is specifically not permitted. 
(c)	There shall be an eight-foot buffer zone between the mobile kitchen and any adjoining district which is not a manufacturing district (M). 
(Ord. No. 407, § 1(B), 8-2-1999)  
Sec. 5-6-4. - Insurance. 
(a)	The operator of a mobile kitchen shall obtain a comprehensive liability insurance policy which shall protect the operator and the city (as an additional insured) under the policy with types and amounts of coverage as follows: bodily injury and property damage liability insurance: $500,000.00 for each person and $1,000,000.00 each occurrence; workers' compensation and employer's liability: $1,000,000.00 each accident. 
(b)	The owner or operator shall furnish a certificate of insurance countersigned by an authorized agent of the insurance carrier on a form of the insurance carrier setting forth the general provisions of the insurance coverage. This countersigned certificate shall name the city as an additional insured under the policy, and shall contain a statement of obligation on the part of the insurance carrier to notify the city of any material change, cancellation, or termination of such insurance. The required certificate shall be furnished by the owner or operator to the city issuing a business license, and a copy thereof shall be carried at all times in the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 407, § 1(D), 8-2-1999)  
Chapter 7 - YARD SALES 
 
Sec. 5-7-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard sale means any event where items of personal property, other than a licensed commercial business, are to be offered for sale to the general public. The term "yard sale" shall include garage, patio, and similarly conducted sales. 
(Code 1966, § 5-10.01)  
Sec. 5-7-2. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1966, § 5-10.06)  
Sec. 5-7-3. - Permit. 
(a)	Every person conducting a yard sale shall obtain a permit. The permit shall include an affidavit stating that all property to be sold is personal property and has not been acquired or consigned to him for the purpose of resale. The permit fee shall be set by resolution. 
(b)	No such permit shall be issued without the approval of the council. Whenever any person desires such a permit, such person shall petition the council for a permit therefor, which petition shall state the name of the applicant, the character and location of the proposed business, and any other information, which the council may by resolution, require. On consideration of such petition, the council may authorize the permit to be issued in whole or in part or rejected in whole or in part. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-1.106, 5-10.02)  
Sec. 5-7-4. - Frequency. 
Each premises shall be limited to three yard sales per 12-month period, each to be limited to not more than three consecutive days. 
(Code 1966, § 5-10.03)  
Sec. 5-7-5. - Signs. 
Signs advertising yard sales shall be displayed only on the days of the sale. No sign shall be posted on any utility pole, street sign, or street tree. All such signs shall be removed within two days after the yard sale is completed. 
(Code 1966, § 5-10.04)  
Sec. 5-7-6. - Inspections and enforcement. 
All personal property to be sold at a yard sale shall be arranged so that fire, police, health, and other officials may have access at all times during the sale. The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be by the police department and all officers of the city charged with the enforcement of laws. 
(Code 1966, § 5-10.05)  
Chapter 8 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES, COMMERCIAL CULTIVATION REGULATIONS, AND DELIVERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 471, § 1, adopted February 2, 2016, amended the title of chapter 8. 
 
Sec. 5-8-1. - Terms. 
Commercial cultivation shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code section 19300.5(l) but is distinguished from personal cultivation which is separately defined in title 7, chapter 7, article 6 of the Gustine Municipal Code. 
Delivery or deliveries shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code section 19300.5(m) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It includes marijuana infused in foodstuff. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seeds of the plant are incapable of germination. 
Medical marijuana dispensary means any association, cooperative, club, coop, delivery service, collective, and any other similar use involved in the sale, possession, cultivation, use, and/or distribution of marijuana for medicinal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1(Exh. A), 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
Sec. 5-8-2. - Imposition of prohibition. 
The city council hereby prohibits all medical marijuana dispensaries and all commercial cultivation of marijuana within all zones and planned developments within the city. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1(Exh. A), 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
Sec. 5-8-3. - Deliveries. 
Deliveries of medical marijuana are allowed to within the city limits of Gustine to private properties only. Delivery and transportation services are required to obtain a business license pursuant to title 5 chapter 2 of the Gustine Municipal Code. Deliveries of medical marijuana shall only be delivered to the residence of the medical card holder. Delivery drivers are required under this section to verify this prior to completion of delivery. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
TITLE 6 - NATURAL RESOURCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 6-1-1—6-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - WATER CONSERVATION  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-2-1—6-2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water Conservation in Landscaping Act, Government Code § 65591 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-2-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Backflow prevention device means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
Estimated applied water use means the portion of the estimated total water use that is derived from applied water. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
Estimated total water use means the annual total amount of water estimated to be needed to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy. It is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of the plants, and the efficiency of the irrigation system. 
Evapotranspiration means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. 
Hydrozone means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once it is established is a nonirrigated hydrozone. 
Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
Landscaped area means the entire parcel less the building footprint, driveways, nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes such as decks and patios, and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens are not included. 
Maximum applied water allowance means, for design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in the following: MAWA = (ETo) (0.8) (LA) (0.62), where the maximum applied water allowance (in gallons per year) equals the reference evaportranspiration (50 inches per year) multiplied by the ET adjustment factor, the landscaped area (in square feet) and a conversion factor of 0.62 (to gallons per square foot). 
Mulch means any material such as leaves, bark, straw or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purpose of reducing evaporation. 
Recreational area means areas of active play such as sports fields, school yards, picnic grounds, or other areas with intense foot traffic. 
Recycled water and reclaimed water means treated wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and not intended for human consumption. 
Rehabilitated landscape means any relandscaping project that requires a permit. 
Turf means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial rye grass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore paspalum, Saint Augustine grass Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm season grasses. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.02)  
Sec. 6-2-32. - Purpose of article. 
This article is intended to endorse and locally implement the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (Government Code § 65591 et seq.) by: 
(1)	Promoting the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest and other resources as efficiently as possible; 
(2)	Establishing a structure for designing, installing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes in new projects; and 
(3)	Establishing provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for established landscapes. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.01)  
Sec. 6-2-33. - Applicability of article provisions. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, this article shall apply to: 
(1)	All new and rehabilitated landscaping for public agency projects and private development projects that require a permit; and 
(2)	Developer-installed landscaping in single-family and multifamily projects. 
(b)	This article shall not apply to homeowner-provided landscaping at single-family and multifamily projects. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.03)  
Sec. 6-2-34. - Standards of landscape design/implementation. 
(a)	Plan preparation. A licensed landscape architect or a licensed landscaped contractor shall be employed in preparing the landscape and irrigation plans. Such plans shall calculate and specify the maximum applied water allowance, the estimated applied water use and the estimated total water use. 
(b)	Plant selection and grouping. 
(1)	Any plants may be used in the landscape, provided that the estimated applied water use recommended does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance and that the plants meet the specifications set forth in subsection (b)(2), (3) and (4) of this section. 
(2)	Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones. 
(3)	Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographic conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged. The planting of trees is encouraged wherever it is consistent with the other provisions of this article. 
(4)	Although a reasonable number of growing seasons will be allowed for full plant coverage to develop, interim ground cover may be provided during this period. Interim ground cover includes rocks, gravel, wood mulch or other acceptable material. Mulches should be a minimum of three inches thick when used as an interim measure in nonground cover areas and a minimum of two inches thick in ground covers. 
(5)	Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in areas that are fire prone. Information about fire prone areas and appropriate landscaping for fire safety is available from the city fire department. 
(c)	Runoff and overspray. Soil types and infiltration rate shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures. Proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, shall be used to closely match application rates to infiltration rates therefore minimizing runoff. 
(d)	Water features. Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features. 
(e)	Recreational areas. Portions of landscaped areas in public and private projects such as parks, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, or school yards where turf provides a playing surface or serves other recreational purposes may require water in addition to the maximum applied water allowance. A statement shall be included with the landscape design plan, designating recreational areas to be used for such purposes and specifying any needed amount of additional water above the maximum applied water allowance. 
(f)	Certification. 
(1)	Upon completing the installation of the landscaping and the irrigation system, an irrigation audit shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation audit or prior to the field observation. 
(2)	A licensed landscape architect or contractor, certified irrigation designer, or other licensed or certified professional in a related field shall conduct a final field observation and shall provide a certificate of substantial completion to the city. The certificate shall specifically indicate that plants were installed as specified, that the irrigation system was installed as designed, and that an irrigation audit has been performed, along with a list of any observed deficiencies. 
(3)	Certification shall be accomplished by completing a certificate of substantial completion and delivering it to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.04)  
Sec. 6-2-35. - Landscape plan specifications. 
The landscape design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets at a scale that accurately and clearly identifies: 
(1)	Designation of hydrozones; 
(2)	Landscape materials, trees, shrubs, groundcover, turf and other vegetation; planting symbols shall be clearly drawn and plants labeled by botanical name, common name, container size, spacing, and quantities of each group of plants indicated; 
(3)	Property lines and street names; 
(4)	Streets, driveways, walkways, and other paved areas; 
(5)	Pools, ponds, water features, fences and retaining walls; 
(6)	Existing and proposed buildings and structures including elevation, if applicable; 
(7)	Natural features including, but not limited to, rock outcroppings, existing trees, and shrubs that will remain; 
(8)	Tree staking, plant installation, soil preparation details, and any other applicable planting and installation details; 
(9)	A calculation of the total landscaped area and the designation of recreational areas. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.05)  
Sec. 6-2-36. - Irrigation plan specifications. 
(a)	Irrigation systems shall be designed to be consistent with hydrozones. 
(b)	The irrigation design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets. It shall be separate from, but use the same format as, the landscape design plan. The scale shall be the same as that used for the landscape design plan described in section 6-2-35. 
(c)	The irrigation design plan shall accurately and clearly identify: 
(1)	The location and size of separate water meters for landscaping; 
(2)	The location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system, including automatic controller, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, and backflow prevention devices; 
(3)	Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
(4)	Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (psi) for each station; 
(5)	Recycled or reclaimed water systems as alternate irrigation water sources if supplied through a dual distribution system which conforms to the county health department standards; 
(6)	An annual irrigation watering schedule must be provided on irrigation drawings for a new plant establishment period, for the established landscape, and for any temporarily irrigated areas; 
(7)	Recreational areas designated in the landscape design plan shall be highlighted and the irrigation schedule shall indicate if any additional water is needed above the maximum applied water allowance because of high plant factors (but not due to irrigation inefficiency); 
(8)	Whenever possible, irrigation scheduling shall incorporate the use of evapotranspiration data such as those from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations to apply the appropriate levels of water for different climates; 
(9)	Whenever possible, landscape irrigation shall be scheduled between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 am. to avoid irrigating during times of high wind or high temperature. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.06)  
Sec. 6-2-37. - City-maintained irrigation and landscaping. 
All proposed landscaping and irrigation systems to be maintained by the city shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all of the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.07)  
Sec. 6-2-38. - Maintenance schedules and irrigation audits. 
(a)	A regular maintenance schedule shall be included in landscape plan specifications and include the following: 
(1)	Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to: checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; and weeding in all landscaped areas. 
(2)	Whenever possible, repair of irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents. 
(b)	A schedule of landscape irrigation audits, for all but single-family residences, shall be submitted to the city with irrigation plan specifications and at a minimum: 
(1)	Comply with the California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, the entire document, which is hereby incorporated by reference. (See Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, Department of Water Resources, Water Conservation Office (June 1990) version 5.5). 
(2)	Provide for landscape irrigation audits to be conducted by certified landscape irrigation auditors at least once every five years. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.08)  
Sec. 6-2-39. - Provisions for existing landscapes. 
All existing landscaped areas to which the city provides water that are one acre or more, including golf courses, green belts, common areas, multifamily housing, schools, businesses, parks, and publicly owned landscapes shall have a landscape irrigation audit at least every five years. At a minimum, the audit shall be in accordance with the California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.09)  
Sec. 6-2-40. - Public education. 
(a)	Publications. 
(1)	The city will provide information to owners of all new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes. 
(2)	Information about the efficient use of landscape water shall be provided to water users throughout the community. 
(b)	Model homes. At least one model home that is landscaped in each project consisting of eight or more homes shall demonstrate via signs and information, the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.10)  
Sec. 6-2-41. - Fees. 
A landscaping and irrigation plan review and inspection fee shall be paid to the city clerk when the building permit is issued. The amount of the fee will be determined on a square foot basis. The landscape area of a project site totaling less than 10,000 square feet shall pay a flat fee as set by resolution. Landscaped areas totaling 10,000 square feet or more shall pay a flat fee as set by resolution. The fees for parks and recreation facilities and city maintained landscaping and irrigation systems will be determined by the city council on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1966, § 6-9.11)  
Chapter 3 - WATER WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water wells and cathodic protection wells, Water Code § 13700 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-3-1. - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise required by the context of this chapter the terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in Water Code div.7, ch. 10 (Water Code § 13700 et seq.) and the Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-81 and subsequent supplements or revisions. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Enforcement officer means the city manager who is designated by the city council to administer and enforce this chapter. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties to any other officer or employee of the city, or may recommend to the city council that such powers and duties be performed under contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for any or all of the responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.102)  
Sec. 6-3-2. - Intent of chapter. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the state by ensuring that the groundwaters of this state will not be polluted or contaminated. To this end, minimum requirements are contained in this chapter for construction, reconstruction, repair, and destruction of water wells, cathodic protection wells, and monitoring wells. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.101)  
Sec. 6-3-3. - Destruction of abandoned wells. 
All persons owning an abandoned well as defined in the well standards shall destroy it before December 31, 1991. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.1001)  
Sec. 6-3-4. - Standards generally. 
Except as otherwise specified, the standards for the construction, repair, reconstruction, or destruction of wells shall be as set forth in: 
(1)	Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-81. The state department of water resources Bulletin 74-81 "Water Well Standards, State of California," except as modified by subsequent revisions; 
(2)	All subsequent supplements and revisions. All subsequent Bulletin 74-81 supplements or revisions issued by the department of water resources, once the revised standards have been reviewed at appropriate public hearing. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.301) 
State Law reference— Well standards, Water Code § 13800 et seq.  
Sec. 6-3-5. - Special groundwater protection areas. 
The enforcement officer may designate areas where groundwater quality problems are known to exist and where a well will penetrate more than one aquifer. The enforcement officer may require in these designated areas special well seals to prevent mixing of water from several aquifers. Where an applicant proposes well construction, reconstruction, or destruction work in such an area, the enforcement officer may require the applicant to provide a report prepared by a registered geologist or registered civil engineer that identifies all strata containing poor quality water and recommends the location and specifications of the seals needed to prevent the entrance of poor quality water or its migration into other aquifers. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.501)  
Secs. 6-3-6—6-3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-3-41. - Variances. 
The enforcement officer shall have the power under the following specified conditions to grant a variance from any provision of the standard referenced in this chapter and to prescribe alternative requirements in their place: 
(1)	There must be, in a specific case, a special circumstance where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship would result from the strict interpretation and enforcement of any standard. 
(2)	The granting of such a variance is consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.401)  
Sec. 6-3-42. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied, or granted conditionally, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, or whose variance request has been denied, may appeal to the city council, in writing, within ten days after any such denial, conditional granting, suspension, or revocation. Such appeal shall specify the grounds upon which it is taken, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth by resolution. The city clerk shall set such appeal for hearing at the earliest practicable time, and shall notify the appellant and the enforcement officer, in writing, of the time so set at least five days prior to the hearing. 
(b)	After such hearing, the city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order or determination appealed from. Such action shall be final. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-6.801, 6-6.802)  
Sec. 6-3-43. - Entry powers. 
The enforcement officer or representatives of the enforcement officer shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable times to make inspections and tests for the purpose of such enforcement and administration. If any such premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If such premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of such premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, he shall have recourse to such remedies as are provided by law to secure entry. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.901)  
Sec. 6-3-44. - Reports to state. 
Pursuant to Water Code § 13225(c), the enforcement officer shall submit a report, not less than annually, to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction in their area. This report shall contain the following data, unless the regional board determines a lesser amount of information is necessary: 
(1)	The number of wells constructed or destroyed. 
(2)	Descriptions of all well destructions undertaken by the enforcement officer using its regulatory authority under nuisance abatement powers. 
(3)	A description of each specific case where variances were granted and the circumstances that made a variance necessary. 
(4)	A description of each specific case where an inspection was waived and the circumstances that made the waiver necessary. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-6.1201—6-6.1205)  
Secs. 6-3-45—6-3-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-3-71. - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies available to the city council to enforce this chapter are in addition to any other remedies available under ordinance or statute, and do not replace or supplant any other remedy but are cumulative thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.1104)  
Sec. 6-3-72. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.1101)  
Sec. 6-3-73. - Notice of violation. 
(a)	Whenever the enforcement officer determines: 
(1)	That a well has not been completed in accordance with a well permit or the plans and specification relating thereto; 
(2)	That a well has been constructed without the required permit; or 
(3)	An abandoned well has not been destroyed in accordance with the standards, the enforcement officer may record a notice of violation with the officer of the county recorder. 
The owner of the property, as revealed by the assessment roll, on which the violation is situated and any other person responsible for the violation shall be notified of the recordation, if their address is available. If the property owner or authorized agent disagree with the determination, he may submit evidence to the enforcement officer indicating that there is no violation and then shall have a right to appeal an adverse decision of the enforcement officer to the city council in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city council shall within 15 days following the filing of the appeal, set a date for public hearing thereon. The evidence before the city council shall consist of the records in the enforcement officer's files and any other relevant evidence which, in the judgment of the city council, should be considered to effectuate and implement the policies of this chapter. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the decision or the notice of violation and may make such order as should be made. Such action shall be final. 
(c)	The enforcement officer shall submit a removal of notice of violation to the county recorder when it is determined by the enforcement officer or the city council, after review, that no violation of this chapter exists; or all required and corrective work has been completed and approved by the enforcement officer. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.1102)  
Sec. 6-3-74. - Civil actions. 
Violations of this chapter may also be readdressed in the manner set forth in this section by civil action. In addition to being subject to prosecution, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be made the subject of a civil action. Appropriate civil action includes, but is not limited to, injunctive relief and cost recovery. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.1103)  
Secs. 6-3-75—6-3-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 6-3-101. - Required. 
(a)	No person shall dig, bore, drill, deepen, modify, repair, or destroy a water well, cathodic protection well, observation well, monitoring well or any other excavation that may intersect groundwater without first applying for and receiving a permit as provided in this chapter unless exempted by law. 
(b)	Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without having obtained a permit shall be required, if subsequently granted a permit for this work, to pay double standard permit fee. 
(c)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency work required on short notice to maintain drinking water or agricultural supply systems. In such cases, the person responsible for the emergency work shall: 
(1)	Urgency. Satisfy the enforcement officer that such work was urgently necessary; 
(2)	Conformance with standards. Demonstrate that all work performed was in conformance with the technical standards as designated in section 6-3-4. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.201)  
Sec. 6-3-102. - Application. 
Applications for permits shall be made to the enforcement officer on forms approved by the agency and shall contain all such information the enforcement officer requires to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by the required filing fee. If the enforcement officer finds the application contains all necessary information, it shall issue to the applicant a comprehensive permit containing such conditions as are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.202)  
Sec. 6-3-103. - Filing fees. 
Filing fees may be set by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.203)  
Sec. 6-3-104. - Conditions. 
(a)	Limitations. When the enforcement officer issues a permit pursuant to this chapter, he may condition the permit in any manner necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, such quantity and quality testing methods as the enforcement officer finds necessary. 
(b)	Performance bond. The enforcement officer may require a performance bond as a condition to the permit. 
(c)	Persons permitted to work on wells. All construction, reconstruction, or destruction work on wells shall be performed by a person who possesses an active C-57 water well contractor's license in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(d)	Proper disposal of drilling fluids. The permit shall contain a clause requiring the safe and appropriate handling and disposal of drilling fluids and other drilling materials used in connections with the permitted work. 
(e)	Abandoned wells. As a condition of a construction or reconstruction permit, any abandoned wells on the property shall be destroyed in accordance with standards provided in this chapter. 
(f)	Posting of permit. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain a copy of this permit on the drilling site during stages of construction or destruction. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.204)  
Sec. 6-3-105. - Denial. 
The enforcement officer shall deny an application for a permit if, in his judgement, issuance of a permit is not in the public interest. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.205)  
Sec. 6-3-106. - Expiration. 
The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time and before the date set out in the permit. If there have been exceptional circumstances, the enforcement officer may grant the applicant an extension. Upon the expiration of the permit, no further work shall be done unless and until the applicant has received an extension or a new permit. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.206)  
Sec. 6-3-107. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)	Circumstances for such action. The enforcement officer may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, whenever he finds that the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or has misrepresented any material fact in his application, or any supporting documents, for such a permit. Prior to ordering any such suspension or revocation, the enforcement officer shall give the permittee an opportunity for a hearing thereon, after reasonable notice. The hearing shall be before the enforcement officer or designated representative. An appeal may be made as set forth in this section. 
(b)	Consequences. No person whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall continue to perform the work for which the permit was granted until, in the case of suspension, such permit has been reinstated by the enforcement officer. 
(c)	Ordered additional work. Upon suspending or revoking any permit, the enforcement officer may order the permittee to perform any work reasonably necessary to protect the underground waters from pollution or contamination, if any work already done by the permittee has left a well in such condition as to constitute a hazard to the quality of the underground waters. No permittee or person who has held any permit issued pursuant to the chapter shall fail to comply with any such order. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.207)  
Secs. 6-3-108—6-3-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 6-3-131. - Generally. 
The enforcement officer shall make an inspection of the annular seal construction work. He may make an initial inspection of each proposed drilling site, an inspection at the completion of the work, and inspections at such other times as he deems appropriate. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.601)  
Sec. 6-3-132. - Waiver of inspections. 
The enforcement officer may waive inspections should any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	Well inspected by other agencies. Inspections may be waived where the work will be inspected by the staff of the state regional water quality control board or the state department of health services if these designated agencies will inspect and report to the enforcement officer on all drilling features required by the standards. 
(2)	Monitoring wells under specified conditions. Inspections may be waived for monitoring wells that will penetrate only formations that normally contain no water. 
(3)	Drilling sites known to have no threats to groundwater quality. Initial inspections may be waived when the drilling site is well known to the enforcement officer and it is known that no significant threats to groundwater quality exist in the area. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.605)  
Sec. 6-3-133. - Initial inspection. 
Upon receipt of an application, the enforcement officer may make an inspection of the drilling site prior to the issuance of a well permit. The purpose of this inspection is to determine whether there are any site conditions such that the enforcement officer shall do the following: 
(1)	Relocation of drilling site. Require relocation of the drilling site should the location shown on the permit application be too close to potential sources of pollution. 
(2)	Additional conditions. Set additional conditions if needed to remediate any previously unknown groundwater quality protection problems. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.602)  
Sec. 6-3-134. - Inspection of well seal. 
The enforcement officer shall inspect the annular space grout depth prior to the sealing. 
(1)	Required notice. The enforcement officer shall be notified by the well driller a minimum of 24 hours prior to sealing the annular space. Drillers who anticipate completing a well in less than one day shall notify the enforcement officer 24 hours prior to commencement of drilling and provide the anticipated time to commence the sealing of the annular space. 
(2)	Should enforcement officer fail to be present. If the enforcement officer wishes to allow a seal to be tremied or placed without inspection, the driller shall seal the well in accordance with the standards of this chapter and any permit conditions. No seal shall be tremied or placed until permission to proceed is given. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.603)  
Sec. 6-3-135. - Final inspection. 
If requested by the enforcement officer, the driller shall notify the enforcement officer within seven days of the completion of their work at each drilling site. The enforcement officer may make a final inspection after completion of the work to determine whether the well was completed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.604)  
Secs. 6-3-136—6-3-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - COMPLETION REPORTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Reports, Water Code § 13751 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-3-161. - Generally. 
The driller shall provide the enforcement officer a completion report within 30 days of the completion of any well construction, reconstruction, or destruction job. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.701)  
Sec. 6-3-162. - Submittal of state report of completion. 
(a)	A copy of the report of completion (water well driller's report, state department of water resources form 188) required by Water Code § 13751 shall be submitted by the permittee to the enforcement officer within 30 days of construction, alteration, or destruction of any well. This report shall document that the work was completed in accordance with the standards and all additional permit conditions. 
(b)	This section shall not be deemed to release any person from the requirement to file such report with the state department of water resources. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.702)  
Sec. 6-3-163. - Confidentiality. 
Reports required by this division shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies, or to any person who obtains a written authorization from the owner of the well. However, a report associated with a well located within two miles of an area affected or potentially affected by a known unauthorized release of a contaminant shall be made available to any person performing an environmental cleanup study associated with the unauthorized release, if the study is conducted under the order of a regulatory agency. A report released to a person conducting an environmental cleanup study shall not be used for any purpose other than for the purpose of conducting the study. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.704) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Water Code § 13752.  
Sec. 6-3-164. - Other agency's requirements. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to excuse any person from compliance with the provisions of Water Code div. 7, ch. 10, art. 3 (Water Code § 13750.5 et seq.) relating to notices and reports of completion or any other federal, state, or local reporting regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6.704)  
TITLE 7 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 7-1-1—7-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alarm companies, Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on or into any building, place or premises; or, for the alerting of others to the existence of an emergency situation, or of the commission of an unlawful act, which when activated emits a sound or transmits a signal or message, and which directly or indirectly initiates or causes a response by the police or fire department. 
Audible alarm means the type of alarm system, which when activated, emits an audible sound outside of the structure, including vehicles, in which it is located. 
False alarm means any alarm or signal activated through alarm user negligence or error for reasons not of an emergency nature, or when activated due to malfunction of any segment of the alarm system, and which results in a response by city police or fire department personnel where an emergency situation does not exist. 
Owner means any person who owns, operates, or maintains an alarm system and shall include any person designated by the owner to represent him for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 4-9.02)  
Sec. 7-2-2. - Alarm registration. 
(a)	A security alarm company or any other person who installs or operates an alarm system on property located in the city shall register such alarm system with the city police department. Registration shall be accomplished before the alarm system is activated. No person shall sell or install an alarm system without first obtaining a business license with the city. The following information shall be furnished when registering the alarm system: 
(1)	Alarm location; 
(2)	Name of the owner; 
(3)	Home and business telephone number of owner; 
(4)	Type of alarm system; 
(5)	Alternate contact authorized to shut off the alarm system. 
(b)	If an alarm system is not registered as required by this section, any alarms for which the police and/or fire departments respond shall be counted as a false alarm until registered properly with the department. 
(Code 1966, § 4-9.03)  
Sec. 7-2-3. - Automatic telephone communications with city. 
No person shall by means of any mechanical device call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number that terminates in the city police or fire department business offices advising of an alarm activation.  
Sec. 7-2-4. - False alarms. 
(a)	Public safety and safety of police officers and firefighters requires that any alarm causing false alarms be corrected immediately. In the case of fire and smoke alarms, the fire chief shall make the determination as to whether or not response will be terminated and when such termination shall occur. In the case of alarm responses other than fire or smoke alarms, the chief of police shall make the determination as to whether or not response will be terminated and when such termination shall occur. 
(b)	The maximum number of false alarms that may be reported by any separate alarm system within a 12 consecutive month period shall be three. On the fourth and subsequent false alarms, a fee schedule shall be imposed as per council resolution.  
Sec. 7-2-5. - Cutoff devices. 
No person shall install an audible alarm system without a mechanical, electronic or other device which will shut off the audible sound of the alarm system after a period of no more than 15 minutes.  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, Penal Code § 596 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the chief of police or any animal control officer or other person authorized to act on his behalf in the implementation or enforcement of this chapter. 
Agricultural animal means, but is not limited to, horses, ponies, mules, burros, jacks and jennies, cows, bulls, ducks, chickens, calves, heifers, sheep, goats, swine, hogs or pigs but excepting one potbellied pig kept as a household pet in a sanitary manner and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or other animals ordinarily utilized for agricultural purposes. 
Agricultural zone means any premises within the city which has been zoned for agricultural uses as established by the official zoning ordinance of the city. 
Animal means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
Animal control officer means a person authorized to act on behalf of the administrator in the implementation or enforcement of this chapter. 
Animal establishment means an animal menagerie, animal shelter, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, horse establishment, or pet shop, as those terms are defined and used in this chapter, but not any animal hospital or medical facility to which animals are taken for the primary purpose of medical treatment. 
Animal menagerie means any place where dangerous animals are kept or maintained for any purpose, including places where dangerous animals are boarded, exhibited, trained or kept for hire. 
Animal shelter means a facility operated by a public jurisdiction or by an accredited, tax exempt humane organization for the purpose of impounding, harboring, selling, placing or destroying seized, stray, distressed, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals. 
Assistance dog means a guide dog, signal dog or service dog as defined in Civil Code § 54.1. 
At large means a dog or other animal that is off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash or chain, or which is wandering or running freely on public property or property belonging to a person not the owner of the person in control of the animal and without supervision, accompaniment and/or adequate restraint. 
Cat means a domestic cat. 
Commercial kennel means any person engaged in the commercial breeding of dogs or cats, or both, for sale, individually or in litter lots; or in the boarding, training, sale or hire of dogs and/or cats for compensation, except that animal hospitals maintained by a veterinarian licensed by the state as part of the practice of veterinary medicine, animal shelters or private kennels shall not be considered commercial kennels. 
Dangerous animal means any wild, exotic or venomous animal, or other animal that, because of its size, disposition or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to persons or property. 
Dog means a domestic dog (Canis familiaris). 
Enclosed premises means any lot or premises so enclosed as to prevent any animal or fowl confined thereon from escaping, or from any animal or fowl entering thereon. 
Grooming parlor means any commercial place where animals are trimmed, bathed or groomed. 
Household pet means dogs, cats, canaries, parrots and other kindred birds and animals usually or ordinarily kept as household pets. 
Owner means any person who acknowledges ownership of an animal or who harbors or keeps any animal for five or more consecutive days. 
Pet shop means an establishment which obtains animals for sale, exchange, barter or hire to the general public. 
Potentially dangerous dog means a potentially dangerous dog as defined in Food and Agriculture Code § 31602. 
Private kennel means a kennel which is within or adjoining any private residence in which five or more dogs over four months of age, or five or more cats over four months of age, but no more than a combined total of seven dogs and cats, such animals to be for recreational use or for exhibition in conformation shows, field or obedience trials and where the sale of offspring is not the primary function of the kennel. The maintenance of more than two dogs or cats used for breeding purposes for which compensation is received, or the parturition or rearing of more than two litters of dogs and/or cats in any one calendar year, shall be a rebuttable presumption that such animals are owned or maintained for the purpose of commercial breeding, and the owner and premises shall be subject to the permit requirements of a commercial kennel. 
Quarantine means isolation of an animal in a place and manner approved by the administrative officer, animal control officer or designee. 
Vicious dog means a vicious dog as defined in Food and Agriculture Code § 31603. 
Wild or exotic animal means any animal which, because of inherent qualities including, but not limited to, size, geographic origin, vicious tendencies, dangerousness, or other characteristics is not considered domesticated and which is not normally kept as a household pet.  
Sec. 7-3-2. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)	Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter not specifically described as a misdemeanor in this chapter shall constitute an infraction. 
(b)	Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section and as provided for in individual sections of this chapter, as per Food and Agriculture Code § 31662, any violation of this chapter involving a potentially dangerous dog shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Any violation of this chapter involving a vicious dog shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)	For purposes of this section, bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. 
(d)	In addition to any other penalties of fines provided for in this chapter, any reasonable costs incurred by the city in seizing, impounding or confining any dangerous animal shall be charged to the owner. 
(e)	Four or more violations of the same section of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each additional day the violations continue shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. The punishment upon conviction shall be as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. In addition, the city may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.  
Sec. 7-3-3. - Exclusions for medical uses or veterinary care. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the keeping of any animal by a licensed veterinarian for hospital or medical purposes by any hospital or clinic, regardless of the zoning district, provided that there is compliance with all other provisions of this chapter relating to the keeping of such animals.  
Sec. 7-3-4. - Public nuisances. 
(a)	It is declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful, for any person owning or having control or custody of any animal, to do any of the following: 
(1)	Permit an animal to defecate or urinate on any privately owned or occupied property other than that of the owner or person having control of the animal; 
(2)	Permit an animal to defecate on public property without immediately cleaning or removing the excrement to a proper receptacle; 
(3)	Permit an animal to unreasonably obstruct the use and enjoyment of property held by others in the community by allowing such animal to habitually bark, howl, yelp, bay or make other noise which by loudness or frequency cause a breach of the peace; 
(4)	Permit unsanitary conditions to exist on any premises where an animal is kept which would cause foul or obnoxious odors, attract flies or vermin or otherwise threaten the public health and safety; 
(5)	Cause or permit a dog or a wild or exotic animal to run or wander at large on any public property or privately owned or occupied premises without the consent of the owner or occupant; or 
(6)	Permit an animal to engage in menacing behavior including but not limited to the chasing of vehicles or the molesting or frightening of passersby. 
(b)	Except as provided otherwise in this chapter and except in circumstances in which the animal control officer or designee seeks to have a nuisance abated in accordance with other provisions of this chapter, any peace officer may seize and impound any animal causing a public nuisance in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)	Any private person may maintain an action under Civil Code § 3493 for enforcement of this chapter declaring certain acts a public nuisance, if such acts are specifically injurious to such person. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-1.09, 6-1.13)  
Sec. 7-3-5. - Keeping of agricultural animals. 
On any premises in any nonagricultural zoning district in which agricultural animals are lawfully present and maintained, the following minimum restrictions shall apply: 
(1)	No agricultural animal shall be maintained on an area of less than one acre, and the number of animals thereon shall not exceed a number per acre of two adult animals and their immature offspring. 
(2)	All open enclosures harboring agricultural animals, whether pasture land or corral, shall be not less than 100 feet from the nearest school, church, hospital or dwelling used for human habitation, other than the residence of the owner of such animal, and shall be set back at least 30 feet from any traveled street or highway, except an alley.  
Sec. 7-3-6. - Keeping swine, bees, chickens, roosters, peafowl, doves, ostriches, other "Ratitae," and livestock. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit to be maintained bees, swine, llamas, roosters, chickens, pigeons, doves, turkeys, pea fowl, water fowl, ostriches and other "Ratitae," or livestock on any premises within the city that have not been zoned for agricultural use. The term "swine," as used in this section, does not include potbellied pigs harbored in accordance with restrictions related to noise or sanitation as provided by ordinance. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to construct, establish, conduct or maintain or cause to be constructed, established or maintained, or engage in, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, any dairy, stockyard or stock corral, cattle ranch, rabbit or poultry ranch, or public stable, on any premises not zoned for agricultural use. Where such uses are existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, then such use shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming use.  
Sec. 7-3-7. - Animals in city buildings. 
No person having the control or care of any animal or animals shall cause or permit such animal to enter or remain in city-owned or city-managed buildings other than a building used for the purpose of care, detention, control or treatment of animals, or a building used for training classes, shows or exhibitions. This section shall not apply to persons who are blind or deaf and who use dogs for guidance or for other use because of physical disabilities, persons who are working with dogs in connection with public police purpose, or persons authorized by the administrator.  
Sec. 7-3-8. - Animal bites; quarantine; examination. 
(a)	Any animal owner or person having legal custody thereof who has knowledge or reason to believe that his or her animal has bitten, mauled or injured any person or other animal in an unprovoked attack shall immediately report that fact to the police department with full information in regard to the incident. 
(b)	Where the evidence contained in the report made under subsection (a) of this section and any other evidence gives rise to probable cause that an animal has bitten, mauled or injured any person or other animal in an unprovoked attack, it shall the duty of the administrator or animal control officer to enter upon or in any premises, building, lot, yard or enclosure for the purpose of inspecting the same to ascertain the presence of any animal for which quarantine may be appropriate under this section. 
(c)	An animal control officer shall have the authority to seize and quarantine any animal which is the subject of the report provided for in subsection (a) of this section for a period of ten or 14 days as may be prescribed by the state department of health. The animal control officer may order the owner to quarantine the animal on the premises of the owner or person having legal custody thereof. 
(d)	Any person who fails, refuses or neglects to quarantine any animal as ordered by the animal control officer, or who refuses to allow the animal control officer to inspect any private premises where the animal is kept, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. No animal shall be removed or released during the quarantine period without permission of the health officer. 
(e)	The administrator may charge a fee, as set forth by resolution, for the costs of quarantining animals and inspections for quarantine of animals. Any fees charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has legal custody of the animal. Such a fee shall be in addition to the actual costs for housing, feeding and otherwise caring for the quarantined animal. 
(f)	The head of any animal which dies or is destroyed while under quarantine shall be submitted to the laboratory of the county health department for a rabies examination. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.10) 
State Law reference— Rabies control, Health and Safety Code § 121575 et seq.  
Sec. 7-3-9. - Diseased animals. 
(a)	No person owning or having charge of any animal which that person knows to be infected with any disease transmittable to humans shall permit such animal to remain with the city other than at an approved veterinary hospital unless the administrator/animal control officer or other appropriate authority approves an alterative means of confinement. 
(b)	The animal control officer is authorized to seize any animal he reasonably believes to be infected with a disease transmittable to humans.  
Sec. 7-3-10. - Disposal of deceased animals. 
(a)	Upon the death of any animal, the owner or person in charge thereof shall provide for the burial, incinerations or other disposition of the body of such animal in a manner not likely to result in an unsanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any dead cat or dog in any trash or garbage receptacle, whether public or private, to be hauled and carried into the general municipal solid waste stream. It shall be unlawful to bury any dead animal within any lands within the city limits other than a pet cemetery. If the owner or person in charge of any dead animal is unable to provide for burial or other disposition, such person may request the animal control officer to remove and dispose of the body of such animal for a fee as set forth by resolution. 
(b)	Upon learning that the body or parts of a dead animal has not been disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner, the animal control officer shall remove and dispose of such body immediately. The owner or person who had legal custody of such animal at the time of removal shall, immediately upon the city's demand for payment, pay to the city all costs incurred by the animal control officer for removing and disposing of the body or parts of the dead animal.  
Sec. 7-3-11. - Abandonment of animals. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal in the city. The term "abandonment," as used in this section, refers to acts clearly indicating an intent on the part of an owner or person with the right of control or custody over an animal to permanently relinquish control over the animal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code § 597s.  
Sec. 7-3-12. - Warning signs for wild or exotic animals or potentially dangerous dogs. 
The owner or keeper of a wild or exotic animal or potentially dangerous dog shall post, at the entrances to the property where the animal is kept, a legible sign to be approved by the administrator warning persons of the animal. The sign shall be capable of being understood by a child.  
Secs. 7-3-13—7-3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-3-41. - Powers of the administrator. 
(a)	The administrator, or animal control officer or designee acting in his behalf, shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To enforce the provisions of this chapter and state laws relating to the care, treatment, impounding and destruction of animals; 
(2)	To arrest any person who violates this chapter in the manner provided by Penal Code § 836.5; 
(3)	To issue citations pursuant to this chapter and applicable laws of this state; 
(4)	To act as a public officer pursuant to Food And Agriculture Code § 7; 
(b)	The administrator shall have the authority to determine whether any dog has engaged in the behaviors or exhibits any of the characteristics of a "potentially dangerous dog" or "vicious dog" as defined in Food and Agricultural Code §§ 31602 and 31603.  
Sec. 7-3-42. - Authority to contract for private services. 
All contracts to hire or let the services of a private or public entity for the purpose of performing the animal control functions of the city shall be authorized specifically by council resolution only.  
Sec. 7-3-43. - Nuisances and inspection for nuisances; notice; procedure. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the administrator, animal control officer or designee to enter upon or in any premises, building, lot, yard or enclosure for the purpose of inspecting the same to ascertain the presence of any nuisance. 
(b)	If the inspecting officer has reason to believe a nuisance exists on the premises, then he, deputies, or any police or peace officer shall serve written notice to the person owning or having control of or acting as agent for such premises, a notice to abate or remove such nuisance within 48 hours or other reasonable time as may be stated in the notice. Such service shall be served personally or, where the person responsible for such nuisance cannot be located, by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the front door or entranceway. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, willfully, or negligently fail to abate the nuisance alleged in the notice or to fail to contest the allegations in such notice within the time period allotted following receipt or knowledge of the notice. 
(c)	Where the person upon whom the abatement notice is required to be served under subsection (b) of this section has been properly served but does not abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice, the administrator shall have the authority to do the following: 
(1)	Where the nuisance is caused by an at-large animal, wild or exotic animal or a potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog, the administrator may follow the procedures relating to seizure and impoundment as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)	Where the nuisance is in the nature of noise or odors and is caused by animals, by animal waste, or other conditions on the premises that are the result of the keeping of the animals, the administrator may abate the nuisance by substantially following the notice, publication, hearing, removal and abatement costs set forth in title 10, chapter 3, article 8 relating to vehicle abatement. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.13)  
Secs. 7-3-44—7-3-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Animal pounds, Food and Agricultural Code § 32500 et seq.; impoundment of dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 31101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-3-61. - Authorized. 
(a)	Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, an animal control officer or peace officer may seize and impound an animal for violation of any provision of this title or state law, without prior notice and prior to a hearing, in any of the following situation where the officer reasonably believes it is necessary: 
(1)	To protect public health, safety, welfare and property; 
(2)	To protect an animal which is injured, sick or starving and must be cared for; and 
(3)	Where the owner is not present, to protect an animal from injury which has strayed onto public property or a public right-of-way. 
(b)	Where the officer determines the animal must be seized and impounded in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the officer shall post a notice of such impoundment on the front door of the residence of the owner or person who has a right to control the animal. The notice shall state the following: The animal impounded, where the animal is being held, the name, address and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the animal, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the animal if no action to regain custody is taken within a specified period of time. 
(c)	Where the owner or person in control of the animal has not contacted the agency impounding the animal with directions provided in the notice, the administrator or designee shall attempt to contact that person again after 48 hours. 
(d)	Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, an animal control officer or peace officer shall not seize or impound a dog or wild or exotic animal for running at-large under the provisions of this title when the animal has not strayed from and is upon the private property of the owner or the person who has a right to control the animal, or upon private property to which the animal owner or person with custodial control has a right of possession. An animal control officer or peace officer shall not seize or impound a dog which has strayed from, but then returned to, the enclosed portion of private property of his owner or the person who has a right to control the dog. In such case, a citation may be issued to the owner or person in control of the animal. An officer may seize and impound any wild or exotic animal which has strayed from, but has returned to, the property of the animals owner or keeper. Where the officer is authorized to issue a citation under this subsection, but the owner or custodial person of the animal cannot be located, and in the reasonable opinion of the animal control or peace officer at the scene the animal poses a threat of running at-large again, the animal may be impounded. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.06)  
Sec. 7-3-62. - Proper care required. 
The administrator shall ensure that all impounded animals receive suitable and adequate food, water and shelter.  
Sec. 7-3-63. - Fees and charges. 
(a)	An impoundment fee shall be charged to the owner of each animal impounded in an amount fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(b)	In addition, a fee for keeping an impounded animal shall be charged in an amount sufficient to defray the costs of keeping the animal, as determined by the administrator.  
Sec. 7-3-64. - Disposition time limitation. 
(a)	The required holding period for an at-large dog or cat shall be pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code §§ 31108 and 31172. 
(b)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an animal which has been determined by a veterinarian or other authorized personnel to be diseased or injured to the extent that care will not alleviate suffering shall be destroyed in accordance with all state and county laws as soon as possible. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.08)  
Sec. 7-3-65. - Redemption. 
The administrator, animal control officer or designee may permit an owner or other person entitled to custody of an impounded animal to redeem such animal. No animal may be redeemed without payment of the fees for impounding and keeping the animal, and without compliance with the licensing provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.06)  
Sec. 7-3-66. - Hearings and appeals. 
(a)	Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, the administrator, animal control officer or peace officer may not seize or impound any animal without the consent of the owner or person entitled to custody of the animal, unless notice of that seizure has been properly served as provided for in this chapter. If the owner or person who has a right to control an animal refuses to consent to an impoundment of any animal owned by such person, the animal control officer or peace officer may issue a notice commanding the person to appear before the administrator for a hearing at a set time. If the owner or person having custody wishes to challenge the impoundment, the owner or person having custody shall request the hearing either personally or by mail within 72 hours after the seizure and impoundment. 
(b)	The administrator shall promptly set the time and place for the hearing and shall cause notice of such hearing to deposited in the mail to the party requesting a hearing at least five days before the date of the hearing. 
(c)	At the hearing, the applicant and the animal control division may be represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted and strict rules of evidence need not apply. The decision of the examiner shall be written and based entirely on the record. The hearing examiner shall issue his or her decision within ten business days from the date of the hearing and that decision shall be final. 
(d)	Any person who fails to appeal any seizure or impoundment by the animal control officer or peace officer under this title within six days of impoundment will forfeit all right of ownership and control of the animal. Final disposition of the animal shall be determined by that agency in accordance with the provisions of ordinance and state law.  
Secs. 7-3-67—7-3-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - DOGS AND CATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-3-101. - Maximum number. 
No person shall keep or maintain more than four dogs over four months of age, or more than four cats over four months of age, or any combination thereof totaling five dogs and cats, including no more than one unspayed female dog or one unspayed female cat, on any premises except a premises maintained by a veterinarian licensed by the state for the practice of veterinary medicine, without a valid permit procured from the administrator pursuant to this chapter for a private kennel, pet shop, animal menagerie or animal shelter. For purposes of this section, a female dog or cat shall be rebuttably presumed to be unspayed, unless the owner provides evidence of spaying. Written certification from a licensed veterinarian that an animal cannot be spayed for health reasons or is incapable of breeding shall be deemed a satisfactory substitution for a certificate showing an animal is spayed.  
Sec. 7-3-102. - Adoption. 
Any person adopting an unaltered dog or cat from any humane society animal shelter, public pound or society for the prevention of cruelty to animals shelter in the city shall have such animal spayed or neutered on or before a date specified in the adoption agreement, unless a licensed veterinarian states in writing that the date specified in the adoption agreement is inappropriate for the animal in question. On submission of such written statement to the person at such shelter or pound responsible for ensuring compliance with this section, the adoption agreement shall be modified accordingly.  
Sec. 7-3-103. - Sale. 
All cats or dogs at least eight weeks of age, before they are sold, must be immunized against common disease; in the case of dogs, distemper; in the case of cats against panleukopenia. The seller of a dog or cat shall provide to the buyer at the time of sale a signed statement from the seller attesting to the date of vaccination and the sellers knowledge of the animal's health. Such statement shall also include the animal's immunization history, and the record of any known disease, sickness or internal parasites that the animal is afflicted with at the time of transfer of ownership, and any known information on treatment and medication. 
State Law reference— Sales of dogs by breeders, Health and Safety Code § 122045 et seq.; retail sale of dogs and cats, Health and Safety Code § 122125 et seq.  
Secs. 7-3-104—7-3-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation and licensing of dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 30501 et seq.; potentially dangerous and vicious dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 31601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-3-121. - License generally. 
(a)	No person shall maintain or board any dog four months of age or older which has not been licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except: 
(1)	A license shall not be required for an animal owned or under the control of a nonresident of the city, and which is to be kept in the city for less than 30 days. 
(2)	A license shall not be required for dogs temporarily brought into the city for entry into an event, show or exhibition scheduled not more than ten days thereafter. 
(b)	Compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including the requirement that any dog in the city over four months of age be vaccinated, shall be a condition to the issuance or renewal of any dog license. 
(c)	Prior to issuance of a dog license, the administrator shall require payment of a license fee which shall be fixed by resolution of the city council and which shall not be refundable, in whole or in part, with the following exceptions: 
(1)	A reduced fee of 50 percent of the normal fee shall be charged for licenses issued for spayed females or neutered males as per Food and Agricultural Code § 30804.5. The administrator may require the submission of a certificate of proof of such spaying or neutering, or cannot be spayed or neutered for health reasons and is incapable of breeding prior to issuance of a license at the lesser fee. 
(2)	An additional fee may be required for a license purchased more than 60 days after expiration of a previously issued license or 60 days after notice to the owner to obtain a license. 
(3)	License and tags for dogs used principally for the purpose of guiding persons who are blind or deaf, and for dogs used in law enforcement by any governmental agencies shall be issued upon request at no charge. 
(d)	Dog licenses shall be renewed upon expiration. The term of any dog license issued under this chapter shall commence on the date of the issuance of the license and shall terminate 12 months from the date of issue. When the license is renewed after the expiration date, the new license period shall begin on the expiration date of the previous period. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.01) 
State Law reference— Dog license fee authorized, Government Code, § 38792.  
Sec. 7-3-122. - License tag. 
(a)	Upon payment of the dog license fee and the presentation of a valid certificate of vaccination by a duly licensed doctor of veterinary medicine, the administrator shall issue a license stating the name and residence of the person to whom the license is issued, the amount paid, the date of issuance and expiration thereof, the date of expiration of vaccination required under this chapter, and a description of the dog for which such license is issued, together with the number of the metallic tag accompanying the license. 
(b)	Upon request of any authorized animal control officer or any peace officer, the owner or person having control of a dog shall present the dog's license to that employee or officer. 
(c)	With each dog license, the administrator shall issue a metal tag bearing an identifying number and the word and letters "Dog License, Gustine." Each dog shall wear the metal tag issued at all times except when being shown at a dog show, exhibition or event. The fee for such tag shall be set by resolution. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a metal tag issued pursuant to this chapter to any dog other than the dog for which it was issued. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.02)  
Sec. 7-3-123. - Vaccination. 
Every owner of a dog over four months of age shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health. Revaccination shall be made at such intervals of time as may be prescribed by the state department of public health. Every veterinarian who vaccinates or causes or directs any dog to be vaccinated shall use a form provided or approved by the administrator to certify that such animal has been vaccinated. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.03)  
Sec. 7-3-124. - Restraint. 
An owner or person with custody over, or the right of control of any dog shall keep such dog confined to such person's own premises within such enclosures as may be reasonably appropriate to restrain the dog from running at large. No dog shall be allowed to walk the public streets without being restrained by means of a leash capable of restraining at least four times the weight of such dog, except: 
(1)	Assistance dogs while performing their duties; 
(2)	Dogs participating in field or obedience trials or exhibitions; 
(3)	Dogs assisting their owner or handler in lawful hunting or herding of livestock; 
(4)	Dogs assisting a security guard or assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement activities. 
(5)	Dogs being trained for any of the purposes set forth in this section on private land with permission of the land owner, so long as such dogs are under direct control of such individuals to ensure that they do not violate any other provision of law. 
(Code 1966, § 6-1.05)  
Secs. 7-3-125—7-3-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CATS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of cats, Food and Agricultural Code § 31751 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-3-151. - Vaccination. 
Every owner of a cat over four months of age shall cause such cat to be vaccinated with an antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of health. The administrator may require an owner to show proof of such vaccination.  
Sec. 7-3-152. - Identifying tags or identification chip. 
(a)	Every owner of a domesticated cat shall attach or cause to be attached to each cat a collar with a tag bearing the name, current residence and telephone number or other information sufficient to enable the administrator to rapidly identify and contact the owner if the cat is found astray or in need of medical help. 
(b)	In lieu of a tag and collar, the owner may cause to be implanted in the cat's skin an identified chip; provided, however, that the owner, in connection with causing such identified chip to be implanted, shall submit or cause to be submitted to the company which has constructed or maintains the identified chip all information necessary to enable the administrator to locate the owner or other responsible person if the cat is found astray or in need of medical help.  
Secs. 7-3-152—7-3-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - ANIMAL CONTROL PERMITS 
 
Sec. 7-3-181. - Required. 
No person shall conduct, operate or keep any pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter or horse establishment; nor shall any person keep a wild or exotic animal, without first obtaining an animal control permit in strict accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.  
Sec. 7-3-182. - Wild or exotic animals. 
(a)	No person shall have, keep or maintain, or have in possession or control, any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, wolf hybrid, monkey or any poisonous or venomous reptile of any kind, or any wild or exotic, dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile without first applying to and receiving an animal control permit from the administrator. 
(b)	In addition to the standards applicable to animal establishments, the administrator may deny or revoke such permit upon finding the following: 
(1)	The animal which is the subject of the application may not be kept or maintained without endangering the safety of any person or property; 
(2)	The keeping of the animal would constitute a public nuisance; or 
(3)	The animal would be subject to suffering, neglect, cruelty or abuse. 
(c)	The administrator has the discretion to condition issuance of the permit upon specific requirements that the animal be properly caged, tethered or restrained in facilities that meet or are in addition to, or more restrictive than state or federal guidelines or regulations relating to design and maintenance of zoo facilities.  
Sec. 7-3-183. - Application; regulations. 
(a)	An application for an animal control permit shall be in writing on a form approved by the administrator. The applicant shall furnish a list of the types of animals to be maintained or used for any purpose, together with the approximate number of animals of each type. 
(b)	The administrator may establish regulations and standards relating to: 
(1)	The maximum number and species of animals to be kept or maintained on the premises. 
(2)	The construction, sanitation and maintenance of facilities; and 
(3)	Any other regulations and standards in conformity with and for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter. 
(c)	Compliance with such rules and regulations shall be prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any permit pursuant to this title. 
(d)	The permittee shall maintain a record of the names and addresses of persons from whom animals are received and to whom the animals are sold, traded or given. This shall be available to the administrator upon request. Such records shall be kept for a minimum of two years.  
Sec. 7-3-184. - Fees. 
Application and annual fees for permits required by this article shall be as established by resolution.  
Sec. 7-3-185. - Inspection of premises. 
As a condition to the issuance or renewal of an animal control permit, the administrator or animal control officer or designee shall have the authority to inspect at any reasonable time the facility housing the animal, subject to the permit for conformance with the housing, sanitation, safety and other standards set forth in this chapter.  
Sec. 7-3-186. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)	The administrator may deny or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter in the following situations: 
(1)	Whenever the administrator determines by inspection that any facility in which the animal which is the subject of the permit fails to meet any of the conditions of the permit, this chapter or applicable state or federal law; 
(2)	Whenever the administrator has reason to believe that the applicant or permit holder has willfully withheld or falsified any information required for a permit; 
(3)	If the applicant or permit holder has been convicted by a court of law of more than two misdemeanor violations in a 12-month period of this chapter, or state laws relating to animals or public nuisance caused by animals, or has been convicted of cruelty to animals in this or any other state within the previous five years. For the purposes of this section, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. 
(b)	Prior to denial or revocation of a permit, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the intent to deny or revoke the permit, the reasons for such denial or revocation, and that the applicant may make a written request for an appeal hearing before the administrator within five days after receipt of such notice if the applicant wishes to challenge the denial or revocation. The administrator shall set the time and place for the hearing and cause notice of such hearing to be mailed to the person requesting such hearing at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. The hearing may be held by the administrator or other designated hearing examiner. At the hearing, the applicant and the animal control division may be represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted and strict rules of evidence need not apply. The decision of the examiner shall be written and based entirely on the record. The hearing examiner shall issue his or her decision within ten business days from the date of the hearing and that decision shall be final.  
Sec. 7-3-187. - Expiration and renewal; late penalty. 
(a)	Any permit issued under this chapter shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance. The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as for an original permit. 
(b)	Upon failure to make application for the renewal within 30 days of the expiration of a permit, or prior thereto, the applicant shall pay in addition to the permit an administrative fee to be set by resolution of the city council.  
Sec. 7-3-188. - Nontransferable. 
Any animal control permit is personal to the holder and is not transferable.  
Chapter 4 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— California Emergency Services Act, Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, complications resulting from the year 2000 problem, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission. 
Emergency services means preparation for and implementation of functions (other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible) to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from natural, manmade, or war-caused disasters. These functions include firefighting, police, medical and health, rescue, first aid, warning, communications, evacuation, resource management, plant protection, restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to preserving the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1.02; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.02), 8-6-2001) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Government Code § 8555 et seq.  
Sec. 7-4-2. - Purpose. 
The declared purpose of this chapter is to establish the legal and organizational basis for operations in the city in response to any type of disaster or large-scale emergency situation. It assigns broad responsibilities to local government agencies and support organizations for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. These responsibilities are generally extensions of normal, day-to-day functions involving the same personnel and material resources. Supporting plans set forth the concepts and procedures whereby the city can effectively apply available resources during peacetime and war cause disasters. Effective use of resources will ensure that casualties and property damage will be minimized and that essential services will be restored as soon as possible following such an emergency or disaster situation. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1.01; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.01), 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 7-4-3. - Disaster management team. 
(a)	The city disaster management team is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
(1)	The mayor, who shall be chair. 
(2)	The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chair. 
(3)	A deputy director of emergency services. 
(4)	Such chiefs and/or department heads as are provided for in this emergency plan. 
(5)	Such representatives of civic, business, labor, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility or volunteer emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the disaster management team. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the city disaster management team, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements. It shall further bring before the city council such resolutions, rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster management team shall meet upon the call of the chair or designee. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-1.03, 4-1.04; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.03, 4-1.04), 8-6-2001) 
State Law reference— Local disaster councils, Government Code § 8610 et seq.  
Sec. 7-4-4. - Director and deputy director of emergency services. 
(a)	The city manager shall be designated the director of emergency services. 
(b)	The deputy director of emergency services shall be appointed by the director. 
(c)	The duties and powers of the director and deputy director of emergency services shall be carried out as set forth in the major emergency response plan as adopted by this chapter, along with other duties as may be established from time to time through mutual aid plans and agreements as set forth by resolution. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-1.05, 4-1.06; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.05, 4-1.06), 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 7-4-5. - Major emergency response plan. 
The city disaster management team shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all available city resources, both public and private, to meet any conditions constituting a designated emergency. Such plan shall take place upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1.07; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.07), 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 7-4-6. - Emergency services organization. 
The California Emergency Services Act (Government Code § 58550 et seq.) provides that emergency services organizations and operations will be structured around existing constitutional government. The city organization for emergency operations consists of existing government departments and private emergency response organizations along with all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation under law, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during any declared emergency. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1.08; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.08), 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 7-4-7. - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with an emergency activity, including mutual aid activities, shall be conformed to the requirements of Government Code § 8607(a) for emergency response and disaster management and shall be deemed for the benefit and protection of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1.09; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.09), 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 7-4-8. - Failure to comply with regulations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person during an emergency to: 
(1)	Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such person by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)	Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of a nature that would imperil the lives or property of the inhabitants of this city, county, state, or country. 
(3)	Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1.10; Ord. No. 418, § I(4-1.10), 8-6-2001) 
State Law reference— Local emergency regulations, Government Code §§ 8634, 8655.  
Chapter 5 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 7-5-1—7-5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal fire departments, Government Code § 38600 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-5-31. - Generally. 
There is hereby created a volunteer fire department which shall be known as the city volunteer fire department. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the overall administrative control of the city volunteer fire department. The city fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve under the supervision of the city manager. The city fire chief shall be responsible for management, administration, and provisioning of the city volunteer fire department. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3.101)  
Sec. 7-5-32. - Membership. 
(a)	The city volunteer fire department shall consist of the following: 
(1)	Fire chief; 
(2)	Assistant fire chief; 
(3)	Second assistant fire chief; 
(4)	As many assistant fire personnel, who shall volunteer as such, as the council may from time to time provide for, appoint, and/or designate; and 
(5)	Such other honorary members as the city volunteer fire department may recommend. 
(b)	Such appointments shall be made upon the recommendation of the fire chief according to the constitution and bylaws of the city volunteer fire department.  
Sec. 7-5-33. - Constitution and bylaws. 
The city volunteer fire department shall be governed by a constitution and bylaws provided by the fire department, subject to the approval of the city council and under the supervision of the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3.102)  
Sec. 7-5-34. - Duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)	To attend all fires unless for good and sufficient reason unable to do so. 
(2)	To investigate the cause of every fire occurring in the city and make a written report of such investigation. 
(3)	To aid in the enforcement of all fire regulations enacted by federal, state, county or local regulation. 
(4)	To examine buildings in the process of erection, to report violations of regulations relating to the prevention and extinguishments of fires. 
(5)	To institute proceedings as per law for any violations found in the examination of such buildings. 
(6)	To have the care, control, and custody of all the apparatus, appliances, and materials belonging to or being used by the fire department and the premises where equipment may be kept. 
The city fire chief or designee shall file a written report of all incidents within the city which involve responses by city volunteer fire department personnel. The fire chief shall have the authority to designate such personnel as may be qualified to assist him in the performance of the duties of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3.104)  
Sec. 7-5-35. - Badges. 
The fire chief shall be entitled to have and to display an appropriate badge of his office. Each assistant firefighter shall be entitled to have and display an appropriate badge of office. The fire chief shall furnish such badges to each active firefighter. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3.105)  
Sec. 7-5-36. - Duties of members. 
Members of the city volunteer fire department shall attend all fires in the city and perform such duties in suppressing any fire as may be directed by a fire services supervisor. Additionally, members of the city volunteer fire department shall assist with fire suppression and rescue duties in locations outside the city when directed to do so by a fire services supervisor. It shall be the duty of all assistant fire personnel to obey the orders and instructions of the fire chief in all matters concerning the fire department.  
Sec. 7-5-37. - Duty to safeguard property. 
Members of the city volunteer fire department have a duty and responsibility to safeguard all public and private property under their control or supervision.  
Chapter 6 - FIREWORKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 470, § 2, adopted November 3, 2015, repealed former ch. 6, §§ 7-6-1—7-6-3, and enacted a new ch. 6. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the the Code of 1966, §§ 4-2.01—4-2.05 and 4-2.15, and Ord. No. 413, adopted April 16, 2001. 
State Law reference— Fireworks, Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq.; local regulation of fireworks, Health and Safety Code § 12541. 
 
Sec. 7-6-1. - Definitions. 
(a)	Dangerous fireworks means any fireworks classified as such as defined by sections 12505 and 12561 of the Health and Safety Code and title 19, division 1, subchapter 6 of the California Code of Regulations, pertaining to dangerous fireworks which are hereby incorporated by reference. Dangerous fireworks are commonly referred to as illegal fireworks. 
(b)	Fireworks means any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. 
The term "fireworks" includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, the Health and Safety Code both as "dangerous fireworks" and as "safe and sane fireworks," and shall include firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, chasers, snakes and other fireworks containing any explosives or flammable substance. This definition does not include ammunition used for target shooting or hunting, nor does it include what is ordinarily known as cap pistol caps, party poppers or snap caps. 
(c)	Fireworks sales stand means any building, counter, or structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, offering for sale, or display for sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
(d)	Nonprofit organization means any nonprofit association, club, or corporation organized for veteran, welfare, religious, civic betterment, youth or charitable purposes as defined by section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The organization must have obtained nonprofit status and have been organized and established in the city for a minimum of one continuous year receding the filing of the application for a permit. The organization must have a bona fide membership of at least 20 members who reside in the city, which will be verified each year. 
(e)	Public fireworks display means an entertainment feature where the public or private group is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of dangerous fireworks. 
(f)	Safe and sane fireworks also known as "state approved fireworks" means any fireworks which do not come within the definition of "dangerous fireworks" or "exempt fireworks" as defined by section 12505 of the Health and Safety Code and title 19, division 1, subchapter 6 of the California Code of Regulations, pertaining to "safe and sane fireworks" which are hereby incorporated by reference. All safe and sane fireworks shall be labeled with the safe and sane fireworks seal authorized by the state fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-2. - Fireworks prohibited generally. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale, at retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the city, except as provided in this chapter. 
(b)	Notwithstanding subsection (a), the use and discharge of safe and sane fireworks within the city is permitted for the period of June 28 through July 6 when the use and discharge will be allowed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
(c)	This chapter does not prohibit the use by railroad or other transportation agencies, for signal purposes or illumination, or torpedoes, flares or fuses; nor the sale or use of blank cartridges for theatrical or ceremonial purposes, athletic events, or military ceremonials or demonstrations. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-3. - Public display—Permits required. 
(a)	Notwithstanding the prohibitions on dangerous and safe and sane fireworks set forth in this chapter, public fireworks displays are permitted upon issuance of a permit therefore under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code and this chapter. 
(b)	Applications for a public fireworks display shall be made not less than 60 days prior to the scheduled date of the display. The permit application shall include a diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged; the location of buildings, highways and other lines of communication; the lines behind which the audiences will be restrained; and the location of nearby overhead obstructions. At the time of permit application, the fire chief or his/ her designee shall be consulted regarding reasonable conditions or requirements for standby personnel and fire apparatus. Public fireworks display permits shall only be granted to licensed pyrotechnic operators. 
(c)	Before filing with the city, the applicant for a public fireworks display shall obtain a license from the state fire marshal as required in division 11 of the Health and Safety Code. The insurance and other surety requirements therein provided are considered to be the minimum and may be increased by the state fire marshal, fire chief, or city council. 
(d)	Public fireworks display permits shall be issued by the fire chief with the concurrence of the police chief. The fire chief and police chief may deny issuance of such permits, provided such a denial is reasonably based on public health and safety concerns, including, but not limited to, an application for another event to be held on the same date as that requested has been previously filed or approved, and the other event is so close in time and location to the event as to cause undue traffic congestion or to place the city in a position of being unable to meet the needs for fire, police or public works services for both events. Any decision regarding such permits may be appealed to the city manager. Appeal requests shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days of the fire and police chiefs' decision. Any appeal shall be conducted within 30 days of receipt of an appeal request. The city manager shall not be required to adhere to formal rules of evidence during the appeal, and the city manager's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-4. - Fireworks sales stand—Permit requirements. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, business, firm, or corporation to offer safe and sane fireworks for sale or otherwise operate a fireworks sales stand within the city without having first complied with all the requirements of applicable state law and received a fireworks sales stand permit from the city. 
(b)	The fire chief upon written application as provided within this chapter and subject to the provisions of this chapter, may grant to any nonprofit organization a permit to operate a fireworks sales stand; provided that no more than two permits per 5,000 population shall be granted in a calendar year. When the total number of city residents exceeds 5,000, the city council may increase the number of permits by resolution. 
(c)	No permit shall be issued to any person except nonprofit organizations. No nonprofit organization may receive more than one permit during any one calendar year. However, one permit may be issued to two or more qualifying applicants as a joint venture. Permits are valid for a single calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-5. - Application for fireworks sales stand permit. 
(a)	Any person or entity desiring to obtain a fireworks sales stand permit shall file an application between the first business day of March and the last business day of May of each year. The city council may establish a fee for the permit and application from time to time by resolution. 
(b)	The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Names, addresses, phone numbers, business address and federal tax identification number of the applicant (if applicant is a corporation, association or partnership, the application shall set forth a described information for each and every owner, partner and manager); 
(2)	Description of the business organization of the applicant (i.e., sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, etc.) and in case of a corporation, shall, upon request, include copies of the bylaws; 
(3)	Description of the location of the intended safe and sane fireworks sales; 
(4)	An assurance by the applicant that if the license is issued to the applicant, the applicant shall, at the time of receipt of such license, deliver to the city a $1,000,000.00 public liability insurance policy, and products liability insurance of $1,000,000.00 with riders attached to the policies designating the city as an additional insured there under; 
(5)	Each application for a safe and sane fireworks retail permit shall contain a description of the desired location and permission of the owner, if applicable. 
(6)	Any other information reasonably requested by the city to demonstrate that the applicant is an eligible nonprofit organization; 
(7)	Include a statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any permit granted it and furnish additional information upon request of the city, including a copy of the license issued in accordance with Health and Safety Code authorizing the applicant to sell safe and sane fireworks immediately upon its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-6. - Fireworks sales stand permit issuance. 
(a)	Upon expiration of the application period, the fire chief may issue fireworks sales stand permits to qualified applicants. The fire chief shall condition the permit on compliance with this chapter and may impose additional conditions as necessary to protect the general health and safety. The fire chief may deny any application if the applicant does meet the qualifications for a fireworks sales stand permit set forth in this chapter. 
(b)	In addition, in the event that the number of qualified applicants exceeds the number of available permits under section 7-6-4, the fire chief shall give priority to applications as follows: first, to all veterans' organizations as defined in section 1800 of the Military and Veterans Code with their principal place of business in the city; second to other nonprofit organizations. If the number of applications in any class exceeds the number of permits to be issued, permits shall be granted on a first come, first served basis within that applicant class. Complete applications shall be date and time stamped by the city upon receipt. 
(c)	Any decision regarding an application may be appealed to the city manager. Appeal requests shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within three days of the fire chief's decision. Any appeal shall be conducted within ten days of receipt of an appeal request. The city manager shall not be required to adhere to formal rules of evidence during the appeal, and the city manager's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-7. - Conditions governing the permit for fireworks sales stand. 
Any permit for a fireworks sales stand shall be governed by the following conditions: 
(1)	The sale and/or display of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only during that period beginning at noon on June 28 and ending at noon on July 6 of the same year. 
(2)	Permittees shall obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the state board of equalization. 
(3)	Permittees shall only sell safe and sane fireworks at one location. 
(4)	Sales shall be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(5)	Safe and sane fireworks shall not be sold to any person under the age of 18. 
(6)	All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is prohibited. The temporary stand shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.	All the stands shall be erected under the supervision of the city building inspector who shall require that stands be constructed in compliance with all applicable building and similar codes. 
b.	No stand shall be located in a manner to impair any dear vision triangle from a public road or highway. 
c.	No stand shall have a floor area in excess of 300 square feet. 
d.	No sign shall be erected or maintained in connection with the stand which shall create a traffic hazard. 
e.	Storage of fireworks shall be at locations approved by the fire chief. Stands used for storage shall be under 24-hour supervision of an alert adult. No sleeping inside of a stand will be permitted at any time. 
f.	Each stand shall be provided with two fire extinguishers, approved for such use by the fire chief, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
g.	No smoking shall be allowed in any stand. 
h.	"No smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks booth. 
i.	All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least 20 feet surrounding the stand. 
j.	All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five p.m. on the sixth day of July. 
k.	Each stand must have an adult 18 years of age or over in attendance and in charge thereof when the stand is being used for the sale or dispensing or storage of fireworks. 
l.	The stand shall be removed from the temporary location by 12:00 noon on the eleventh day of July, and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from said location by the said time and date. 
m.	The state license and city permit to sell fireworks and the temporary sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the stand. 
(7)	No person other than the permittee nonprofit organization shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. 
(8)	No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization, or the wives or husbands or adult children of such members, shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
(9)	Any attempt to transfer a permit shall void the permit. 
(10)	The permittee shall obtain and maintain the insurance set forth in section 7-6-5. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-8. - Violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereon, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-9. - Seizure of fireworks. 
The police chief or designee shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter. Such seizure shall be subject to cost reimbursement to the state fire marshall in accordance with section 7-6-10. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-10. - Administrative fines. 
(a)	The city may enforce any violation of this chapter related to: possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as dangerous fireworks in Health and Safety Code section 12505 et seq. or the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of safe and sane fireworks on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter through the issuance of an administrative citation. Fines for such citations shall not exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Citations shall be issued and appealed as provided for in article 2 of title 2 of this Code, provided that the city manager and not the planning commission shall be the hearing officer in any appeal. 
(b)	The issuance of an administrative citation to any person constitutes, but one remedy of the city to redress violations of this chapter. By adopting this section, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violations of this section which the city may otherwise pursue. 
(c)	The imposition of administrative fine under this section shall be limited to persons who possess, use, sell and/or display, or the seizure of 25 pounds or less of dangerous fireworks; or persons who possess, use sell, and/or display safe and sane fireworks on or at the dates, times, and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter. 
(d)	Administrative fine collected pursuant to this section shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code section 12706. The administrative fines collected shall be allocated in compliance with Health and Safety Code section 12557, which requires the city to provide cost reimbursement to the state fire marshal for reimbursement of costs, including, but not limited to transportation, and disposal. Regulations are to be adopted by the state fire marshal setting forth this allocation. Unless and until such regulations have been adopted by the state, the city shall hold in trust $250.00 from any fine collected to cover the reimbursement to the state fire marshal for the cost of transportation and disposal of the dangerous fireworks. Alternatively, the city council may adopt and amend a fee to cover such disposal and reimbursement costs by resolution. 
(e)	This section shall not apply to the storage and handling of safe and sane fireworks in accordance with California Building Code for Class 1.4G fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 7-6-11. - Enforcement—Special provisions. 
(a)	A minor and the parent(s) or guardian(s) having custody and control of said minor, are jointly and severally liable to the city for any administrative citation and/ or penalty issued for failure to appear to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Provided that the violation occurs at real property owned, leased or otherwise resided in by the violator, any administrative citation/fine issued for a violation of this chapter may become a special assessment or a lien against the property of any person who is issued a citation for a violation of the provisions of this chapter. This shall include the property of a minor who is issued a citation and/or the property of the parent(s) or guardian(s) having custody of the minor or private property owner that allows the illegal use of storage on their property. The procedures set forth in section 3-2-26 shall be followed for the imposition of a special assessment or lien. 
(c)	Without limiting any other applicable remedies, any nonprofit organization which is granted a fireworks sales stand permit, and which tor any reason fails to exercise the permit by the operation of the stand in accordance with the conditions of the permit, shall forfeit the right to a permit for the succeeding year. Any nonprofit organization may appeal any determination under this subsection in the same manner as a decision related to the issuance of a permit under section 7-6-6. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 2, 11-3-2015)  
Chapter 7 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-7-1. - Acts injurious to public health. 
No person shall do any act, or cause, suffer or create anything which is injurious to public health, or which prevents or obstructs the free and comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or is dangerous to the surrounding property, and any such act shall constitute a nuisance that may be abated by the chief of police or other officer of the city at the expense of the person maintaining such nuisance.  
Secs. 7-7-2—7-7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - WEAPONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Deadly weapons, Penal Code § 12000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-7-31. - Exemptions. 
(a)	This article shall not be deemed to make punishable the act of carrying or discharging a weapon in the lawful discharge of duties as a public officer, or private person duly licensed therefor. 
(b)	This article shall not apply to the keeping of weapons at a place of business or residence by a person 18 years of age or older lawfully in possession of such weapon. 
(c)	This article shall not apply to the keeping or use of weapons on the premises of any shooting gallery, practice range, skeet field, archery range, or similar place conducted at a fixed location and with regard to which adequate safeguards have been provided to protect persons and property from injury. 
(d)	This article shall not apply to any organized hunt for the purpose of ridding premises larger than one acre of vermin, when the setting of traps or poison is impractical and the chief of police has approved the time, place, and method of the hunt. Such approval shall be given upon a showing that public peace and public safety will not be endangered. 
(e)	This article shall not be deemed to make punishable any act that is allowed or prohibited by any state law.  
Sec. 7-7-32. - Seizure. 
The chief of police is authorized to seize and impound any weapon or missile which is kept, possessed or used in violation of this article, and to hold the same for a period of 30 days and until it is claimed by its owner. Such articles may not be returned to any person under the age of 18 years but may be returned to his parent or guardian. This section shall not be deemed to make punishable acts which are allowed or prohibited by any law of the state.  
Sec. 7-7-33. - Parental responsibility. 
No parent, guardian, or any adult person having the control, custody, or charge of any person under the age of 18 years, shall knowingly permit, allow, or let such person use or possess a weapon in violation of this article.  
Sec. 7-7-34. - Hunting. 
No person shall hunt wildlife with any weapon described in this article within the city limits.  
Sec. 7-7-35. - Discharge of firearms. 
No person shall discharge a firearm into or within the city limits. 
(Code 1966, § 4-4.01)  
Sec. 7-7-36. - Throwing missiles; slung- shots, slingshots and similar weapons. 
No person shall propel a missile by, or possess a slingshot, slungshot, bow or other instrument commonly used or which is designed for the throwing of any shot, bullet, rock, stone, arrow, or other missile or similar device.  
Sec. 7-7-37. - Possession of firearm by minor. 
(a)	No person under the age of 18 years shall have in his possession any firearm within the city limits unless he, at all times during the possession has on his person the written consent of a parent or guardian, is accompanied by his parent or guardian or is participating in and going to and from and organized, lawful recreational or competitive shooting activity or lawful hunting activity. 
(b)	As used in this section, the term "firearm" means any firearm except any pistol, revolver, or firearm capable of being concealed upon the person as described in Penal Code § 12001, or a BB gun, pellet gun or spot-marking gun as described in Penal Code § 12001.1 or any other firearm the possession of which by minors is regulated by state law. 
State Law reference— Possession of concealable firearms by minors, Penal Code § 12101.  
Sec. 7-7-38. - Air rifles and similar devices. 
Every person who discharges an air rifle, BB gun and pneumatic weapons of all types within the city limits, but excluding toy weapons incapable of harming either persons or property, such as water pistols and popguns, shall be guilty of an infraction unless written permission has been obtained beforehand from the chief of police. Such permission shall be given upon a showing that public peace and public safety will not be endangered.  
Secs. 7-7-39—7-7-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-7-71. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)	In this section, the term "minor" means a person who is under the age of 18 years. 
(b)	No person under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)	The provisions of subsection (b) of this section do not apply to a minor who is: 
(1)	Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having care and custody of such minor. 
(2)	On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)	In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)	Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)	Involved in an emergency. In this subsection the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(6)	Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(7)	Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(8)	Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(d)	No parent, guardian, or any adult person having the control, custody, or charge of any minor shall suffer or permit the minor to violate subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)	A law enforcement officer is authorized to temporarily detain any minor upon a reasonable suspicion based on articulable facts that the minor is in violation of subsection (b) of this section and to transport that minor to his permanent or temporary residence within the state whether the place of residence is located within or without the city, or to the custody of his parents or legal guardian. A law enforcement officer may decide not to temporarily detain and transport a minor if he determines that the minor has a legitimate reason based on extenuating circumstances for violating subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)	Upon the first violation of subsection (b) of this section, the law enforcement officer shall issue to the minor a warning citation regarding the consequences of a second violation of such subsection. A designated representative of the city shall mail to the parents or legal guardian of the minor a notification which states that a second violation and every violation thereafter, the parents or legal guardian may be held liable for actual administrative and transportation costs. This notification shall require that the parents or legal guardian sign and return the notification. This notification shall include a space for the explanation of any circumstances relevant to an applicable exemption from fee as provided in subsection (g) of this section. A designated representative of the city shall review this explanation and if the explanation is found to be insufficient, the representative may request a consultation with the parents or legal guardian for further explanation. 
(g)	A fee for the actual costs of administration and transportation services for the return of the minor to his place of residence, or to the custody of his parents or legal guardian may be charged jointly or severally to the minor, his parents, or legal guardian, in an amount not to exceed the actual costs of such administration and/or transportation. Upon petition of the person required to pay the fee, the city shall conduct a hearing as to the validity of the fees charged, and may waive payment of the fee upon a finding of good cause. If authorized by the city council, the city may charge this fee, in which case the city may: 
(1)	Provide for a waiver of the payment upon a determination that the person has made reasonable efforts to exercise supervision and control over the minor. 
(2)	Provide for a determination of the ability to pay the fee and provide that the fee may be waived if neither the minor, his parents nor legal guardian has the ability to pay the fee. 
(3)	Provide for the performance of community service in lieu of imposition of the fee. 
(4)	Provide for waiver of payment upon the determination that the parents or legal guardian has limited physical or legal custody and control of the minor. 
(h)	The fees set forth shall be established by resolution. Such fees shall be based on the cost reasonably associated with the procedures set forth in this section. All other procedures including the establishment of a hearing officer and procedures for the hearings and other administrative steps in this section shall be established by resolution. 
(Code 1966, §§ 5-3.01, 5-3.02)  
Secs. 7-7-72—7-7-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 7-7-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Intoxicating liquor means any alcoholic beverage containing more that one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, and all kinds of spirituous, vinous and malt liquors. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.01)  
Sec. 7-7-92. - Intoxicating liquor in parks. 
The consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted in city parks between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  
Sec. 7-7-93. - Restaurant operation in public area. 
The operator of any restaurant which serves any beer, wine, or other intoxicating beverage for consumption in an area operated for restaurant purposes on any street or sidewalk pursuant to an encroachment permit issued by the city council shall post and maintain signs in or adjacent to the encroachment area reasonably calculated to give notice of the limits of the area. The chief of police shall approve the number, content, physical features, and locations of such signs.  
Secs. 7-7-94—7-7-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 7-7-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far as determined at any specific point. 
Clearly audible means those sounds or noises which can be heard by any person of average or normal hearing capability. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair or alteration of any building, structures, or land, public or private, together with any associated scientific or engineering surveys. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, surfaces or similar property, public or private. 
Dwelling unit means any building or separate portion thereof used for residential purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, single-family dwellings, apartments, condominiums, and modular homes. 
Emergency work means work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or damage, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service. 
Intrusive noise means noise which intrudes over and above the existing background noise at a given location and endangers the health and safety of human beings, or annoys or disturbs persons of normal sensitivities. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its level, duration, frequency, time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content as well as the prevailing background noise level. 
Motor vehicle means any car, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, and any and all self-propelled vehicles, as defined in the California Vehicle Code including, but not limited to, minibikes and go-carts. 
Internal combustion engine means any engine powered by the explosion of a fuel-and-air mixture within the cylinders. 
Sound-amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. The term "sound-amplifying equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed. The term "sound-amplifying equipment," as used in this division, shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.102)  
Sec. 7-7-112. - Policy; nuisance declared. 
It is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and intrusive noise from all sources subject to its police power. It is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to the public interest. Therefore, the city council does ordain and declare that creating, causing, maintaining, or allowing to be created, caused or maintained, any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.101)  
Sec. 7-7-113. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Sirens or other similar emergency warning devices located upon any emergency vehicle as defined by the Vehicle Code, or upon the premises of any public safety premises; 
(2)	Any bell, siren or similar device on any vehicle, which is required by law, and which is automatically activated by placing the vehicle transmission in reverse, or by any backing movement; 
(3)	Any sound equipment operating under a city license or permit, or being utilized for any activity subject to First Amendment protection; 
(4)	Emergency work; 
(5)	Events in public parks or other public places, sponsored by the city or city school district; 
(6)	Noise necessarily generated in conjunction with health or sanitation services including, but not limited to, refuse collection. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.502)  
Sec. 7-7-114. - Variances. 
(a)	Variances from the provisions of this division may be granted in accordance with this section. 
(b)	The city manager or designee shall evaluate all applications for temporary variances from the requirements of this division and may grant such variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms as he may deem reasonable in achieving compliance with the provisions of this division. In determining the reasonableness of the variance, the city manager or designee shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, operations carried on under existing nonconforming rights or conditional use permits and general public interest and welfare. 
(c)	Any request for a permanent variance from this section shall go before the planning commission as provided in this section. 
(d)	Every applicant for a variance permit required by this division shall file with the city manager or designee a written application on a form prescribed by such office. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the noise source involved, and such other information as may be required. 
(e)	Every applicant, except any state or local governmental agency or public district, shall pay a fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(f)	The city manager or designee shall act within 30 days, if possible, on an application for a permit or variance and shall notify the applicant in writing in mail or in person of the action taken, namely, approval, or denial. Notice of the action shall be deemed to have been given when the written notification has been deposited in the mail, postpaid, addressed to the address shown on the application, or when personally delivered to the applicant or representative. Before acting on an application for a variance permit, the city manager or designee may require the applicant to furnish further information or further plans or specifications. Failure of the applicant to provide such further information or further plans or specifications within ten days after notice of such request is made shall be grounds for denial of the permit. 
(g)	In the event of denial, the notice shall advise of the reason for denial of the permit.  
Sec. 7-7-115. - General prohibitions. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, intrusive, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area. 
(b)	The standards that shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	The volume of the noise; 
(2)	The intensity of the noise; 
(3)	Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(4)	Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(5)	The volume and intensity of the background noise or ambient noise, if any; 
(6)	The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities or dwelling units; 
(7)	The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(8)	The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(9)	The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
(10)	The duration of the noise. 
(11)	Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
(12)	Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.201)  
Sec. 7-7-116. - Vehicle horns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily sound any horn or other signaling device on any vehicle except as provided in Vehicle Code div. 12, ch. 5, art. 1 (Vehicle Code § 2700 et seq.). This section shall be inapplicable to the sounding of any horn, bell, whistle, siren or other audible warning device which is operated in compliance with Utilities Code § 7604, or any other state or federal provisions governing railroad operations, or for emergency work. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.103(A))  
Sec. 7-7-117. - Musical instruments and amplified noise. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to play or operate any television set, radio, musical instrument, drum, loudspeaker, or any other similar device for sound amplification, whether mobile or from a fixed location upon the public streets, public right-of-way, or in public parks in such a fashion that it is clearly audible at a distance of 150 feet, except that subject to permit issued by the city specifying time, location, and any other conditions as may be requested by the city. 
(b)	The operation of any device for the amplification, production or reproduction of sound in such a manner that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the source or the building structure shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.103)  
Sec. 7-7-118. - Burglar alarms. 
(a)	Any building burglar alarm must have an automatic cutoff, capable of terminating its operation within 15 minutes of the time it is activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of this subsection, any member of the police department of the city shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm during the period of its activation. 
(b)	Any owner of a motor vehicle with a burglar alarm installed must have an automatic cutoff capable of terminating its operation within five minutes of the time it is activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of this subsection, any member of the police department of the city shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm during the period of its activation.  
Sec. 7-7-119. - Animal noises. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to permit the keeping or maintenance upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person in the city, any animal or animals, poultry or household pets, which by any frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb or cause discomfort to any reasonable person of normal noise sensitivity. For purposes of this section, the term "frequent or long-continued noise" shall mean any noise which is essentially continuous for fifteen minutes aggregate during any 60-minute period. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to any kennel, cattery, or animal hospital operated legally within the city. 
(c)	The written affirmation by two persons having separate residences that violation of this section disturbs the peace and quiet of such persons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.302)  
Sec. 7-7-120. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at council approved or otherwise licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.303)  
Sec. 7-7-121. - Construction of buildings and projects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within a residential zone, or within a radius of 500 feet thereof, to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, or projects or to operate any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other construction type device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance unless beforehand a special permit authorizing exception to the above hours has been duly obtained from the officer or body of the city having the authority to issue permits of this kind. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.401)  
Sec. 7-7-122. - Internal combustion engines. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within any residentially zoned area of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle or internal combustion engine between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(Code 1966, § 4-11.501)  
Secs. 7-7-123—7-7-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SECURITY AT SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 7-7-141. - Generally. 
(a)	In any instance in which a special event or occurrence within this city such as, but not limited to, a public dance, bazaar, parade, carnival, circus or any other gathering which may attract a large number of people, or which for any reason may become a hazard to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare unless supervised by security personnel, the chief of police or designee may require such event to be so supervised prior to the issuance of any city permit. 
(b)	It is the intent of this division to encourage the use of private security agencies under the monitoring and control of the chief of police. If a private security agency cannot be obtained, or cannot, in the opinion of the chief of police, provide adequate security for such event, the chief of police may at his discretion assign police officers to such event. If the chief of police is of the opinion that there is not sufficient resources to maintain the general welfare of all persons involved, the chief of police has the authority to deny the application.  
Sec. 7-7-142. - Appeals. 
(a)	The applicant for any event or occurrence shall have the right to appeal to the city manager as to the necessity of security protection or the number of officers required by the chief of police. Such appeal shall be in writing and provided to the city manager with a minimum of ten days prior to the actual date of the event or occurrence. 
(b)	Any permit may be refused or revoked by the chief of police or city manager if such event is to be, is being or has been conducted in such a manner as to be detrimental to the public peace, safety, health or general welfare.  
Sec. 7-7-143. - Private security; licensing and bonding. 
A person shall employ only licensed and bonded security agencies to provide security at any special event or occurrence within the city. The security agency so employed shall also be required to obtain a business license for the city prior to providing security for any event or occurrence within the city. This section shall not apply to regular police officers employed by the city in performance of their duties while so employed.  
Sec. 7-7-144. - Compensation for city personnel. 
The applicant for a special event permit or occurrence requiring city police personnel shall pay the city an amount sufficient to cover the costs of all wages and benefits plus such administrative sums as may be determined by the city manager to cover other associated costs. The city manager may require a deposit or prepayment prior to issuance of any permit as he deems necessary to ensure the payment of the total costs when due.  
Secs. 7-7-145—7-7-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-7-181. - Gambling. 
No person shall play, participate in, or bet for or against any game not mentioned in Penal Code §§ 330 or 330(a), on any street, sidewalk, alley, highway or parking lot open to the general public, if such game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device, for money, checks, chips, credits or any other thing which has or represents value. 
State Law reference— Gaming, Penal Code § 330 et seq.  
Sec. 7-7-182. - Begging and soliciting alms. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in immediate possession. 
Ask, beg or solicit means, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or other such acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg, or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)	Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on that property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automatic teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such measurement shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)	From any person who is waiting in line for entry into any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(c)	Forcing oneself on another. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by accosting another or by forcing oneself upon the company of another.  
Sec. 7-7-183. - Urination or defecation. 
No person shall commit a nuisance in any public place, or upon any private property, or in any place where there are other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby. The term "commit a nuisance" as used in this section shall mean to evacuate the bowels or bladder at a place not provided for that purpose.  
Secs. 7-7-184—7-7-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  
Subdivision 1. - In General 
 
Secs. 7-7-201—7-7-220. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 2. - Public Consumption (Special Events) Permit 
 
Sec. 7-7-221. - Required. 
Except and unless a person applies for and is issued a special events permit by the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any intoxicating liquor, or consume any intoxicating liquor, or have in his possession or control an open container of an intoxicating liquor, in or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, mall, school grounds or any parking lot open to public use, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.01)  
Sec. 7-7-222. - Issuance and conditions. 
Before issuing any permit for consumption of alcoholic beverages in a public place, the chief of police shall be satisfied that the public peace, safety, health, and general welfare will not be endangered or jeopardized by the issuance of such permit. The chief of police may impose conditions upon the issuance of such permit to ensure that such activity will be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety, health, and general welfare. The chief of police may consider any relevant factual material, including, but not limited to, the proposed place or location of such activity and the character and reputation of the applicant and other persons who will be involved in the conducting and operation of the activity under the permit if issued. If the chief of police finds that the issuance of such permit will endanger or jeopardize the public peace, safety, health, and general welfare, the permit shall be denied. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.03)  
Sec. 7-7-223. - Term. 
The permit if so issued shall be good for such time period as prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.04)  
Sec. 7-7-224. - Possession. 
The permittee shall have a copy of the permit in his possession and shall produce such permit upon a request by the chief of police or any of his representatives. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.07)  
Sec. 7-7-225. - Liability of permittees. 
The person, society, lodge, organization, or corporation to who a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the permittee to who such permit shall have been issued. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.06)  
Sec. 7-7-226. - Revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke such permit at any time if the activity being conducted under the permit is conducted in such a manner that the chief of police deems it to be detrimental to the public peace, safety, health, and general welfare. 
(Code 1966, § 5-5.05)  
Secs. 7-7-227—7-7-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 5. - GRAFFITI[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 467, § 1, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed former art. 5., §§ 7-7-261—7-7-269, and enacted a new art. 5, §§ 7-7-261—7-7-273. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the new provisions have been codified as §§ 7-7-261—7-7-269.4. Former art. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 423, adopted March 3, 2003. 
State Law reference— Graffiti, Penal Code § 594 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-7-261. - Findings and declaration. 
(a)	The city council finds that graffiti on public and private property contributes to the creation of blight, depreciates the value of property and visually detracts from neighborhoods. Graffiti also encourages other acts of malicious vandalism and generally lowers the quality of life in the city. The city council further finds that graffiti is frequently tied to gang-related or other potential criminal activities and its presence encourages the proliferation of additional graffiti unless promptly abated. 
(b)	In order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and community, the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to alleviate vandalism and halt the spread of such nuisances as allowed for in Government Code section 53069.3. It is declared that graffiti is a prohibited obnoxious activity and a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-262. - Definitions. 
(a)	Graffiti means any act which results in the altering or defacing of any real property through the use of: paint, spray paint, markers, paint sticks, glass etching tools, objects, or other substances capable of destroying public or private property. 
(b)	Prohibited obnoxious graffiti means graffiti having any of the following characteristics deemed to: 
(1)	Insult or incite hatred of or contempt for any racial, religious or ethnic group; 
(2)	Include or make reference to the name of any gang, or words or symbols which are associated with a gang or gangs; 
(3)	Insult or threaten any identifiable individual or group; 
(4)	Have obscene or indecent language or pictures; 
(5)	Be an eyesore to the neighborhood or community or which tends to attract more graffiti. 
(c)	Unauthorized means without the explicit consent of the owner or person in possession of, or the party responsible for, the affected private property, or the public official responsible for the public property. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-263. - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to scratch, carve, paint, chalk, or otherwise apply any unauthorized graffiti on any public or privately owned building, fence, structure, or other property. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to maintain, permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or to remain upon any structure within his or her control, possession or ownership when the graffiti is visible by a person utilizing any public right of way in the city such a highway, road or alley. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-264. - Reporting graffiti. 
(a)	The city may pay a reward to any person who provides information which leads to the arrest of any person who applies any drawing, inscription, figure or mark, commonly known as graffiti, to a surface of a public or private property, as established from time to time by the city manager. The amount of any reward paid in conjunction with this section may be sought from the person arrested and convicted as restitution in addition to any other restitution associated with the removal of the graffiti. 
(1)	The person committing the graffiti or if an un-emancipated minor, then the custodial parent of the minor, shall be liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section. 
(2)	For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program or a plea bargain to a lesser offense shall constitute a conviction. 
(3)	In the event there are multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-265. - Sale, possession of graffiti materials. 
(a)	Sign required. Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol containers or paint and other liquid substances capable of being used to deface property must display at the location of retail sale a legible sign not smaller than 8.5" × 11" clearly visible to employees and customers which states: 
Possession by or sale to any individual under the age of 18 years of age, who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, of: any aerosol container of paint or other liquid substances or markers with a marking tip of one quarter inch or more in width, glass etching tool, paint stick or similar implement capable of defacing property; is unlawful. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation doing business within the city to store, stock, keep or display for sale or transfer any aerosol spray paint container, or any indelible ink marker pen with a tip exceeding one quarter inch in width, in an area other than a place that is locked and secure or is otherwise made unavailable to the public and which is accessible only to employees of such business. The requirements of this subsection do not apply to any businesses engaged in selling the afore mentioned materials at the time of this ordinance adoption. 
(c)	It is unlawful in the city for any person to sell, loan, give, exchange or cause or permit to be sold, given, loaned or exchanged any pressurized can(s) containing any substance commonly known as paint or dye capable of defacing property to any minor under the age of 18 years, unless such person is accompanied by the parent or legal guardian of such minor. No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase any pressurized can(s) containing paint or dye. 
(d)	It is unlawful for minor persons to have in their possession any aerosol spray containing any substance commonly known as paint, capable of defacing property while upon any public highway, street, alleyway, park, playground, swimming pool or other public place, whether such minor is or is not in an automobile, vehicle or other conveyance. 
This section shall not apply if such minor is in possession of any aerosol spray can in order to perform a task as directed by the minor's parent, guardian, instructor or employer, and if that task would not be a violation of this chapter is conducted by an adult. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-266. - Graffiti removal. 
(a)	Removal of graffiti, upon discovering its existence on private or public property within the city, shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or his designee who shall be authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti in accordance with state law and established city procedures. 
(1)	Private property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, or manager or person in control to remove the graffiti on private property within 48 hours of receipt of notification by the city of the obligation to do so. 
(2)	Public property. Whenever the public works director, chief of police or their designee determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the city, it shall be removed within 24 hours, or on the weekends as soon as possible, but certainly no longer than is the required removal standards set forth for the private property owners. 
(b)	Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on public or privately owned property viewable from a public place within the city, the city shall be authorized to remove the graffiti or in the case of private property have the owner assume responsibility for such removal. If a private property owner fails to remove the graffiti within 48 hours, the city shall be authorized to remove the graffiti. 
(1)	The city shall not repair or repaint any area more extensive than that where the graffiti is located unless the chief of police or designee determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the graffiti and the more extensive area as well. 
(2)	Prior to any graffiti abatement conducted by the city on private property or public property owned by another public agency, the responsible party shall be required to execute a written release, prepared by the city, holding the city harmless and acknowledging that the covering may not match the color of the structure upon which it is placed. 
(c)	Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove same in a manner approved by the city within 24 hours after notice by the city or the public or private owner of the property involved. The notice to the person applying the graffiti shall be in writing. 
(d)	Form of notice to remove. A two-day day notice of intention to abate or remove the graffiti shall be mailed by certified mail or hand-delivered to the owner(s) of the property or agents and to any individual(s) who are responsible for causing the graffiti. The notice shall advise that if the graffiti is not removed within the time frame set forth in the notice, the city shall remove the graffiti and assess the costs to the property owner and/or the individual(s) responsible. If a responsible individual is a minor, costs shall be assessed to the parents or guardians of that minor and reimbursement sought for the victim(s) of unauthorized graffiti placement through the Civil Code. 
Service of notification is complete at the time of deposit in the mail or when personal delivery has been made. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any legal proceedings regarding removal of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-267. - Graffiti abatement process. 
(a)	Graffiti abatement process. Failure of the property owner, manager or person in control to remove graffiti within the 48 hour period shall constitute a public nuisance and, upon discovery of such nuisance, the city shall notify the owner or manager or person in control that the nuisance shall be abated by the aity at private expense. 
(b)	Summary of abatement. 
(1)	Graffiti located on privately owned structures on privately owned property with the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right of way, may be removed by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance after service of a notice to abate as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)	Whenever the chief of police or his/her designated representative is appraised of the presence of graffiti located on privately owned real property within the city, the chief of police or his/her designated representative may cause a written notice to abate such graffiti to be served upon the owner of the effected premises as such owner's name, address appear on the last equalized assessment roll. 
(c)	Contents of notice to abate. Contents of the notice to abate the graffiti shall be in accordance with title 3 of chapter 2 of article 2 of the Gustine Municipal Code, provided that in the event of any inconsistency respecting the time period or process for removal of the graffiti, this chapter shall control. 
(d)	Service of notice. The service of notice to abate shall be in accordance with title 3 of chapter 2 of article 2 of the Gustine Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-268. - Hearings and appeals. 
Hearing and appeals of the order of abatement of graffiti shall be conducted in the same manner provided in chapter 7 of title 2 of the Gustine Municipal Code with regard to administrative citations. However, in the event of any appeal, the city manager, and not the planning commission, shall act as the hearing officer pursuant to the procedures in article 3 of chapter 7 of title 2. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-269. - Summary of abatement costs. 
(a)	Cost of abatement: 
(1)	The chief of police or his/her representative, shall keep an account of the costs and expenses, including all direct and indirect costs and expenses in abating such graffiti, and shall render a written itemized statement of such costs to the persons receiving the notice to abate. 
(2)	Such person or persons receiving the notice to abate shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in abating the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-269.1. - Assessment of costs—Lien against property. 
(a)	If payment is not received, the itemized statement may be submitted in writing to the code enforcement officer. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees, and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous. 
(b)	Upon receipt of the itemized report, the code enforcement officer, or his/her designee, shall serve notice of the lien in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure section 415.0 et seq. If the owner of record after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in the city newspaper or other newspaper of general circulation in the county. The period of notice commences upon the first day of publication and terminates at the end of the tenth day, including therein the first day. Publication should be made on each day on which the newspaper is published during the ten-day period. 
(c)	After notice has been served, the lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office and, from the date of the recording, shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgement lien. 
(d)	The lien shall identify: 
(1)	The amount of the lien; 
(2)	The city as the agency on whose behalf the lien was imposed; 
(3)	The date of the abatement order; 
(4)	The street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and 
(5)	The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
(e)	In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, through either payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (d) of this section shall be recorded by the code enforcement officer. 
(f)	A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgement. 
(g)	The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred in the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-269.2. - Actions to ease removal of graffiti. 
(a)	All utilities operating in the city shall paint their above ground facilities with a uniform paint type and color which meets the approval of the city. 
(b)	All encroachment permits issued by the city shall, among other things, be considered on: 
(1)	The permittee applying an anti-graffiti material to the encroached object that is acceptable to the city manager, or his/her designee; 
(2)	The permittee immediately removing any graffiti; 
(3)	The right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object; 
(4)	The permittee providing the city with sufficient matching paint and /or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object containing graffiti. 
(c)	In approving tentative subdivision or parcel maps, conditional use permits, variances or other discretionary land use entitlements, the city may consider imposing any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or related conditions, at the public hearing required by law for approval of the entitlement: 
(1)	The developer shall apply an anti-graffiti material, if possible, of a type and color that is acceptable to the city manager, his/her designee, to publically viewable surfaces on improvements to be constructed on the site deemed by the city manager, or his/her designee, to be likely to attract graffiti (graffiti attracting surfaces"). 
(2)	The developer shall grant, prior to sale of any of the parcels compromising said mop, the right of access to such parcels, upon 48 hours posting of notice, to the city for the purpose of removing or "painting over" graffiti from graffiti-attracting surfaces previously designated by the city manager or designee, and the right to remove such graffiti; 
(3)	The developer shall, for a period of two years after the sale of the developer's final lot, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material upon demand for use in painting over or removal of designated graffiti-attracting surfaces. 
(4)	The developer shall covenant, either as a part of the conditions, covenants and restrictions, or as separate covenants recorded against individual lots, prior to sale of same, such covenant to run with the land and be for the benefit of the city, in a form satisfactory to the city, that the owner of the lot(s) shall immediately remove any graffiti placed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-269.3. - Prevention. 
(a)	Any applicant for: design, review approval, conditional use permit, special use permit, unclassified use permit, development agreement, or other form or development or building permit; shall, to the extent deemed feasible by the city manager or his/her designee, have designed any structures visible from any public place in such a manner to consider prevention of graffiti, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Use of protective coating to provide for the effective and expeditious removal of graffiti; 
(2)	Use of additional lighting; 
(3)	Use of nonsolid fencing; 
(4)	Use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls such as ivy or similar clinging vegetation; 
(5)	Use of architectural design to break up long continuous walls or solid areas. 
(b)	Retrofitting existing graffiti-attracting surfaces—Nonresidential structures. The following requirements may be incorporated in any order during an abatement hearing: 
(1)	The owner of the property on which is located a surface of a structure other than residential which has been defaced with graffiti more than five times in a 12-month period, or has immediate area surrounding said surface, shall permit the city to enter upon and make modifications thereto, which modifications shall include such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti or as necessary to permit more convenient removal thereof. 
(2)	The owner of any surface of a structure on a parcel of land placed in any land use other than residential which has been defaced with graffiti more than five times in a 12-month period, or immediate area surrounding said surface, shall retrofit, at the cost of the property owner of said lot, such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to permit the convenient or efficient removal thereof. In exercising the authority hereunder, the city may not impose a cost on the property owner greater than three times the cost of one year's expense to the property of graffiti removal. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 7-7-269.4. - Alternative means to enforcement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state law as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
ARTICLE 6. - PUBLIC USE/CONSUMPTION AND PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Medical marijuana dispensaries, Tit. 5, Ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 7-7-270. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, morals, general welfare and enjoyment of private property of the residents within the city by restricting the public use and consumption of marijuana for medical purposes and by regulating the individual cultivation of medical marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 463, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 7-7-271. - Definitions. 
All definitions set forth in California Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq., as may be amended, including but not limited to the terms "person with an identification card," "primary caregiver," "qualified patient," and "identification card," shall apply under this chapter in addition to the definitions set forth as follows: 
Cultivation of medical marijuana means the growing of medical marijuana for medical purposes as defined in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. 
Medical marijuana. In strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 463, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 7-7-272. - Regulations applicable to public use/consumption of medical marijuana. 
No person shall smoke, ingest or otherwise consume medical marijuana in the city unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Such smoking, ingesting or consumption occurs entirely inside a private residence; and 
(2)	No smoke or odor resulting from such smoking, ingesting or consumption may be detected from any neighboring property or residence. 
(Ord. No. 463, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 7-7-273. - Regulations applicable to individual cultivation. 
To the extent that the city is required to allow the cultivation of medical marijuana under state law, the rules set forth in this chapter shall apply. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to permit medical marijuana dispensaries otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
(1)	Secure enclosed structure. The cultivation of medical marijuana shall at all times only occur within a fully enclosed and adequately secured building having at least four solid walls and roof of masonry, metal, or wood, and standard locks, but not within any portion of a building or structure dedicated to living space. 
(2)	The building within which cultivation of medical marijuana occurs, and any improvements within such building, shall meet all applicable building and zoning requirements (including but not limited to required setbacks, height limitations and fire sprinkler requirements), and the structure and improvements themselves shall have been properly and inspected. 
(3)	The total area dedicated to cultivation of medical marijuana shall be limited to a total of 120 square feet per parcel. 
(4)	Any person responsible for cultivation of medical marijuana shall maintain evidence of qualification to use and cultivate medical marijuana as required by state law. 
(5)	No cultivation in conjunction with a business: No sales of goods or services. The cultivation shall not occur in conjunction with any business. No products or services shall be sold from the property where cultivation occurs. 
(6)	Cultivation may only be conducted by the property owner of the subject property or a resident of the subject property with written permission of the property owner of the subject property to conduct cultivation. 
(Ord. No. 463, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 7-7-274. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty of imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed six months, or by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or both, for each violation. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. 
(b)	Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by: 
(1)	A fine not exceeding $150.00 for a first violation; 
(2)	A fine not exceeding $250.00 for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
(Ord. No. 463, 11-20-2012)  
Chapter 8 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal police departments, Government Code § 38630 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-8-1. - Created. 
There is hereby created a police department for the city which shall consist of a chief of police and as may employees as the city council may designate from time to time. 
(Code 1966, § 4-6.01)  
Sec. 7-8-2. - Appointment/supervision of chief of police. 
(a)	The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager. The chief of police shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and may be removed by the city manager at any time thereafter pursuant to applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)	The city manager shall be the immediate supervisor of the chief of police, and all policies, directives, and orders from the city government to the chief of police shall be transmitted or made by the city manager. The chief of police shall report directly to the city manager on all matters concerned with the administration of the police department. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-6.02, 4-6.03) 
State Law reference— Police chief, Government Code §§ 36501, 41601 et seq.  
Sec. 7-8-3. - Powers and duties of the chief of police. 
(a)	The chief of police shall direct the administration and operations of the police department and, in addition to the policies transmitted to him by the city manager, shall establish such other policies, directives, rules, and regulations for the administration and operation of the police department as he sees fit. The chief of police shall serve as the appointive authority for appointments to positions within the police department, other than his own, and shall have the power to suspend or dismiss any employee consistent with the provisions of this Code, applicable state and federal laws, applicable police department policies and procedures, and the personnel rules as adopted by the city council. 
(b)	The chief of police shall lead by professional example and by participation as a member of the management team of the city. He shall organize the police department to accomplish its mission and shall coordinate and control the operations of major division within the police department as well as its relations with other law enforcement agencies. Other responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The review and evaluation of police department policies and procedures. 
(2)	Conducting staff meetings and inspections to evaluate and improve departmental performance and efficiency. 
(3)	Direct the police department toward meeting goals and objectives as may be set by the city manager or city council. 
(4)	Plan for departmental needs and programs. 
(5)	Provide advice and counsel to the city manager on matters pertaining to law enforcement; and 
(6)	Provide information and maintain external relations with the public. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-6.04, 4-6.05) 
State Law reference— Functions of police chief, Government Code § 41601 et seq.  
Sec. 7-8-4. - Training standards. 
The city hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code pt. 4, tit. 4, ch. 1 (Penal Code § 13500 et seq.). Pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code pt. 4, tit. 4, ch. 1 (Penal Code § 13522), the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to such chapter, shall adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the state commission on peace officers standards and training. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-4.301, 2-4.302) 
State Law reference— Training of local law enforcement officers, Penal Code § 13500 et seq.  
Sec. 7-8-5. - Unclaimed personal property. 
(a)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to property subject to confiscation under the laws of the state or of the United States of America. 
(b)	All unclaimed personal property in the possession of the police department shall be stored in a safe place by the chief of police for at least six months. 
(c)	The chief of police shall restore unclaimed personal property to its legal owner upon proof of such ownership satisfactory to the chief of police and upon the payment of all reasonably necessary costs in the care and protection thereof unless such property is held by the police department as evidence in a pending case. In such event such unclaimed personal property shall be disposed of only upon an order of the proper court. 
(d)	At any time after the expiration of the six months' period set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the chief of police may publish once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of his intention to sell all such unclaimed personal property at public auction to the highest bidder at the time and place specified in the notice. The sale shall be held not less than five days after the publication of such notice, and each item shall be separately sold at public auction to the highest bidder. The expenses connected with such sale shall be a proper charge against the general fund, and all proceeds received from such sale shall be delivered to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund. The chief of police shall report any items remaining unsold after the public auction to the council. The council shall instruct the chief of police what disposition shall be made of such items as it may see fit in the public interest. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-5.01-3-5.04)  
TITLE 8 - STREETS, PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-1-1. - Official datum. 
The official base from which all grades and elevations shall be determined shall be the base plane of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, namely, mean sea level, such base being 101.86 feet below the top of that certain benchmark described as follows: A brass bolt set in a concrete monument located on Lot 17, Block 26, as shown on the map of the city, such monument being approximately ten feet southerly from the southerly line of Third Avenue and ten feet easterly from the easterly line of Sixth Street. 
(Code 1966, § 7-1.01)  
Sec. 8-1-2. - Moving property of public utility or franchise owners. 
(a)	If it becomes necessary to move the property of any owner of a public utility or franchise, such owner shall, upon the proper application by the contractor, be notified by the director of public works to remove such property within a specified reasonable time, and the contractor shall not interfere with such property until after the expiration date of the time specified. 
(b)	The right shall be reserved to the owners of public utilities and franchises to enter upon streets for the purpose of making repairs or changes on their property, which may be made necessary by this work. The city shall also have the privilege of entering upon streets for the purpose of repairing the sewer and water pipes or making house connections therewith, or repairing culverts or storm drains.  
Chapter 2 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Park and Playground Act of 1909, Government Code § 38000 et seq.; discontinuance of parks, Government Code § 38400 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-2-1—8-2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - GUSTINE AREA RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Board of recreation commissioners, Education Code § 10907 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-2-31. - Established. 
There is hereby created and established the Gustine Area Recreation Commission. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.101)  
Sec. 8-2-32. - Membership. 
(a)	The Gustine Area Recreation Commission shall consist of five regular members who shall serve on such commission for a term of one year after their appointment or until a successor is selected and two nonvoting ex officio members. Three of the regular members shall be appointed by the council and live within the city limits. Two of the regular members shall be residents of the area of the Gustine Unified School District and shall be appointed by the city council. The ex officio members shall be a member of the council and a member of the school board. The ex officio members shall serve without the right to vote except when it is necessary to provide for a quorum to conduct the business of the Gustine Area Recreation Commission. 
(b)	A regular member of the commission who fails to attend during four consecutive meetings of the commission, without a reasonable excuse or cause, shall forfeit his membership, and the appointing body who appointed the particular member shall forthwith appoint another person to such position. 
(c)	The appointive bodies shall report the names of persons appointed to serve on the commission to the superintendent of the county parks and recreation department. 
(d)	All the members of the Gustine Area Recreation Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-2.102, 2-2.104)  
Sec. 8-2-33. - Officers and committees. 
The Gustine Area Recreation Commission shall elect from among its members a chair and may appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. The commission may also create such committees as it deems necessary for the performance of its duties and may delegate to such committees such investigations, studies, and other administrative duties as it deems advisable. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.103)  
Sec. 8-2-34. - Meetings. 
The Gustine Area Recreation Commission shall establish the time and place of its regular meetings which shall be held at least once in each calendar month. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.105)  
Sec. 8-2-35. - Powers and duties. 
The Gustine Area Recreation Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To coordinate and constructively encourage public recreational activities in the city and in the territory of the Gustine Unified School District; 
(2)	To act in an advisory capacity to the city council and the county board of supervisors on any agreements the city may enter into with the Gustine Unified School District for the operation and maintenance of recreational programs and the use of facilities and playgrounds; 
(3)	To consider the annual budget for recreation during the process of its preparation and make recommendations thereon to the council and to the board of supervisors; 
(4)	To assist in the planning of recreational programs for the community, promote and stimulate public interest therein, and, to that end, solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of the county, the Gustine Unified School District, and other interested public and private agencies; 
(5)	To formulate a comprehensive recreational policy and adopt rules and regulations on all recreational activities and programs for which the commission will provide funds from the recreation budget; and 
(6)	All other powers granted to the commission by the provisions of Education Code tit. 1, div. 1, pt. 7, ch. 10 (Education Code § 10900 et seq.). 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.106)  
Secs. 8-2-36—8-2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-2-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amplified music means music projected and transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers, the total output of which amplifiers, including the sum of the wattage output of each channel, exceeds 25 watts. 
Amplified speech means speech projected and transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers, the total output of which amplifiers, including the sum of the wattage output of each channel, exceeds 25 watts. 
Building means those buildings, or any portion thereof, which are under the supervision of the parks, recreation, and playgrounds department and are made available to exclusive use by permittees. 
Commissioner of parks and recreation means the chair of the Gustine Area Recreation Commission. 
Legal authority means the council, city manager, chief of police, Gustine Area Recreation Commission, or persons authorized by the council to enforce the rules and regulations promulgated by the provisions of this article. 
Park means all parks, playgrounds, greenbelts, open space, median strips, and other areas owned by, dedicated to, leased to, or operated or maintained by the city. 
Permit means a permit for the exclusive use of the parks or buildings as provided for and defined in this article. 
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term "vehicle" shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind, or description. Baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city parks shall be excepted from this definition. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.02)  
Sec. 8-2-72. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of the parks and recreation buildings of the city and to protect the rights of those in the surrounding areas. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.01)  
Sec. 8-2-73. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to and be in full force and effect at all parks and recreation areas under the jurisdiction and control of the city and shall govern the use of all such parks and recreation areas. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.03)  
Sec. 8-2-74. - Compliance required. 
No person shall enter, be, or remain in any park or building of the city unless he complies with all the regulations set forth in this article applicable to such park or building. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.04)  
Sec. 8-2-75. - Supplemental rules and regulations. 
The legal authority may establish such supplemental rules and regulations as from time to time may be required or necessary for the proper administration and regulation of conduct in the city's parks and recreation areas including, but not limited to, the times during which the parks, or any of the facilities therein, may be used. Any such supplemental rules and regulations promulgated under the provisions of this section shall be posted in or near the entranceway in each park and recreation area. Any change in any such rules and regulations established shall have prior written approval from the legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.37)  
Sec. 8-2-76. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any city employee, agent, or representative in the duly authorized performance of his duties. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.27)  
Sec. 8-2-77. - Enforcement; ejection of violators from parks and recreation areas. 
The legal authority and/or its representatives or the police department, in connection with their other duties, shall diligently enforce the provisions of this article. The legal authority and its duly authorized employees and representatives shall have the authority to eject from parks and recreation areas any person acting in violation of the rules and regulations set forth in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.36)  
Sec. 8-2-78. - Signs. 
(a)	Any sign required to be posted by the city pursuant to this article shall be placed at or near the entrance to the park and/or area requiring posting. 
(b)	No person shall disobey any instruction, sign, or notice posted by the Gustine Area Recreation Commission in any park, grounds, or recreation center, or in any building, structure, construction, or erection thereon, for the control, management, or direction of such park, grounds, recreation center, building, structure, construction, or erection. 
(Code 1966, §§ 10-2.28, 10-2.38)  
Sec. 8-2-79. - Authorized operation of concessions. 
(a)	The legal authority will enter into an agreement contract for all longterm concessions to be operated in any park. 
(b)	All persons holding contracts for concessions shall keep the grounds used by them properly policed and shall maintain the premises in a sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee. No operator of any concession shall retain in his employment any person whose presence is deemed by the city manager to be subversive of good and proper order and safety. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of soliciting, selling, or peddling liquids or food of any kind within the park without the approval of the legal authority. 
(d)	Concessions operating during special events in the parks of less than one week's duration (shortterm) will be acceptable upon approval by the legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.45)  
Sec. 8-2-80. - Hours of use. 
No person shall remain in any park or recreation area during any times prohibited by the legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.05) 
State Law reference— Trespass, Penal Code § 602 et seq.  
Sec. 8-2-81. - Care of public property. 
No person shall mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any soil, building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, fencing, paving or paving material, water line or other public utility, or parts of appurtenances thereof, sign, notice; or placard, whether temporary or permanent, or other structure or equipment, facility, park property, or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.06) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, Penal Code § 594 et seq.  
Sec. 8-2-82. - Care of flora. 
No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree, plant, or flower, or any portion thereof, or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. No person, other than an authorized city employee or agent, shall attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant, nor shall such person dig or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.07) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, Penal Code § 594 et seq.  
Sec. 8-2-83. - Fires. 
No person shall light or maintain any fire in any park unless such fire is lighted and maintained in a place provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.08)  
Sec. 8-2-84. - Animals prohibited; exception. 
No person shall ride, drive, bring, possess, or permit any animal under his control within any park, except Seeing Eye dogs or animals used for demonstration or educational purposes when approved by the legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.41)  
Sec. 8-2-85. - Care of wild animals and birds. 
No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles or objects at any animal, reptile, or bird or remove or have in his possession the young of any animal or egg, nest, or young of any reptile, animal, or bird. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.09)  
Sec. 8-2-86. - Refuse, trash, and litter. 
No person shall dump, deposit, or leave any bottle, broken glass, ashes, paper, box, can, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash anywhere on park grounds, but such trash shall be placed in proper receptacles provided for such purpose. No such item, refuse, or trash shall be placed in any water contiguous to any park or recreational area. Where receptacles are not provided, all such items, refuse, and trash shall be carried away from the park or recreation area by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.10) 
State Law reference— Littering, Penal Code § 374.  
Sec. 8-2-87. - Possession of glass beverage containers in city parks. 
(a)	No person shall possess any glass container in any city park, except where the sponsor of an organized public or private event has obtained prior permission from the chief of police to possess glass beverage containers within the boundaries of the event. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to any covered facility, whether open or enclosed within any city park.  
Sec. 8-2-88. - Speed limits. 
Except as otherwise posted, no person shall ride or drive any bicycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle, or other vehicle at a greater speed than 15 miles per hour in any park. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.43) 
State Law reference— Authority to set speed limits in parks, Vehicle Code § 22358.3.  
Sec. 8-2-89. - Parking. 
No person shall operate or park any vehicle within a park, except upon areas designated for such use. No person shall park, abandon, or otherwise allow to remain in city park facilities any such vehicle or other conveyance between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except with the written permission of the commissioner of parks and recreation, or as otherwise posted. Such permission shall be granted by the commissioner upon a showing that the vehicle is in the park while the driver or passengers thereof are participating in city-sponsored recreational activities during such hours. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.11)  
Sec. 8-2-90. - Bicycles. 
No person shall operate, drive, or ride upon any bicycle or unicycle in any park, except in areas designated and posted specifically for such use. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.16)  
Sec. 8-2-91. - Boating. 
Boating shall be permitted only in those areas specifically designated for such purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.17)  
Sec. 8-2-92. - Swimming. 
No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in any area not specifically designated for such purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.18)  
Sec. 8-2-93. - Archery, horseshoes, golf, and model airplanes. 
Golf, archery, horseshoes, the flying of motor-powered airplanes, kite flying, and propelled rockets or missiles shall be permitted only at locations specifically designated for such purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.19)  
Sec. 8-2-94. - Weapons. 
No person shall discharge or shoot any firearm, airgun, slingshot, or bow and arrow in any park, except at locations specifically designated for that purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.20)  
Sec. 8-2-95. - Pollution of waters. 
No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place, or cause to be placed, in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.21)  
Sec. 8-2-96. - Liquor prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)	No person shall transport into, possess, or consume upon the premises within any park any intoxicating liquor, excepting beer and wine. However, this restriction shall not apply within the following park facilities when legally rented: Harry Schmidt Park Picnic Shelter and Henry Miller Park Picnic Shelter. 
(b)	Persons serving or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall comply with state alcoholic beverage control regulations. The sale of alcoholic beverages to the general public shall be prohibited, unless authorized by the legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.44)  
Sec. 8-2-97. - Advertising prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall circulate, distribute, or deposit any handbill, circular, pamphlet, or advertisement, or post or affix to any tree, fence, structure, or vehicle situated within any park any handbill, circular, pamphlet, or advertisement, except with the permission of the legal authority. The standards in section 8-2-143 shall govern decisions to issue permits under this section. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.42)  
Sec. 8-2-98. - Amplified sound. 
The use of any system for amplifying sounds shall be prohibited in any park, unless a use permit is first secured. The standards in section 8-2-143 shall govern decisions to issue permits under this section. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.22)  
Sec. 8-2-99. - Vending and peddling. 
No person shall solicit in any manner or for any purpose, or sell or offer for sale, any goods, wares, or merchandise in any park without having first obtained a permit, concession, license, or lease from the Gustine Area Recreation Commission. The standards in section 8-2-143 shall govern decisions to issue permits under this section. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.23)  
Sec. 8-2-100. - Mass picnics and meetings. 
No mass picnic or meeting shall be held, except as provided in sections 8-2-141—8-2-143. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.26)  
Sec. 8-2-101. - Fireworks prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall discharge any firecracker, bomb, torpedo, rocket, or any other firework or explosive device of any kind in any park, except with the permission of the legal authority. The standards in section 8-2-143 shall govern decisions to issue permits under this section. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.40)  
Secs. 8-2-102—8-2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE PERMITS  
Subdivision 1. - In General 
 
Sec. 8-2-121. - Exclusive use of parks. 
The city's parks, or portions thereof, may be made available for the exclusive use of persons and groups, subject to the issuance of a permit by the legal authority. All applications for the exclusive use of any park shall be signed or cosigned by an adult, which adult shall agree to be responsible for such exclusive use. No exclusive use permit will be granted if prior to the time the application was filed, the city has scheduled a city-sponsored event at the same time and place as the activity proposed in the application. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.25)  
Sec. 8-2-122. - Interference with use by others. 
No person within any park or building shall use or attempt to use or interfere with the use of any table, space, or facility within such park or building which at the time is reserved for any other person or group which has received a permit from the legal authority therefor. Unless the actual use of a table, space, area, building, or facility referred to in any such permit is commenced within one hour after the period covered by such permit begins, such permit shall thereupon be void, and all rights under such permit may be canceled by the legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.24)  
Secs. 8-2-123—8-2-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 2. - Meetings, Gatherings and Overnight Camping Permits 
 
Sec. 8-2-141. - Required. 
No person shall hold, conduct, or address any assemblage, meeting, or gathering in any public park or recreation area, nor hold a picnic when the number of participants does not exceed 50 persons, nor shall any person or organization conduct any overnight camping activity without a written permit granted by the legal authority of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.29)  
Sec. 8-2-142. - Applications. 
Persons seeking the issuance of permits pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision shall file applications with the legal authority on forms provided for such purpose. Any person applying for a park permit pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision shall file an application for such permit with the legal authority not less than 20 days nor more than 90 days prior to the proposed use of such park. The legal authority may waive the 20-day period if the applicant waives all appeal rights. 
(Code 1966, §§ 10-2.29(a), 10-2.30)  
Sec. 8-2-143. - Standards for issuance. 
The legal authority shall issue a permit pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision when it finds that: 
(1)	The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general enjoyment of the park by the public; 
(2)	The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety, and recreation; 
(3)	The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
(4)	The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and 
(5)	The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.29(b))  
Sec. 8-2-144. - Denial; appeals. 
Within seven days after the receipt of an application for a park permit which is denied, the legal authority shall apprise the applicant in writing of its reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within five days thereafter to the council, which shall consider the application under the standards set forth in section 8-2-143 and sustain or overrule the legal authority's decision within 21 days. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.31)  
Sec. 8-2-145. - Effect. 
The permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable laws as fully as though the same were inserted in such permit. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.32)  
Sec. 8-2-146. - Liability of permittees. 
(a)	The persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(b)	If, in the opinion of the legal authority, the event or program would constitute a hazard to the public safety, the applicant for the permit shall provide the city with certificates of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, evidencing $500,000.00 for each occurrence, combined single limits for bodily injury and property damage. If the serving of liquor is involved, certificates of insurance shall be filed with the city prior to the granting of the permit. 
(c)	All events or programs open to the public where alcoholic beverages are sold or included in the price of admission shall constitute a hazard to the public safety requiring liability insurance as set forth in this section. Public events or programs which do not serve alcoholic beverages or private events or programs which do serve alcoholic beverages shall not be required to have liability insurance, unless, in the opinion of the city manager, a hazard to the public safety may exist. In such event, the council shall make the final decision if a hazard to the public safety does exist. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.33)  
Sec. 8-2-147. - Possession of copies. 
The permittee shall have a copy of the permit in his possession and shall produce such permit upon a request made by any duly authorized city employee, representative, or agent. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.35)  
Sec. 8-2-148. - Revocation. 
The legal authority shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon the finding of a violation of any rule, regulation, or law or upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2.34)  
Chapter 3 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-3-1—8-3-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-3-31. - Construction generally. 
(a)	Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be constructed to the official grade in accordance with the plans and specifications as shown in this article and at locations marked on the map of the city. The necessary underground drainage to carry stormwater across the streets or along the streets into existing or new storm drains shall be included. 
(b)	All curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be laid to the official grades and at distances from the property lines as indicated on the plans or to match existing work. All curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete built in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2.07)  
Sec. 8-3-32. - Adoption of plans and specifications. 
The council shall adopt plans and/or specifications for the construction of sidewalks, curbs, and gutters within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2.07)  
Sec. 8-3-33. - Barriers, guards, lights, and watchmen. 
The contractor shall take all necessary measures to protect the work and prevent accidents during construction for which a permit is required by the provisions of this article. He shall provide and maintain all necessary barriers, guards, lights, or watchmen.  
Sec. 8-3-34. - Protection of work and clearing up. 
The contractor shall care for all the work for which a permit is required by this article until the final acceptance. He shall remove all surplus materials and rubbish from the work after completion and before he makes application for acceptance of the work.  
Secs. 8-3-35—8-3-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION PERMITS 
 
Sec. 8-3-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct and lay sidewalks, curbs, or gutters within the boundary lines of any street or thoroughfare which is open for public use within the city, or to alter, improve, enlarge, or demolish any existing sidewalks, or to cause any of such work to be done without first securing a permit from the council to construct and lay, alter, improve, enlarge, or demolish the same. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2.01)  
Sec. 8-3-62. - Applications. 
(a)	Any person desiring to secure the permit required by this article shall file with the city clerk an application for such permit, addressed to the council. Such application shall contain, among other matters, a description of the land along which such sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter is proposed to be laid, either by lot, block, and tract or similar general description which shall readily identify and definitely locate the proposed sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter. 
(b)	Such application shall show the ownership of the land described in the application. If the land is owned by any other person than the applicant, the application shall be endorsed by such owner. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the city clerk to present such application to the council at its next regular or adjourned regular meeting subsequent to the filing of the application. 
(Code 1966, §§ 7-2.02, 7-2.03)  
Sec. 8-3-63. - Conditions. 
If the council approves the application and grants a permit for the construction and laying of such sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, or any portion thereof, or the alteration, improvement enlargement, or the demolishing of any existing sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, or any portion thereof, such permit shall be granted subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)	All work done pursuant to the provisions of such permit shall be done under the supervision of the director of public works or such other person as the council may appoint for that purpose. 
(2)	All sidewalks, curbs, and gutters shall be laid in conformance with the established grade of the city. 
(3)	Sidewalks, curbs, and gutters shall be constructed of the materials and in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted by the council and currently in effect. 
(4)	All such work shall be done to the satisfaction of the director of public works or such other person as the council may appoint for that purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2.04)  
Sec. 8-3-64. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue a permit in accordance with the order of the council and to attach thereto a copy of the plans and specifications adopted by the council and currently in effect. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2.05)  
Sec. 8-3-65. - Removal and replacement of improperly done work. 
(a)	Authority of the director of public works. If any work for which a permit is required by the provisions of this article is performed contrary to the requirements of this article, the director of public works or such other person who may have been appointed as provided in this article shall have the power to order the removal and/or replacement of such sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, or any portion thereof, which violates the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Notice to permittee. Before ordering the removal and/or replacement of such sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, a notice in writing ordering such removal shall be mailed to the permittee by depositing a copy of such notice in the United States Post Office, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee as his address is given on the application. If the permittee is not the owner of the property, a copy of the order shall also be mailed to the owner by depositing the same in the United States Post Office, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner as his address appears upon the application on file with the city clerk. 
(c)	Removal and replacement by city. If, within ten days after the mailing of such notice, such sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, or that portion thereof ordered to be removed, has not been removed and/or replaced, the director of public works or such other person who may be in charge shall have the power to remove and/or replace the same. Any cost incurred in moving and/or replacing the sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, or any portion thereof, shall become a charge against the permittee. If the permittee is not the owner of the property, the charge shall be against both the permittee and the owner of the property, shall be secured by a lien against the property adjoining such sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter, and shall be collected as provided for the collection of taxes in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2.06)  
Chapter 4 - TREES 
 
Sec. 8-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved trees means trees planted and growing in accordance with the street tree plan, both as to variety and location. 
Nonconforming trees means all street trees other than approved trees. 
Permit means a written or printed authorization issued by the city manager. 
Street tree areas means the areas where street trees are planted or growing within public rights-of-way, public easements, streets, parking strips, alleys, roads, and ways within the city, except that on existing streets where no room has been planned or provided for street trees on city rights-of-way or easements, the council shall create tree planting easements of from four feet to eight feet in width. Such created easements shall not apply where protested in writing by adjoining property owners. Under such protest, the city shall neither plant nor maintain any tree, and the provisions of section 8-4-9 shall apply. 
Street trees means all trees planted or growing within public rights-of-way, public easements, streets, parking strips, alleys, roads, and ways within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.02)  
Sec. 8-4-2. - City manager; powers and duties. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the city manager to administer, control, and regulate the street tree program of the city in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping master plan and of this chapter. 
(b)	The city manager shall have the authority to prune, trim, clip, spray, maintain, and care for the street trees, as needed, to remove diseased or dead trees, and to plant and/or encourage the planting of approved trees throughout the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.04)  
Sec. 8-4-3. - Landscaping master plan. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the planning commission to prepare and adopt a landscaping master plan for the city, specifying a list of approved street trees and a uniform method of street tree planning, and designating certain streets or blocks for certain species of trees. 
(b)	Such plan shall be submitted to the council, and after the adoption of the plan by the council, as submitted or modified, in accordance with law it shall become the landscaping master plan of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.03)  
Sec. 8-4-4. - Planting, removal or trimming permits. 
(a)	No person shall plant, remove, or trim any street tree without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. 
(b)	The city manager shall issue to any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the state public utilities commission and holding a valid franchise a permit which shall authorize the trimming of the trees necessary for the safety and proper maintenance of the utilities' services pursuant to the orders, rules, and regulations of the state public utilities commission. Such permits, unless renewed, shall expire at the end of one year after the date of issuance and may be revoked for good cause. 
(c)	Permits required by subsection (a) of this section shall be issued only for work to be done in compliance with the landscaping master plan and the provisions of this chapter and shall be issued without a fee. All work done pursuant to a permit shall be done under the supervision of the city manager. Whenever any street tree, whether approved or nonconforming, is removed or needs replacing, it shall be replaced with a tree planned for that specific street tree location. With or before the filing of any final map of any new subdivision, the subdivider shall either file with the planning commission a proposed plan of street tree planting, showing the location and variety of trees proposed to be planted in the subdivision, or shall request the planning commission to designate the type and location of street trees for such subdivision and file the plan with the council before the approval of the final subdivision map. 
(d)	Subdividers are hereby required to deposit a sum equal to an amount established by resolution per front foot to be used by the city for planting street trees within their subdivisions. Prior to the approval of the final subdivision map, the deposit shall have been either paid or guaranteed by the subdivider's bond. After planting, the subdivider or property owners in the subdivision shall water such trees at their own expense. 
(e)	When the erection, repair, alteration, or removal of any building, house, or structure necessitates the trimming, pruning, or removal of any street tree, such trimming, pruning, or removal shall be done only after a written permit has been issued by the city manager and shall be done at the expense of the applicant. As a condition to granting a permit for the removal of a tree, the city manager shall collect a deposit from the applicant sufficient to defray the cost of replacing such removed tree with an approved tree in conformance with the landscaping master plan. 
(Code 1966, §§ 10-1.05—10-1.07)  
Sec. 8-4-5. - General planting specifications. 
No street tree shall be planted except in accordance with the landscaping master plan and the provisions of this chapter. No new street tree shall be planted where an existing street tree or private tree is within 20 feet of a new street. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.08)  
Sec. 8-4-6. - Abuse of trees. 
No person shall abuse, destroy, or mutilate any street tree, nor attach or place any rope or wire (other than a rope or wire customarily used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill, paint, or any other substance, structure, thing, or device of any kind or nature whatsoever to or on any street tree, nor allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such tree to come in contact with it. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.09)  
Sec. 8-4-7. - Open ground required around trees. 
No person shall place or maintain any stone, cement, or other substance so that it shall impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any street tree. Not less than 12 square feet of open ground shall be left unpaved and maintained in a porous condition around every street tree. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.10)  
Sec. 8-4-8. - Interference with work of city employees. 
No person shall in any way interfere with the city manager or other city employees or city contractors while they are lawfully engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating, or removing any street tree, or in removing any stone, cement, or other substance from about the trunk of any street tree. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.11)  
Sec. 8-4-9. - Hazardous private trees. 
(a)	No person shall allow or maintain any tree on private property to become a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic by obstructing vision or impairing necessary clearance, or in any manner endangering the security or usefulness of any public street, sewer, sidewalk, or other public property. 
(b)	Any such private tree allowed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Upon a determination by the city manager that such private tree constitutes a nuisance, he shall give written notice to the owner of the property upon which such nuisance exists to trim, remove, or otherwise control such tree in such a manner as will abate such nuisance. The failure to comply with such written notice within ten days thereafter shall be deemed a violation of this section. Such written notice may be given by a personal service of a copy thereof or by placing a copy of such notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the property as shown on the last assessment roll of the city. Upon the failure of the owner to comply with such notice, the city manager may cause the work to be done, and the cost shall be charged to the property owner. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.12)  
Sec. 8-4-10. - Civil liability. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub, or plant upon any street tree area adjoining his property or under his control in such condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley, or public place within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.13)  
Sec. 8-4-11. - Suits for collection of city's expenses. 
Where any work is done or materials are purchased by the city in performing any of the acts required by the provisions of this chapter, after the failure of the owner or occupant of the abutting property to do so upon demand, the cost of such work or materials may be recovered from such owner or occupant by civil action. The bringing of such action shall not prevent a criminal prosecution for the same act or omission. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.14)  
Sec. 8-4-12. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any person dissatisfied with any order of the city manager may appeal therefrom to the council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager not more than five days after the date of such order. Such appeal shall be considered at the next regular meeting of the council, and its decision shall be final. 
(b)	The acts of the city manager for ordinary trimming and maintenance of street trees shall not be subject to appeal. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1.15)  
TITLE 9 - TAXATION  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 9-1-1—9-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - PROPERTY TAXES 
 
Sec. 9-2-1. - Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties to county; offices of city assessor and city tax collector abolished. 
(a)	Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code §§ 51500 —51519, the city hereby elects to transfer the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and city tax collector to the assessor and tax collector of the county. 
(b)	The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city, are hereby transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem property taxes which become a lien after December 3, 1962, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1963. 
(c)	On and after July 1, 1963, all duties performed by the city assessor, other than the assessing of property in the city, and all duties performed by the city tax collector, other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property which become a lien after December 3, 1962, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1963, are hereby transferred to and are to be performed by the city clerk. 
(d)	The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are hereby abolished as of July 1, 1963. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-3.01—3-3.04)  
Chapter 3 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-3-1. - Tax imposed. 
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00 a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 3-6.02) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11911 et seq.  
Sec. 9-3-2. - Person responsible for payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of section 9-3-1 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued. 
(Code 1966, § 3-6.03)  
Sec. 9-3-3. - Exemptions. 
The tax levied by this article is subject to the exemptions provided for in Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 6.7, ch. 3 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11921 et seq.). 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-6.04—3-6.08)  
Sec. 9-3-4. - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 6.7 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq.) and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 3-6.09)  
Sec. 9-3-5. - Claims for refunds. 
Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 1, pt. 9, ch. 5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 5096 et seq.). 
(Code 1966, § 3-6.10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 5096 et seq.  
Chapter 4 - SALES AND USE TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Sales and use taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-4-1. - Rate. 
The rate of the sales tax and use tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.02)  
Sec. 9-4-2. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of this chapter, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all the functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax law; provided, however, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to such operative date, the city shall nevertheless so contract, and, in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.05)  
Sec. 9-4-3. - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate set forth in section 9-4-1 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.06) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy sales tax, Government Code § 37101.  
Sec. 9-4-4. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.07)  
Sec. 9-4-5. - Use tax. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use, or other consumption in the city at the rate set forth in section 9-4-1 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.08) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy use tax, Government Code § 37101.  
Sec. 9-4-6. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), all of the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(b)	In adopting the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.), wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. Such substitution, however, shall not be made when the term "state" is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, the state treasury, or the state constitution; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of such Code; the substitution shall not be made in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828; the substitution shall not be made for the term "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203. 
(c)	All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code, which amendments relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-4.09, 3-4.10, 3-4.15)  
Sec. 9-4-7. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)	There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
(1)	The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
(2)	The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) by any city and county, county, or city in the state; 
(3)	The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use, or other consumption of, property purchased by operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city; and 
(4)	The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property, or communications, or in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or in the manufacture, transmission, or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the state public utilities commission. 
(b)	There shall be exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax 80 percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(c)	In addition to the exemptions set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempted from the use tax. 
(Code 1966, §§ 3-4.12, 3-4.13)  
Sec. 9-4-8. - Permits not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.11)  
Sec. 9-4-9. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Code 1966, § 3-4.16) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202.  
Chapter 5 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local occupancy taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
Operator means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax administrator means the city manager. 
Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this tax may be considered. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.02)  
Sec. 9-5-2. - Tax imposed. 
(a)	For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of the rent charged by the operator. 
(b)	Such tax constitutes a debt owned by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.03) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy above tax, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280(a).  
Sec. 9-5-3. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
(1)	Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
(2)	Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions of federal law or international treaty. 
No exception shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.04)  
Sec. 9-5-4. - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether direct or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.05)  
Sec. 9-5-5. - Registration of operators. 
Within 30 days after the effective date of this tax, or within 30 days after commencing business whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(1)	The name of the operator; 
(2)	The address of the hotel; 
(3)	The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
(4)	"This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform transient occupancy tax by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.06)  
Sec. 9-5-6. - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this article shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.07)  
Sec. 9-5-7. - Penalties. 
(a)	Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall, in addition to the amount of the tax, pay a penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax per month or fraction thereof until paid; the maximum penalty imposed on any one delinquency shall not exceed 25 percent of the amount of the tax. 
(b)	Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid under this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.08)  
Sec. 9-5-8. - Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by tax administrator. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section 9-5-9. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.09)  
Sec. 9-5-9. - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax and penalties, if any, may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedure established by section 2-1-2 of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.10)  
Sec. 9-5-10. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.11)  
Sec. 9-5-11. - Refunds. 
(a)	Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
(b)	An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)	A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)	No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.12)  
Sec. 9-5-12. - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator, which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.13)  
Sec. 9-5-13. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or other person to fail or refuse to register as required in section 9-5-5, or to fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made, or to fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or to render a false or fraudulent return or claim. It shall be unlawful for any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim to make any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.14)  
Sec. 9-5-14. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All moneys received by the city under or pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited and paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.15)  
Sec. 9-5-15. - Security for collection of tax. 
(a)	The tax administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, may require any person subject thereto deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such manner, as the tax administrator deems proper, or $10,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations provided in this section. 
(b)	If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out or quits his business or a substantial portion thereof, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover any transient occupancy tax which is due against any portion of the business unless the former operator produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If the successors or assigns of a business fail to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required, they shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by them to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Such tax shall be a lien against the purchase price for any portion of the business. The successors or assigns may request in writing a certificate of no tax due. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the successors or assigns for a certificate, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to them at the address given in the request of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice will release the successors and assigns from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as provided in this subsection. The time within which the obligation of the successors and assigns may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(Code 1966, § 3-8.16)  
Chapter 6 - UTILITY USER TAXES 
 
Sec. 9-6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gas means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefore. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Nonutility supplier means: 
(1)	A service supplier, other than an electrical corporation serving within the city, which generates electrical energy for sale to others; or 
(2)	A gas supplier other than a gas corporation that sells or supplies gas to users within the city. 
Service supplier means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter. 
Service user means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. 
Tax administrator means the city treasurer or designee. 
Telephone corporation, electrical corporation, cable television corporation, gas corporation and water corporation shall have the same meanings as defined in Public Utilities Code §§ 218, 222, 234, 241, and 215-5, respectively, except the terms "electrical corporation," "gas corporation," and "water corporation" shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas or water to a service user. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.02)  
Sec. 9-6-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 37100.5 and other applicable laws for the purpose of providing general municipal revenues to be used for general municipal purposes. Revenues from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city's general fund. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.01)  
Sec. 9-6-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state. 
(b)	The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes or persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax. 
(c)	The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.03)  
Sec. 9-6-4. - Cable television users tax. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 2.5 percent of the charges made for cable television service and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. 
(b)	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.04)  
Sec. 9-6-5. - Electricity users tax. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person other than an electric or gas corporation using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 2.5 percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation providing service in the city and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. The term "charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: 
(1)	Metered energy; and 
(2)	Minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, authorized by the state public utilities commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
(b)	As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water or treatment of wastewater by a water utility or a governmental agency. 
(c)	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-generation or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in section 9-6-10. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by United States mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by United States mail, to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.05)  
Sec. 9-6-6. - Gas users tax. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the city, gas which is transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 2.5 percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service used would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the city. The term "charges," as used in this section, shall include: 
(1)	That billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; 
(2)	Gas transportation charges; and 
(3)	Demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the state public utilities commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
(b)	The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to: 
(1)	Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; 
(2)	Charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business; or 
(3)	Charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and 
(4)	Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code. 
(c)	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the 20th of each calendar month, commencing on the 20th day of the calendar month after the calendar month after the effective date of the chapter, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax administrator. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in section 9-6-10. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.06)  
Sec. 9-6-7. - Telephone users tax. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate and interstate telephone services, excluding advertising in phone directories by any person in the city using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 2.5 percent of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
(b)	As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee, plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to public utility regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulations; nor shall the term "telephone communication services" include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as such section existed on January 1, 1970. The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations, which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account, excluding advertising in any telephone directory, having a situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the city. 
(c)	The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
(d)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 20 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 41001 et seq.), or the tax imposed under section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.08)  
Sec. 9-6-8. - Water users tax. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using water in the city which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 2.5 percent of the charges made for such water, and shall be paid by the person paying for such water. 
(b)	The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.09)  
Sec. 9-6-9. - Remittance of tax. 
Taxes collected from a service user, which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.10)  
Sec. 9-6-10. - Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report such fact to the tax administrator within 30 days of such use and shall directly remit to the city the amount of tax due. 
(b)	The tax administrator may require such service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the price thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.07)  
Sec. 9-6-11. - Action to collect. 
Any tax to be paid shall be required by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has willfully been withheld from the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.11)  
Sec. 9-6-12. - Duty to collect; procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
(1)	Notwithstanding the provisions of section 9-6-10, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the service charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on such energy charges section 9-6-13(c) will apply. 
(2)	The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.12)  
Sec. 9-6-13. - Additional power and duties of tax administrator. 
(a)	The tax administrator shall have the power and duty and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes imposed in this chapter. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
(c)	The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so the collection of any tax imposed may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service supplier so long as such agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
(d)	The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to an exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who then is determined exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
(e)	The tax administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers, at least 60 days prior to any annexation or other change in the city's boundaries. Such notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from the local agency formation commission. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.13)  
Sec. 9-6-14. - Assessment; service user administrative remedy. 
(a)	Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts of the tax owed from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods as set forth in this section. 
(b)	The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. 
(c)	The tax administrator shall notify the service user the city has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user's address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice, which shall be the date of mailing (if service is not accomplished in person), a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become part of the tax, which shall be required to be paid in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.14)  
Sec. 9-6-15. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.15)  
Sec. 9-6-16. - Refunds. 
(a)	Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a service supplier claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected had either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess in the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided that such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three years from the date of overpayment. 
(c)	Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the state public utilities commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. If this chapter is repealed, the amount of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city. 
(d)	A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the supplier's customary practice. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.16)  
Sec. 9-6-17. - Annual review. 
The city council shall annually review the provisions of this chapter before the ensuing fiscal year begins and shall make a determination by resolution as to the financial necessity of continuing this chapter. Such annual review shall coincide with the adoption of the annual operating budget. Should a resolution not be adopted, the imposition of the taxes authorized by this chapter shall automatically cease. 
(Code 1966, § 3-9.18)  
Chapter 7 - GENERAL TRANSACTIONS (SALES) AND USE TAX 
 
Sec. 9-7-1. - Chapter title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Gustine Community Enhancement to Services Sales Tax Measure. This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-2. - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be effective immediately after certification by the city council of the returns of the election indicating approval by a majority of the voters in favor of the Gustine Community Enhancement to Services Measure. The general transactions (sales) and use tax imposed hereunder shall be operative the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this chapter. Based upon a November 3, 2009 election, the tax shall be operative April 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-3. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)	To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax provision which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
(2)	To adopt a retail transactions and use tax provision that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(3)	To adopt a retail transactions and use tax provision that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes. 
(4)	To adopt a retail transactions and use tax provision that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-4. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax provision; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-5. - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-6. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-7. - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-8. - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-9. - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
(1)	Wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
a.	The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
b.	The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
c.	In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
1.	Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
2.	Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
d.	In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2)	The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-10. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactors permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-11. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)	There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
(b)	There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
(1)	Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(2)	Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.	With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.	With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
(3)	The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
(4)	A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
(5)	For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4), the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(c)	There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
(1)	The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax provisions. 
(2)	Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(3)	If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
(4)	If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
(5)	For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4), storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(6)	Except as provided in subsections (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
(7)	"A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
(d)	Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-12. - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
Sec. 9-7-13. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-15-2009)  
TITLE 10 - TRANSPORTATION  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 10-1-1—10-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State Aeronautics Act, Public Utilities Code § 21001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-2-1—10-2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Airports generally, Public Utilities Code § 21661 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-2-31. - Airport manager. 
(a)	The office of the airport manager of the city is hereby created and established. The airport manager shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city manager. 
(b)	The airport manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall from time to time determine. 
(c)	The airport manager shall supervise all activities at the Gustine Municipal Airport and shall enforce all pertinent laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and the federal and state aviation authorities that shall apply to persons or firms using the facilities of the Gustine Municipal Airport. In addition to his general powers as supervisor of the airport, and not as a limitation thereon, he shall also have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	Attendance at airport commission meetings. To attend all meetings of the city's airport commission unless excused therefrom; and 
(2)	Collection of fees. To promptly and properly collect all fees due the city from transient users of the airport facilities; to promptly pay such fees to the city treasurer; and to report monthly to the city manager as to the amount and kinds of fees collected; it shall not be his duty to collect monthly rentals or fees due from regular occupants or users of the airport. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-4.401—2-4.404)  
Secs. 10-2-32—10-2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 10-2-51. - Established. 
The airport commission of the city is hereby established as an advisory commission of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.401)  
Sec. 10-2-52. - Membership. 
(a)	The airport commission shall consist of five members appointed by the council. Residence within the city shall not be a requirement for appointment to the commission. The term of appointment shall be two years, following the beginning of their term. Terms shall be staggered, with two commissioners in one term, and three commissioners in another term. 
(b)	The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint one member of the council to serve as an ex officio member of the commission without the right to vote except when it is necessary to provide for a quorum to conduct the business of the airport commission. 
(c)	All of the members of the airport commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-2.402, 2-2.404)  
Sec. 10-2-53. - Officers. 
The airport commission shall elect from among its members a chair. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.403)  
Sec. 10-2-54. - Meetings. 
The airport commission shall establish the time and place of its regular meetings. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.405)  
Sec. 10-2-55. - Powers and duties. 
The airport commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To act in an advisory capacity to the council of the city for the operation, maintenance, and development of the Gustine Municipal Airport; 
(2)	To prepare and submit to the council of the city a proposed budget for the operation and improvement of the airport; 
(3)	To advise the council as to the availability of any cooperative agreements and/or projects for the maintenance and/or improvement of the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 2-2.406)  
Secs. 10-2-56—10-2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AIRPORT REGULATIONS  
Subdivision 1. - In General 
 
Sec. 10-2-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City includes authorized agents of the city. 
Fixed base operator means any person using the airport as a base of operations. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.118)  
Sec. 10-2-82. - Scope. 
The provisions of this division apply to the municipal airport.  
Sec. 10-2-83. - Failure to comply with regulations. 
In addition to any other penalty prescribed in this chapter, any person operating or handling an aircraft on the airport in violation of any provision of this chapter or refusing to comply therewith in any respect may be removed or ejected from the airport and may be deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for such length of time as may be deemed necessary to ensure the safeguarding of the airport and its facilities and the public and its interest therein. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1101)  
Sec. 10-2-84. - General manner of operation. 
The municipal airport shall be conducted as a facility for the promotion and accommodation of air traffic and shall be operated as a public airport. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.101)  
Sec. 10-2-85. - Hours of operation. 
The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day and night, subject to the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, the payment of fees, and subject to such restrictions due to inclement weather, the condition of the landing area, the presentation of special events, and like causes as may be determined by the airport commission. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.102)  
Sec. 10-2-86. - Special services and facilities. 
No person shall use the airport as a base for the carrying on of commercial activities, for instruction in aviation in any of its branches, for the sale of fuels, refreshments, or any commodity, or for any other commercial purpose, unless a permit has been granted therefor by the city. The airport shall be conducted as a terminal facility for the promotion and accommodation of air commerce and as a public air terminal. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.103) 
State Law reference— Unauthorized sales at airports, Public Utilities Code § 602.4.  
Sec. 10-2-87. - Uses create obligations to obey regulations. 
The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all the regulations set forth in this chapter and as adopted from time to time by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.104)  
Sec. 10-2-88. - Responsibility of users. 
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and he shall release, hold harmless, and indemnify the city, the council, and their officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as against claims of third persons against the person using the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.105)  
Sec. 10-2-89. - Operators and aircraft. 
All operators and aircraft shall be certified by the Federal Aviation Agency. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.107)  
Sec. 10-2-90. - Handling, policing, and protection of the public. 
The city shall have the authority to take such steps as may be necessary for the handling, policing, and protection of the public while present at the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.109)  
Sec. 10-2-91. - Garbage, refuse, and rubbish disposal. 
Each tenant and user of the airport shall collect and deposit all garbage, refuse, and rubbish in receptacles provided by the city. Each fixed base operator shall pay a separate fee for garbage service. Agricultural aircraft operators shall be responsible for the disposal of all chemical bags, cans, and other receptacles used in relation to their operation. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.110) 
State Law reference— Litter, Penal Code § 374.  
Sec. 10-2-92. - Damages to airport property. 
Any person causing damages to airport lighting or any other airport property, improvement, or facility shall reimburse the city fully for such damages. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.111)  
Sec. 10-2-93. - Signs and placards. 
Business, advertising, or other signs or placards shall not be erected, placed, or displayed on any of the airport property without the prior approval of the city. The city may designate the location, size, type, color, or other characteristics thereof, and this approval may be made subject to such designations. Any such sign shall also comply with all applicable building, electrical, and other codes of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.112)  
Sec. 10-2-94. - Vehicles for hire. 
No motor or other vehicle for hire shall be housed or operated from the airport without the prior approval of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.113)  
Sec. 10-2-95. - Dogs and pets. 
No dogs or other pets shall be permitted on the airport or any of its facilities, unless such dog or pet is confined in an automobile, cage, or on a leash and under the full and complete control of some responsible person. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.114)  
Sec. 10-2-96. - Speed limits of motor vehicles. 
The maximum speed for the operation of motor vehicles on the airport shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.115) 
State Law reference— Regulation of vehicle traffic at airports authorized, Vehicle Code §§ 21108, 21113.  
Sec. 10-2-97. - Firearms. 
No firearms shall be discharged on the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.116)  
Sec. 10-2-98. - Vending machines. 
No vending machine of any kind shall be placed, used, or maintained on the airport or any of its improvements or facilities, unless the council has first given its approval. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.117)  
Sec. 10-2-99. - Insurance required for fixed base operators. 
No fixed base operator shall use the airport or its facilities, improvements, or equipment, unless such operator holds a fully paid up policy of public liability and property damage insurance, naming the city as a coinsured, plus a hold harmless clause, in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00 each, respectively, and furnishes proof to the city of such insurance. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.119)  
Sec. 10-2-100. - Motor vehicle parking. 
All motor or other vehicles kept at the airport on a permanent basis shall park only in those areas designated for vehicle parking. Such permanently parked vehicles shall be required to obtain a parking permit from the city. No motor or other vehicle shall be parked on any taxiway, apron, or tiedown area so as to obstruct aircraft traffic flow. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.121)  
Sec. 10-2-101. - Parachute activities. 
Parachute activities shall be prohibited, except by permission of the council and after compliance with the applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the state. This section shall not apply to aircraft during emergency conditions where parachuting from the aircraft is for the health, safety, or preservation of the crew thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.801)  
Secs. 10-2-102—10-2-120. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 2. - Air Traffic Rules 
 
Sec. 10-2-121. - Adoption. 
The air traffic rules promulgated by the Federal Aviation Agency of the United States of America, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of this chapter as fully in all respects as if particularly set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.106)  
Sec. 10-2-122. - Compliance with FAA rules and regulations required. 
No person shall navigate any aircraft over, land upon, take off from, or service, repair, or maintain any aircraft on the airport or conduct any operation on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter and those of the Federal Aviation Agency. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.108)  
Sec. 10-2-123. - Direction of traffic. 
The direction of traffic shall be governed by the segmented circle. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.201)  
Sec. 10-2-124. - Helicopters and rotor-wing aircraft. 
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, all helicopters and rotor-wing aircraft shall comply with a flight pattern set by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.202)  
Sec. 10-2-125. - Takeoffs from taxi strips. 
No takeoff shall be made from a taxi strip. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.203)  
Sec. 10-2-126. - Minimum altitude. 
For aircraft flying the standard pattern the minimum altitude shall be 800 feet AGL. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.204)  
Sec. 10-2-127. - Takeoffs generally. 
All aircraft approaching the airport for landing shall fall in the line of traffic and skirt the field to a point where a landing can be made in the direction indicated by the segmented circle and in accordance with all the regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency, as now or hereafter amended. Takeoffs likewise shall comply with all the regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.301)  
Sec. 10-2-128. - Turns upon taking off. 
So far as is practicable, no aircraft taking off shall make any turn at a distance of less than 1,000 feet horizontally from the nearest edge of the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.302)  
Sec. 10-2-129. - Taxiing rules. 
When in the vicinity of aircraft landing or taking off, an aircraft being taxied shall be brought to a complete stop. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.303)  
Sec. 10-2-130. - Charges for storage, supplies, and services. 
The city may refuse clearance to any aircraft until all charges for storage, supplies, and services rendered to it shall have been paid. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.402)  
Sec. 10-2-131. - Parking aircraft. 
The parking of aircraft shall be permitted only in those areas designated by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.403)  
Sec. 10-2-132. - Flight instructors. 
Every person instructing students in flying shall acquaint them with the rules and regulations in effect. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.501)  
Sec. 10-2-133. - Starting and running engines. 
(a)	No aircraft engine shall be started on an aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes which are fully set, unless the wheels have been set with blocks that are equipped with ropes or other suitable means for removing them. 
(b)	No aircraft engine shall be started or run unless a competent operator shall be at the controls of the aircraft. 
(c)	No aircraft engine shall be started or run in a hangar or other building, nor in such a manner that a draft from the propeller will be directed into a hangar or other building. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-7.601—4-7.603)  
Secs. 10-2-134—10-2-150. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 3. - Fire and Safety Regulations 
 
Sec. 10-2-151. - Caution to prevent fires, bodily injuries, and property damages. 
Every person using the airport or its facilities in any way shall use the utmost caution to prevent fire and shall otherwise conduct himself so as to prevent bodily injuries or property damages. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.701)  
Sec. 10-2-152. - Repairs. 
No aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of the landing or takeoff area for the purpose of repairs. All repairs of every kind shall be made at the places designated therefor. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.401)  
Sec. 10-2-153. - Fueling and draining aircraft. 
No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while its engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed place. Fueling shall be done in such a manner and with such equipment that adequate connections for the grounding of static electricity shall be continuously maintained during such time, and only in the fueling area. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.702)  
Sec. 10-2-154. - Cylinders or flasks of compressed gas or aviation fuel. 
No cylinder or flask of compressed flammable gas shall be kept or stored, except at a place designated by the city and the fire department of the city for that purpose. The storing of aviation fuel in hangars or adjacent areas shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.703)  
Sec. 10-2-155. - Cleaning of motors and other parts of aircraft. 
The cleaning of motors or other parts of aircraft shall not be carried on in any hangar, except with nonflammable substances. If flammable liquids shall be employed for this purpose, the operation shall be carried on in the open air and in such other structures as may meet with the approval of the city and the fire department of the city and in compliance with any applicable law or regulation governing such activity. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.704)  
Sec. 10-2-156. - Smoking. 
No person shall smoke or ignite any match or cigarette lighter in any hangar or building, except in offices, waiting rooms, or buildings in which smoking is authorized specifically by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.705)  
Sec. 10-2-157. - Maintenance work. 
Repairs on storage floors of hangars primarily used for aircraft storage shall be limited to inspections and the replacement of minor parts. The changing of motors or major overhaul of motors and the painting of aircraft shall be prohibited, unless special permission is obtained from the council. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.706)  
Sec. 10-2-158. - Hangar entrances. 
Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.707)  
Sec. 10-2-159. - Floors to be kept clean. 
Floors shall be kept clean and free from oil, and no volatile, flammable solvent shall be used for cleaning floors. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.708)  
Sec. 10-2-160. - Accumulations of boxes, crates, and other rubbish. 
Boxes, crates, rubbish, paper, and other litter shall not be permitted to accumulate in or about any hangar, and all oil, paint, and varnish cans, bottles, and other containers of flammable liquids shall be removed from the hangar immediately upon being emptied. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.709)  
Secs. 10-2-161—10-2-180. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 4. - Fees and Rentals 
 
Sec. 10-2-181. - Payment. 
The payment of any fee or rental which may be required by the council shall be a condition precedent to the use of the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.120)  
Sec. 10-2-182. - Tiedown fees. 
Tiedown fees shall be set by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.901)  
Sec. 10-2-183. - Commercial operators and crop dusters. 
Commercial operators with a possible environmental impact shall have a permit from the city. Crop dusters shall pay a fee for the use of the airport, which fee shall be set by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.902)  
Sec. 10-2-184. - Fixed base operators. 
Fees for fixed base operators shall be determined by potential use, based on a lease agreement. All fees shall be reviewed from time to time. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.903)  
Secs. 10-2-185—10-2-210. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 5. - Agricultural Aircraft Operations 
 
Sec. 10-2-211. - Approval and agreements required. 
No agricultural aircraft operator shall use the airport for the commercial operation of his business without the written approval of the city and executing an agreement therewith. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1001)  
Sec. 10-2-212. - Designated areas. 
Agricultural operations shall be conducted only from those areas as designated on the airport by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1002)  
Sec. 10-2-213. - State and county licenses required. 
All agricultural operators shall provide the city with proof of proper state and county licensing in the conduct of agricultural commercial operations. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1003)  
Sec. 10-2-214. - Insurance. 
All agricultural operators shall keep in effect liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 with a ten-day cancellation notice, with the city named a co-protectorate in the policy, plus a hold harmless clause. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1004)  
Sec. 10-2-215. - Tiedown fees. 
All agricultural operators using the airport commercially, other than fixed based operators, shall pay the normal tiedown fee as established per month, per aircraft. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1005)  
Sec. 10-2-216. - Chemicals. 
(a)	All agricultural operators using pesticides, defoliants, and herbicides shall be required to use the closed mixing and closed loading systems. 
(b)	No agricultural chemicals shall be stored at the airport. 
(c)	Operators shall supply the city, on a monthly basis, with a list of chemicals being flown from the airport. A list of monthly chemical use permits granted to agricultural operators using the airport shall be obtained from the county agricultural commissioner. 
(d)	No agricultural operator shall wash or flush tanks or spray equipment containing agricultural chemicals on the airport. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-7.1006—4-7.1009)  
Sec. 10-2-217. - Washing aircraft. 
The location and types of materials allowed to be washed from any agricultural aircraft shall be approved by the city. The washing of the exteriors of agricultural aircraft shall be restricted to areas designated by the city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-7.1010, 4-7.1011)  
Chapter 3 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq.; general powers of local authorities, Vehicle Code §§ 21, 21100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-3-1. - Definitions. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section, but are defined in the Vehicle Code, such definitions are incorporated in this section and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this section as though set forth in this section in full. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means any motorbus, motor coach, trackless coach, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
Business district means that portion of a street and the property contiguous thereto upon one side of which street for a distance of 600 feet, 50 percent or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by buildings in use for business; or, upon both sides of which street, for a distance of 300 feet, 50 percent or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is so occupied. 
Central traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the area bounded by North Avenue, the north boundary of South Avenue, the west boundary of Fourth Street and the alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street. 
Curb means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such marked by curbing construction or not so marked. The term "curb," as used in this chapter, shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of the street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
Divisional island means a raised island located in the roadway separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
Holidays means any day designated in Government Code §§ 6700—6707; provided, however, that Saturday afternoon shall not be considered a holiday for the purpose of this chapter. 
Loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Official time standard means the standard whenever certain hours are named in this chapter and shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use. 
Official traffic control devices means all signs, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Official traffic signals means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternated directed to stop and proceed, and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
Park means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise engaged in loading or unloading passengers or materials. 
Parkway means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
Passenger loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the loading and unloading of passengers. 
Police officer means every officer of the police department of the city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Stop , when required, means the complete cessation of movement. 
Traffic means any pedestrian, ridden or herded animal, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-3.101, 4-3.102, 4-3.104—4-3.109, 4-3.111, 4-3.112) 
State Law reference— Applicable definitions generally, Vehicle Code §§ 100 et seq., 21000 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3-2. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except those listed in subsection (b) of this section, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. 
(b)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code which involve the standing or parking of a vehicle shall be subject to civil penalties of which the amounts and administrative costs will be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 416, 5-21-2001) 
State Law reference— Parking violations, Vehicle Code § 40200 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3-3. - Driving between vehicles in a funeral procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.701) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, Vehicle Code § 21100(a).  
Sec. 10-3-4. - Use of private driveways by commercial vehicles. 
(a)	No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on, or across any private driveway approach, sidewalk area, or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one ton. 
State Law reference— Obedience to local traffic signs, Vehicle Code § 21461.5.  
Sec. 10-3-5. - Riding and driving on new pavement and markings. 
No person shall walk, ride or drive any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to cross such pavement or markings, or when such device is in place indicating that the street, sidewalk, or any portion thereof, is closed. 
State Law reference— Obedience to local traffic signs, Vehicle Code § 21461.5.  
Secs. 10-3-6—10-3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 10-3-41. - Duty of police. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the statutes of the Vehicle Code applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.201) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic officers, Vehicle Code § 21100(c).  
Secs. 10-3-42—10-3-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic signs, signals and markings, Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq.; obedience to local traffic signs, Vehicle Code § 21461.5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-3-71. - Authority to install. 
(a)	The chief of police shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required by this chapter or by any regulation prescribed by the city council to make effective the provisions of this chapter or such regulations. 
(b)	Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any provisions thereof, that traffic control devices are installed to give notice to the public of the applications of such law, the chief of police is hereby authorized to install or to have installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(c)	The chief of police may also place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-3.301, 4-3.302) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of official traffic control devices, Vehicle Code § 21100(d); when signs required, Vehicle Code § 21103.  
Sec. 10-3-72. - Stop signs; when and where required; compliance with state law; through streets. 
Whenever this chapter or any resolution prescribed by the city council designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, the chief of police shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
(1)	A stop sign shall be erected on a designated street at its intersection with the through street or portion thereof and at entrances to other intersections where a stop is required. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in Vehicle Code §§ 21400 and 21401. 
(2)	Through streets in the city shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-3.601, 4-3.602) 
State Law reference— Authority to install stop signs and designate through streets, Vehicle Code § 21353 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3-73. - Yield right-of-way signs. 
Whenever any section or resolution of the city designates and describes any intersection at which vehicles are required to yield the right-of-way at one or more entrances thereto in accordance with Vehicle Code § 21803, the chief of police shall erect and maintain yield right-of-way signs, subject to the provisions of this division. 
State Law reference— Authority to install yield signs, Vehicle Code § 21356.  
Sec. 10-3-74. - Turn signs generally. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to place or cause to be placed markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. 
(b)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, and such signs may be removed when such signs are no longer permitted. 
(c)	Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U turn is permitted, no driver of any vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-3.401—4-3.403) 
State Law reference— Turning, stopping and turn signals, Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq.; authority to prohibit turns, Vehicle Code § 22113.  
Sec. 10-3-75. - Signal-controlled intersections; right turns. 
(a)	No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted, giving notice of such restriction as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The chief of police shall post appropriate signs giving effect to the provisions of this section where he determines that making of right turns against a traffic signal stop indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.404) 
State Law reference— Turning, stopping and turn signals, Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq.; authority to prohibit turns, Vehicle Code § 22113; turning at red light prohibited if forbidden by sign, Vehicle Code § 21453.  
Sec. 10-3-76. - One-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the chief of police shall place or cause to be placed and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.501) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys, Vehicle Code § 21657.  
Sec. 10-3-77. - Crosswalks. 
(a)	The chief of police shall establish, designate, and maintain or cause to have established, designated, and maintained crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, markings, or lines upon the surface of the roadway. Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district, at such intersections outside the central traffic district, and at other places within or outside such district where the chief of police determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, subject to the limitations contained in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
(c)	The chief of police may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk, directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish crosswalks, Vehicle Code § 21106; pedestrians generally, Vehicle Code § 21949 et seq.  
Secs. 10-3-78—10-3-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq.; local regulation of stopping, standing and parking, Vehicle Code §§ 21100(l), 22500 et seq.; curb markings to regulate or prohibit parking, Vehicle Code § 21458. 
 
Sec. 10-3-110. - Parking violations under this article designated as infractions. 
The provisions of this article prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall be enforceable as infractions, unless specifically designated by section as enforceable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 445, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 10-3-111. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this Code, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or other official traffic control device. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.901)  
Sec. 10-3-112. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or this chapter, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.901)  
Sec. 10-3-113. - Parking space markings. 
The director of public works is hereby authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate where authorized parking is permitted.  
Sec. 10-3-114. - Curb markings; authority; meaning. 
The police chief is authorized, subject to the provision and limitations of this chapter and applicable state laws and codes, to place the following curb or pavement markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such markings shall have the following meanings: 
(1)	Red: No stopping, standing, or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus loading zone. 
(2)	Yellow: Stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight for the time as may be specified by local ordinance. 
(3)	White: Stopping for either of the following purposes: 
a.	Loading or unloading of passengers for the time as may be specified by local ordinance. 
b.	Depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox. 
(4)	Green: Time limit parking specified by local ordinance. 
(5)	Blue: Parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of disabled persons and disabled veterans. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.1102) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21458.  
Sec. 10-3-115. - Restrictions on displaying vehicles for sale and on repairing vehicles parked on city streets. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any street or the right-of-way of any street within the city, or upon any arterial or expressway, or the right-of-way of any arterial or expressway for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(b)	This restriction shall not apply to any vehicle parked contiguous to the property in which the registered owner of the vehicle resides. 
(c)	It is unlawful for any person to grease, maintain, or repair a vehicle while such vehicle is parked on any city street, except when such repair is necessitated by an emergency. 
(d)	The provisions of Vehicle Code § 22651.9 governing removal of vehicles parking for the primary purpose of sale may be applied in enforcing this section. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-3.906, 4-3.907)  
Sec. 10-3-116. - Stopping and standing in parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.902)  
Sec. 10-3-117. - No stopping zones and no parking areas; authorized. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined in this chapter and authorized by applicable codes. 
(b)	When curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb markings or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.903)  
Sec. 10-3-118. - Angle parking. 
(a)	On any of the streets or portions of streets established by ordinance as diagonal parking zones and when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except as follows: 
(1)	At the angle to the curb indicated by the signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such allotted space; or 
(2)	With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
(b)	The following streets and portions of streets shall be designated and described as "angle parking zones" in the city: 
Fifth Street—South Avenue to First Avenue 
Sixth Street—Fourth Avenue to Second Avenue 
First Avenue—Fifth Street to alleyway between Fifth Street/Sixth Street 
Second Avenue—West Avenue to alleyway between Fourth Street/Fifth Street 
Third Avenue—Fourth Street to West 
Fourth Avenue—Fourth Street to Seventh Street 
Fifth Avenue—Fourth Street to alley between Fifth Street/Sixth Street 
State Law reference— Authority to permit angle parking, Vehicle Code § 22503.  
Sec. 10-3-119. - Parking or placing of other than operable vehicles on streets. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, other than a motor vehicle in operating condition, or to place, locate or leave any other article or object on a public street, highway or alley in the city. 
(b)	Parking of trailers, semitrailers, auxiliary dollies, trailer coaches and other such vehicles shall be permitted only while such vehicle is attached to a motor vehicle suitable for drawing it upon the highway and pursuant to any other ordinance as it relates to time limitations for parking within the city. The city council may, by resolution, allow parking of trailers, trailer coaches and other such vehicles on city streets for special events as determined by the council.  
Sec. 10-3-120. - Seventy-two-hour parking limits for vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle, including a boat or trailer, to park or leave such vehicle upon any street, alley, or public parking facility for a period of 72 consecutive hours or more. For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered to have been parked or left standing for 72 or more consecutive hours if it has remained inoperable or has not been moved at least one mile during the 72-hour period. An inoperable vehicle is a vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power or a vehicle which cannot operate legally and safely on the highways of the state. Pushing or moving a vehicle a short distance or attempting to rub away the tire marking will not be considered compliance with this section. The mileage reflected on the odometer of the vehicle shall be presumed to be an accurate indication of the distance that the vehicle has or has not been moved. Obstruction of the odometer of the vehicle will result in a presumption that the vehicle has not been moved. Any law enforcement officer of the city or contracted party or company may remove any vehicle or issue a citation to any vehicle which is parked in violation of this section, in accordance with the provisions of the state vehicle code. 
(Ord. No. 435, § I, 1-16-2008)  
Secs. 10-3-121—10-3-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 5. - PUBLIC OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate parking, stopping or standing of vehicles in off-street parking facilities that it operates, Vehicle Code § 22519. 
 
Sec. 10-3-151. - Designation. 
Public off-street parking lots are hereby established in the city. Such off-street parking lots are those areas so designated by resolution.  
Sec. 10-3-152. - Method of regulation and control. 
The method of regulation and control of parking or standing of vehicles in public off-street parking lots shall be determined by the city council and may be by meters, attendants, traffic officers, police officers or any other appropriate means.  
Sec. 10-3-153. - Rates; hours of operation; rates prior to determination by city council; applicability. 
Rates to be charged for parking in public off-street parking lots and the hours during which the rates will be effective shall be established by resolution and shall be designated by appropriate markings and signs. Until the rates to be charged, if any, are determined by the city council, no charge shall be made for parking in public off-street parking lots, but this section shall not affect or apply to penalties for this section or of any regulation prescribed by the city council for the use or control of off-street parking lots.  
Sec. 10-3-154. - Parking time limits; violations of appropriate signs. 
The limit of parking time and the days and hours during which parking time limits shall apply on public off-street parking lots shall be established by resolution of the city council. When appropriate signs or markings designating such parking time limits are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on any public off-street parking lot for longer than the time permitted.  
Sec. 10-3-155. - Parking, standing or stopping within designated spaces; within driveways. 
Lines or other appropriate markings shall designate parking spaces on public off-street parking lots. When parking spaces are so designated, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle other than in a regularly designated parking or loading space, across any such line or marking or in such position that such vehicle shall not be entirely within the space so designated as a parking space. No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the free movement of vehicles into and out of any public off-street parking facility driveway or to obstruct the free movement of any vehicle from any regularly designated parking space.  
Sec. 10-3-156. - Use of designated entrances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any public off-street parking lot over any area or driveway or the portion between any curb returns which is not indicated by arrows, signs or words that it is a driveway or place for the entering of such parking lot.  
Sec. 10-3-157. - Use of designated exits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move any vehicle from any parking lot into any public way over any area except an area indicated by arrows, signs or words that it is a driveway or place for the leaving of such parking lot.  
Sec. 10-3-158. - Use of aisles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to travel in the direction opposite to that designated in one-way aisles. It shall be unlawful for any person to travel on the left side of an aisle designated for two-way traffic movement.  
Secs. 10-3-159—10-3-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 6. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 10-3-191. - Authority to determine and mark zones. 
The police chief is hereby authorized to determine and mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(1)	At any place in the central traffic district or any business district except that no loading zones shall be determined or marked in front of any place of business which has loading or unloading facilities through or by means of a rear entrance. 
(2)	Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.1101)  
Sec. 10-3-192. - Zones not to exceed certain length. 
In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.1101)  
Sec. 10-3-193. - Time limits. 
(a)	White: No stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed five minutes and such restrictions to apply between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows: 
(1)	When such zone is in front of a hotel, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
(2)	When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
(b)	Green: No standing or parking for longer than 30 minutes at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays. 
(c)	Yellow: No standing or parking for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time limit necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 30 minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.1102)  
Sec. 10-3-194. - Curb markings; not to be violated. 
When the police chief, as directed, has caused curb or pavement markings to be placed, no person shall stop or stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or within such legible pavement markings in violation of any of the provisions of section 10-3-193. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.1102)  
Secs. 10-3-195—10-3-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 7. - TRUCKS OR COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 10-3-231. - Authority to designate. 
(a)	Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six tons, the chief of police is hereby authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as a "Truck Route" or "Truck Traffic Route" for the movement of all such vehicles. 
(b)	Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the chief of police shall erect or cause to have erected and maintained appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3.1204) 
State Law reference— Local reduction of weight limits, Vehicle Code § 35701 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3-232. - Truck routes. 
The following streets and portions of streets shall be designated and described as "truck routes" in the city: 
East Avenue—North city limits to south city limits 
Railroad Avenue—South Avenue to south city limits 
South Avenue—Fourth Street to East Avenue 
Second Street—Second Avenue to North Avenue (Hwy 140) 
Third Street—North Avenue (Hwy 140) to Third Avenue 
First Avenue—Fifth Street to Fourth Street 
Second Avenue—East Avenue to alley west of Second Street 
Third Avenue—East Avenue to Fourth Street 
Fourth Avenue—Alley one-half block west of Fourth Street to Fourth Street 
Fifth Avenue—Alley one-half block west of Fourth Street to railroad tracks 
Sullivan Road—Highway 33/140 to Hunt Road 
(Ord. No. 434, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 10-3-233. - Prosecution. 
In any prosecution under this section, a showing that such vehicle was parked at a location, whether there appears to be no access other than via a public roadway, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was operated in violation of this article.  
Secs. 10-3-234—10-3-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 8. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 446, § 1, adopted October 21, 2008, repealed article 8 in its entirety. Formerly, article 8, §§ 10-3-261—10-3-271 pertained to abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 6-5.01, 6-5.02, 6-5.05, 6-5.07—6-5.09, 6-5.11—6-5.14. For similar provisions, the user's attention is directed to title 3, chapter 2, article 3, §§ 3-2-50—3-2-67. 
 
Secs. 10-3-261—10-3-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 9. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles generally, Vehicle Code §§ 21200, 39000 et seq.; authority to regulate bicycles, Vehicle Code § 21100(h); authority to regulate roller skating, skateboards, etc., Vehicle Code §§ 21967, 21969. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-3-301. - Penalties. 
(a)	In addition to any other penalty provided by this chapter, the police department or any of the members thereof, may impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and retain possession of the same until the license provided for in this article is obtained by the owner of such bicycle. 
(b)	In addition to the penalty set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the chief of police is hereby granted authority to suspend for a period of not to exceed 30 days, the registration card and license for any bicycle which is operated by the owner or rider thereof, in violation of or contrary to any law of the state, or any ordinance of the city or the provisions of this chapter, during which time the chief of police may take possession of and impound such bicycle. At the expiration of the period of suspension, the registration card and license shall be reinstated and the bicycle delivered to its owner at the city police department. 
(c)	In addition to the penalties set forth in this section, the chief of police is hereby authorized to require any minor under the age of 18 years, who operates a bicycle in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of the Vehicle Code to attend a bicycle operator's school to be conducted under the supervision of the chief of police. Such school shall be for the purpose of educating the violator regarding proper operation of a bicycle and the provisions of law applicable to bicycles. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.401)  
Sec. 10-3-302. - Bicycle license and registration. 
(a)	No person shall operate any bicycle on any street, road, highway, or other public property within the city unless the bicycle is licensed in accordance with this section. 
(b)	All registrations and licensing of bicycles is subject to the restrictions of the mandatory provisions set forth in Vehicle Code § 39000 et seq. The following sections of this article implement discretionary provisions of such Vehicle Code sections. 
(c)	The city police department is appointed as the "licensing agency," whenever that term is used in this section. However, the city council may, by resolution, appoint another city department as the licensing agency. 
(d)	Application for a bicycle license or renewal shall be made to the licensing agency upon a form provided to the city by the state. Upon receipt of a proper application, a bicycle license or renewal sticker shall be issued and shall be effective for three calendar years from January 1 of the calendar year in which it was issued (e.g., a license issued at any time during 2002 shall be valid through December 31, 2004). 
(e)	It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning the registration card or receipt issued to such person as licensee thereof to the police department, or to any other locations as designated by the chief of police, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within ten days of such sale or transfer. 
(f)	The fees for initial three-year licenses, subsequent three-year renewals, transfers, and replacements shall be as designated in the master fee resolution. Fees shall be paid to the licensing agency before each license, renewal, transfer or replacement is issued. The transfer provisions shall not apply to secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers, or to merchants for purchases of bicycles from dealers, jobbers or manufacturers in the regular course of business. 
(g)	Violation of any of the provisions of this section is an infraction, except that any fine imposed for violations of the subsections of this section shall not exceed the maximum fine as stated in Vehicle Code § 39011. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-12.201—4-12.207) 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing of bicycles, Vehicle Code § 39000 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3-303. - Removal, destruction, alteration of license plates, registration cards and frame numbers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this article; or to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, sticker, seal or registration card which has been issued pursuant to this article. However, nothing in this article shall prohibit a person designated by the chief of police from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.302)  
Sec. 10-3-304. - Public sidewalks in business district. 
No person shall ride bicycles, scooters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices upon any sidewalk in any business district. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 1(A), 8-7-2000)  
Sec. 10-3-305. - Public streets. 
Persons operating scooters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices that are not otherwise controlled by the Vehicle Code are subject to the same regulations as are pedestrians while operating these devices on public streets, alleys or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 1(B), 8-7-2000)  
Sec. 10-3-306. - Restricted areas and/or private property. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle, scooter, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices on any restricted area or any private property without the permission of the property owner or person in control of the property. The term "restricted area" shall be defined as any section of public sidewalk, walkway, public park, thoroughfare, or other area, which is clearly posted by means of signs or painted markings prohibiting the operation of such devices. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 1(D), 8-7-2000)  
Sec. 10-3-307. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person operating bicycles, scooter, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 1(C), 8-7-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21203.  
Sec. 10-3-308. - Grant of approval for use of skateboards, roller skates, scooters or similar devices in prohibited and/or restricted areas. 
The city council may, by resolution, grant approval for the use of otherwise prohibited or restricted areas for organized events utilizing any of the restricted devices for organized events of community-wide interest and importance. In granting such approval, the council may impose such conditions, restrictions and requirements as it deems necessary or desirable in order to protect the public interest and promote the general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 1(E), 8-7-2000)  
Sec. 10-3-309. - Parking bicycles on sidewalk. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to park bicycles on any public sidewalk in the city except in racks placed specifically for that purpose or in areas designated as bicycle parking areas by the chief of police. 
(b)	If no designated bicycle parking facility or rack is readily accessible, a bicycle may be parked upon a sidewalk, provided that it shall be parked so as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic.  
Secs. 10-3-310—10-3-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BICYCLE SAFETY 
 
Sec. 10-3-331. - Compliance with mechanical standards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city unless the bicycle is equipped as provided in this article, and is in a safe, mechanical condition. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.301) 
State Law reference— Bicycle equipment, Vehicle Code § 21201.  
Sec. 10-3-332. - Sirens and whistles. 
No person shall equip a bicycle with a siren or whistle or operate or use a bicycle so equipped. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.303)  
Sec. 10-3-333. - Handlebar grips. 
Every bicycle that is equipped with handlebar grips must have the grips securely glued or cemented to the handlebars. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.304) 
State Law reference— Handlebars, Vehicle Code § 21201(b).  
Sec. 10-3-334. - Carriers. 
Every bicycle equipped with a carrier must have the carrier securely attached to the bicycle. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.305)  
Sec. 10-3-335. - Towing. 
No person riding or operating a bicycle in the city shall tow any other vehicle, coaster, skateboard, or person, except that bicycle trailers used for the delivery of newspapers, magazines or merchandise may be towed when being used in such delivery service, or trailers designed specifically to carry people. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.308)  
Sec. 10-3-336. - Racing. 
A person propelling or operating a bicycle upon any street in the city shall not participate in any race, speed or endurance contest unless such race, speed or endurance contest has the written permission of the city council under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.309)  
Sec. 10-3-337. - Trick riding. 
A person riding or propelling a bicycle in the business district of the city shall not perform or attempt to perform any acrobatic, fancy or stunt riding. Any person performing acrobatic, fancy or stunt riding in those portions of the city where it is not specifically prohibited by this chapter, shall exercise due care and shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.310)  
Sec. 10-3-338. - Parking and parking spaces. 
When official signs or markings restricting parking of bicycles only, are in place in areas designated by the city council, bicycles shall be parked only in such places, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle other than a bicycle in such designated space. No person shall park a bicycle against any window or on the main traveled portion of a sidewalk in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians, traffic or property and where bicycle parking spaces have been established and designated by official signs and markings, no persons shall park a bicycle in the vicinity thereof except in such designated bicycle parking spaces. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12.311)  
Chapter 4 - REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-4-1. - Intent. 
(a)	The City Council of the City of Gustine finds that future development within the County of Merced to the year 2030 will result in traffic volumes in excess of capacity on the regional system of arterials, highways, and freeways as designated in this chapter. 
(b)	The city council finds that failure to expand the capacity of the existing circulation system will result in new development causing unacceptable levels congestion on the arterials, highways, and freeways of the regional system. 
(c)	The city council also finds and declares that, in the absence of this chapter imposing a fair-share traffic fee upon new development, existing and future sources of revenue are inadequate to fund substantial portions of the regional transportation system improvements needed to avoid unacceptable levels of congestion and related adverse impacts caused by new development. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-2. - Purpose. 
(a)	The city council finds and determines that adoption of this regional transportation impact fee ordinance will raise additional revenues needed to construct improvements to accommodate traffic that will be generated by new development within the county and City of Gustine. 
(b)	The city council also finds and declares that the regional transportation impact fee study, as amended, has determined the extent to which the new development of land will generate traffic volumes impacting the roadway system and that this chapter establishes a fair and equitable method for distributing unfunded costs of transportation improvements necessary to accommodate traffic volumes generated by such development. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-3. - Specific findings. 
The need for regional transportation improvements and for the regional transportation impact fee established by this chapter are based on the finding of the regional transportation impact fee study, as amended, prepared by the Merced County Association of Governments whose governing board is composed of city council members and county supervisors from the county's six cities and the county board of supervisors. The study has established that growth to the year 2030 will affect the entire regional transportation system and therefore that the area of impact for future development is appropriately the entire County of Merced. The study made the following additional findings: 
(1)	Population and employment within the County of Merced is anticipated to increase by 98 percent and 82 percent, respectively by the year 2030 and will result in levels of service E and F (as defined in the 1994 Highway Capacity Manual) on existing arterials, highways, and freeways. 
(2)	The regional transportation plan (MCAG, 2004) modeled and evaluated the effect of projected growth to the year 2030 on all major arterials, highways, and freeways in Merced County and found that without expansion, the transportation system would suffer severe congestion. Further, the plan showed that the recommended transportation improvements would accommodate the traffic anticipated in the year 2030 at the desired level of service D. 
(3)	Existing and future sources of public revenues are insufficient to fund all the needed transportation improvements. 
(4)	The revenues generated by this regional transportation impact fee will provide additional funds necessary to construct the transportation improvements and will help provide the additional capacity needed in the year 2030 to accommodate the traffic generated by new development in the six cities and County of Merced. 
(5)	The regional transportation impact fee is a fair and equitable method of distributing the cost of transportation improvements among the development that will generate the increased traffic. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-4. - Definitions. 
Average weekday peak-hour trips means the average number of peak-hour vehicle trips to or from a designated land use Monday through Friday. 
Development means any discretionary or ministerial action by the city resulting in the issuance of grading, building, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of occupancy issued by the city to construct, to change the use of, a building or property. 
Where development applies to a change in use of, or enlargement of an existing building, the average weekday peak-hour trips shall be only the additional trips in excess of those associated with the existing use. 
Merced County means the unincorporated areas of the County of Merced and the incorporated areas of the six cities within Merced County. 
Merced County Association of Governments or MCAG means the joint powers agency delegated to manage and administer the regional transportation impact fee and whose members are the incorporated cities and the County of Merced. 
Merced County Association of Governments Regional Transportation Impact Fee Trust Fund or trust fund means the account to which regional transportation impact fees collected under this chapter are deposited with the Merced County Treasurer by the cities and county for any lawful use as provided in this chapter. 
Peak-hour means the one-hour long period during which the maximum amount of traffic occurs. Often the peak hour is a rush period when commuters travel to and from work. 
Regional system means the following street, road, and highway segments: 
• State Highways: the portions of Interstate 5 and State Routes 33, 59, 99, 140, 152, 165 that lie within Merced County 
• Bradbury Rd. from Hwy. 165 to Hwy. 99. 
• Bloss Ave. from Hwy. 165 to Hwy. 99. 
• Westside Blvd. from Hwy. 165 to Hwy. 99. 
• Lincoln Blvd. from Hwy. 140 to Peach Ave. in Livingston. 
• Main St. in Livingston from Peach Ave. to Hwy. 99. 
• Livingston-Cressy Rd. from Hwy. 99 to Santa Fe Ave. 
• Olive Ave. from Livingston-Cressey Rd. in Livingston to Santa Fe Ave. in Winton. 
• Santa Fe Ave. from the Stanislaus County line to Hwy. 59/Olive Ave. in Merced. 
• Santa Fe Ave. from Plainsburg Rd. in Planada to the Madera County line. 
• Applegate Rd. from Hwy. 140 to Hwy. 99 in Atwater. 
• Winton Way from Hwy. 99 in Atwater to Santa Fe Ave. in Winton. 
• Buhach Rd. from Hwy. 140 to Santa Fe Ave. 
• Bellevue Rd. from Hwy. 99 to Lake Rd. or the Campus Parkway, including gaps. 
• Olive Ave. in Merced from Hwy. 59 to Campus Parkway. 
• G St. in Merced from Hwy. 99 to Bellevue Rd. 
• Mission Ave. from Hwy. 59 to Campus Parkway. 
• Plainsburg Rd. from Hwy. 99 to Hwy. 140. 
• Sandy Mush Rd. from Hwy. 59 to Hwy. 99. 
• Henry Miller Avenue-east from Interstate 5 in Santa Nella, across State Route 165 to Turner Island Road. 
• Los Banos to Gustine Route-along Volta Road, Ingomar Grade, Cottonwood Road and Hunt Road to Gustine. 
• Sandy Mush Road/Turner Island Road-west from State Route 99, across State Route 59 to Turner Island Road and south to State Route 152. 
• Washington Road-from Indiana Avenue to Highway 59. 
• Hutchins Road-from Carlucci Road to Indiana Avenue. 
• Indiana Avenue-from Highway 152 to Washington Road. 
• Walnut Avenue-in the County, from Livingston to Santa Fe Drive. 
• Le Grand Road-in the County, from Hwy 99 to Santa Fe Avenue. 
• Minturn Road-in the County, from Le Grand Road to the Madera County line. 
• Oakdale Road-in the County, from Highway 59 to the Stanislaus County line. 
• La Grange Road-in the County, from Highway 59's termination in Snelling to the Stanislaus County line. 
• Merced Falls Road-in the County, from Highway 59's termination in, Snelling to the Mariposa County line. 
• The future Campus Parkway-from Highway 99 to end of route at Yosemite Avenue or UC Merced County. 
• Gurr Road-from State Route 140 near the McSwain area to Sandy Mush Road. 
Regional transportation impact fee policy board (RTIF policy board) means those members of the MCAG Governing Board whose appointing jurisdiction has adopted this chapter. 
Regional transportation plan means the document adopted by the Merced County Association of Governments on August 19, 2004. 
RTIF means the regional transportation impact fee. 
Trip generation rate means the number of average weekday peak-hour trips generated by a particular land use. The land use categories correspond to those used in the regional travel model maintained by MCAG. The trip generation rate for each land-use category is the rate published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers ("ITE"), 6th Edition. The land use categories and peak-hour trip generation rates are as follows: 
Residential, Single-Family (ITE Code 210): 	1.00 trips per dwelling unit 
Residential, Multi-Family (ITE Code 220): 	0.61 trips per dwelling unit 
Retail Commercial, General (ITE Codes 800-912 except those listed below): 	1.86 trips per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area 
Retail Commercial, High Turnover (ITE Codes 831-837, 844-847, 851-853, 911912): 	10.86 trips per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area 
Retail Commercial, Low Turnover (ITE Codes 814, 823, 848, 860, 862, 890): 	1.25 trips per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area 
Retail Commercial, Over 50,000 sq. ft. gross floor area (ITE Code 820, and any 800-999 with 50,000+ sq. ft): 	3.58 trips per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area 
Office Commercial (ITE Codes 710-770): 	1.79 trips per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area 
Industrial (ITE Code 110-170): 	0.75 trips per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area 
 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-5. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply only to new development and to any reconstruction of existing buildings that will generate additional vehicular trips. The provisions of this chapter shall take effect August 21, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-6. - Establishment of regional transportation impact fee. 
(a)	The regional transportation impact fee is not intended to be the sole source of funding for construction of the regional system. Furthermore, the total amount of fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed the cost of construction of the regional system. 
(b)	The amount of the regional transportation impact fee shall be set forth in the transportation impact fee schedule established by resolution of the city council. The resolution shall specify the procedure by which the regional transportation impact fee is calculated. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-7. - Findings. 
The city council finds that the regional transportation impact fee study, as amended: 
(1)	Identifies the purpose of the regional transportation impact fee; 
(2)	Identifies the use to which the regional transportation impact fee will be put, including specific facilities; 
(3)	Demonstrates a reasonable relationship between the regional transportation impact fee's use and the type of development project on which the regional transportation impact fee is imposed; 
(4)	Demonstrates a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and type of development project on which the regional transportation impact fee is imposed; and, 
(5)	Shows a reasonable relationship between the amount of the regional transportation impact fee and the cost of the public facility or portion of the public facility attributable to the development on which the regional transportation impact fee is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-8. - Exemptions. 
The following developments are exempted from payment of the regional transportation impact fee required by this chapter: 
The reconstruction of any building that has been destroyed by fire, flood, or natural disaster so as the reconstructed building both continues the prior use and generates the same or fewer trips as the original building. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-9. - Credits. 
(a)	Where an applicant, otherwise subject to this chapter dedicates and/or improves those regional roads, highways, or freeways identified in Exhibit A of Ordinance No. 430. Beyond the requirements established in subsection 10-4-9(b), the applicant shall receive a credit against his regional transportation impact fee. That credit shall be an amount equal to the land value of dedicated land and/or the actual engineering and construction costs incurred at the time of the development to the extent that the MCAG has included those costs in its estimated cost of constructing the regional system. 
(b)	The regional transportation impact fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any fees and conditions imposed upon projects under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, California Environmental Quality Act, and other state and local laws, ordinances, or administrative policy which may authorize the imposition of conditions or contributions on development and the applicant shall not be entitled to any credits for such contributions or conditions. 
(c)	The in-lieu-of fee credit for any land dedications shall be based on the fair market value of the land dedicated as determined by an appraisal process with consultation with MCAG. 
(d)	Should the in-lieu-of-fee credit exceed the applicant's total regional transportation impact fee, the difference may be credited against any of the applicant's future development which would be subject to the regional transportation impact fee, or a reimbursement agreement may be entered into. 
(e)	Should a developer be required to provide improvements which benefit adjacent undeveloped land, the developer may be reimbursed for a proportionate share of the cost of such improvements under special agreements with MCAG and contingent upon future fees contributed from other benefited developments. In all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must be timed to coincide with construction of the transportation project as scheduled in the capital improvement plan adopted by MCAG. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-10. - Collection of fee. 
The regional transportation impact fee shall be collected at the time when the city grants an occupancy permit for residential structures or at the time of the issuance of a building permit for non-residential structures. 
For non-residential structures, the regional transportation impact fee may be paid in up to five equal annual installments that shall include interest subject to the approval of the city. 
For a change of use or other development subject to this chapter, that would not require a building permit, the regional transportation impact fee shall be collected at the time of the issuance of a use, development, or business license permit, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-11. - Regional transportation impact fee fund. 
(a)	All monies collected from payments of the regional transportation impact fee shall be deposited with the County Treasurer of Merced County in the trust fund. 
(b)	All monies in the trust fund shall be used solely for the delivery of the regional transportation projects identified in this chapter. Project delivery includes preparation of environmental and engineering documents, right-of-way acquisition, construction, project support, and fund administration. All interest or other earnings of the trust fund shall be credited to the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-12. - Appeal process. 
An applicant who disputes the amount of impact fee may file a written notice of appeal with the city manager or their designee. Within 15 days of the appeal, the city manager or his or her designee shall provide written notification of his/her decision. If unsatisfied with the decision of the city manager or his or her designee, the applicant may resubmit a written appeal to the city council which shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the mailing of the city manager's decision. Thereafter, the city council shall render its decision by a majority vote of those members present within 60 days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-13. - Annual fee and program review. 
(a)	The city council shall annually review, pursuant to Government Code section 66006, and if necessary amend the regional transportation impact fee program to ensure that it continues to be a fair and equitable method to distribute the costs of improvements necessary to accommodate traffic volumes generated by future growth. In adjusting the fee program, the following shall be considered: 
(1)	Adding new transportation projects that meet program criteria. 
(2)	Deleting projects that have been completed. 
(3)	Adjust the average per trip cost to reflect changes in construction costs. 
(4)	Adjust the average per-trip cost to reflect changes in land values as indicated in an annual survey of local government costs for land subject to right-of-way acquisition. 
(5)	Revise the average per-trip cost to reflect changes in the list of regional projects as that list may be amended from time to time by the RTIF Policy Board. 
(b)	Unless otherwise amended by the city council, the regional transportation impact fees listed in the transportation impact fee schedule established by resolution of the city council shall be adjusted on July 1 of each year based upon the Engineering Construction Cost Index as published by the Engineering News Record. 
(c)	Changes in the regional transportation impact fee resulting from the annual review will have no effect on fees already paid into the trust fund. 
(d)	At the time of the annual review, the city council shall make findings for any fees remaining unexpended and uncommitted in the trust fund for five or more years after deposit demonstrating a reasonable relationship between the regional transportation impact fee and the purpose for which it was charged. Unless a need for such regional transportation impact fees can be demonstrated, the unexpended or uncommitted portion including interest that has accrued, shall be refunded to the current record owner of the development project on a prorated basis. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-14. - Severability. 
If any one or more of the terms, provisions, or sections of this chapter shall to any extent be adjudged invalid, unenforceable, or void, by a court of competent jurisdiction, each and all of the remaining terms, provisions and sections of this chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall be valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 10-4-15. - Repeal. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city council may repeal this chapter by a majority vote. Such repeal shall be effective one year and 90 days after notice of such repeal is given to MCAG. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
TITLE 11 - UTILITIES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 11-1-1—11-1-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 11-2-1. - Standards. 
All drainage system improvements shall conform to the city's standard details and specifications or to any other standards approved by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8.02)  
Sec. 11-2-2. - Required improvements. 
Drainage system facilities including, but not limited to, storm sewers, drains, channel improvements, and other drainage structures will be required on all developed property within the city as determined by the city. Such improvements are the responsibility of the owners or agents of developed property. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8.03)  
Sec. 11-2-3. - Off-site improvements. 
The following off-site drainage system improvements by the owners or agents of developed property may be required: 
(1)	The development of drainage disposal facilities or financial contributions for the improvement of any existing sewage disposal system; and 
(2)	The construction of transmission lines from the proposed improvements to the site of disposal. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8.04)  
Sec. 11-2-4. - Drainage fees. 
The owners or agents of all lots to be developed within the city shall pay to the city clerk a fee for the maintenance of and capital improvements to the drainage system. Such fees shall be paid at the time of obtaining building permits. Such fees shall be set by resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 6-8.05)  
Chapter 3 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Waste management generally, Public Resources Code § 40000; authority to contract for solid waste disposal, Public Resources Code § 49300. 
 
Sec. 11-3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Combustible and semicombustible waste matter means papers, boxes, rags, clothing, old shoes, tree and shrub trimmings, dead flowers, lawn cuttings, feathers, and similar materials. 
Garbage means all animal and vegetable refuse from the kitchen. Household waste which shall have been prepared for or intended to be used as food or shall have resulted from the preparation of foodstuffs intended for human consumption shall be handled commercially. 
Noncombustible waste matter means bottles, cans, wire, broken glass, and similar materials. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.101)  
Sec. 11-3-2. - Authority of council to provide regulations. 
The council, by resolution, may provide such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or advisable to accomplish the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.113)  
Sec. 11-3-3. - Enforcement of chapter provisions; right of entry. 
All members of the police department and the health officer are hereby specifically required to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the right to enter upon all premises, except within private dwelling houses, for the purpose of ascertaining the sanitary condition of such premises and whether the provisions of this chapter are being compiled with. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.111)  
Sec. 11-3-4. - Receptacles generally. 
(a)	The city provides each business with a supplied receptacle. 
(b)	The city provides each house with two containers, one for green waste and one for regular trash. They will be on wheels and very easy to maneuver. The containers remain the property of the city and will stay with the house should you move. The containers are registered to the property address by using the serial number marked on the container. The green container is for yard waste for the purpose of composting, and the brown container is for household garbage only. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, keep, or accumulate, or cause or permit to be deposited, kept or cause to be kept, or accumulated, any garbage in or upon any lot or parcel of land or any public or private drive, alley, or street, or any house, store, restaurant, or other place in the city unless such garbage shall be enclosed in the plastic receptacles supplied by the city. 
(d)	Each such receptacle shall be kept in a convenient place easily accessible to persons engaged in the business of collecting garbage. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-2.102, 6-2.104)  
Sec. 11-3-5. - Tampering with receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or any officer or any employee of the city to interfere in any manner with any receptacle used for the accumulation or handling of garbage, or to remove any such receptacle from the location where it shall have been placed by the owner or person lawfully in control thereof, or to remove the contents from any such receptacle. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.105)  
Sec. 11-3-6. - Placing dead animals and birds in receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause or permit to be placed, in any receptacle in which garbage is placed for collection any dead animals or birds. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.106)  
Sec. 11-3-7. - Removal of garbage by unauthorized persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or convey, or cause or permit to be removed or conveyed, any garbage upon or along any public street, alley, or other public place in the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person under contract with the city for the purpose of collecting or removing garbage. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.107)  
Sec. 11-3-8. - Burying and burning garbage. 
(a)	Burying. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or bury garbage in any hole or excavation. 
(b)	Burning. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be burned any garbage. 
(Code 1966, § 6-2.108) 
State Law reference— Burning of garbage, Public Resources Code § 49600 et seq.  
Sec. 11-3-9. - Charges. 
(a)	The council shall from time to time prescribe by resolution the rates to be charged for the hauling of garbage. Such charges made to the residents and business houses of the city shall be fair and reasonable at all times and shall be based on the quantity of garbage required to be hauled. 
(b)	A charge shall be collected from all occupied premises within the city for the collection, removal, and disposal of garbage and noncombustible waste matter and for the inspections of premises by the health officer, as fixed by resolution of the council. Such charges shall be for making sanitary inspections of premises and for the collection and removal of garbage and noncombustible waste matter resulting from other than normal use of occupied premises. This shall not be construed as preventing the city from imposing reasonable extra charges for the special inspection work or for the removal of excessive amounts of garbage and noncombustible waste matter. In the event of a dispute, the council shall determine and order the number of times garbage and noncombustible waste matter shall be removed from the occupied premises. 
(c)	Such charges shall be paid to the city, and all established rules and regulations for the collection of water bills, shall apply in every particular in the collection of garbage and noncombustible waste matter bills. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-2.109, 6-2.110, 6.2-112)  
Chapter 4 - SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means a room or suite of rooms occupied by at least one family doing its cooking therein. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)	A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)	A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the industrial waste originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer; also called House connection. 
Club means an association primarily organized for some common nonprofit purpose, including lodges and fraternal orders, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Discharger means any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer. The term "industrial discharge" shall mean any person that discharges waste to a public sewer. 
Domestic sewage means waste containing human or animal excreta, and other than industrial waste. 
Dwelling group means a group or row of detached or semidetached dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having a yard or court in common, including bungalow courts, but not including automobile courts. 
Industrial plant means a plant or works producing waste material other than domestic sewage. 
Industrial user means any user engaged in the business of processing or manufacturing agricultural products, animals, poultry, goods, wares or other products of sale, resale or redelivery in processed or manufactured form. 
Industrial waste means liquid and/or solids contained within a liquid, other than domestic sewage. 
Mobile home park means land or premises used, or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by or of trailers or movable dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
Motel means a group of two or more detached or semidetached buildings containing guestrooms or apartments, and automobile storage space serving such rooms or apartments provided in connection therewith, which group is designed and used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile passengers. 
Multiple dwelling means a building occupied by three or more families, each living independently as a separate housekeeping unit, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats. 
NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
One-family dwelling means a detached building containing only one kitchen and occupied by at least one family exclusively. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 1/10 - 7 . 
Premises means a lot, parcel of land, building, or establishment. 
Public sewer means a sanitary sewer controlled by the city, a governmental agency, or public utility. 
Recreational vehicle park means land or premises used for occupancy by campers traveling by automobile or otherwise or for occupancy by trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
Sewage means a combination of liquid or water-carried human waste conducted away from residences, business buildings, and institutions which is known as domestic sewage, together with the liquid or water-carried waste resulting from a manufacturing process employed in industrial establishments, including the washing, cleaning, or drain water from such process and/or establishment which is known as industrial waste. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Suspended solid means total suspended matter which either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Two-family dwelling means a building occupied by at least two families exclusively, living independently of each other. 
Wastewater facilities means the pipelines, structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-3.101—6-3.116, 6-3.117—6-3.125, 6-3.128—6-3.130)  
Sec. 11-4-2. - Additional penalties. 
Any failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall result in an additional charge against the person or premises so failing to comply in the amount of $1,000.00. In addition, such person or premises shall be liable for any damages which occur to the public sewer as a result of such failure to comply with any provision of this chapter. Each such failure to comply and each day on which a failure to comply shall occur or continue shall be deemed a distinct and separate failure, and charges shall be applied accordingly. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.401)  
Sec. 11-4-3. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)	The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharges to the sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	The director of public works or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered proprietary. The industry shall establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)	While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, the director of public works or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injuries or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(d)	The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.305)  
Sec. 11-4-4. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)	The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or any other purpose, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided such public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.209)  
Sec. 11-4-5. - Discharge permit. 
(a)	Every person having a one-family dwelling with a sewer connection connecting with the sewer system of the city is hereby granted a permit to discharge domestic sewage from such one-family dwelling into the city sewer system. Every person whose premises, other than a one-family dwelling, in the city are now served, or which shall require service, by a connection with the city sewer system whereby the domestic sewage or industrial waste, or both, are disposed of by the city shall obtain from the city manager or authorized representative a permit to discharge such sewage and/or industrial waste. 
(b)	The application for a permit to discharge such domestic sewage or industrial waste shall be in writing and shall contain, among other things, the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)	The proposed location of the connection; 
(3)	The character of the waste or sewage proposed to be discharged; and 
(4)	Any other information which may be deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(c)	The city manager shall issue a permit to discharge sewage into the city sewer system if he finds and determines the following: 
(1)	That such sewage and waste will not result in damages to the sewer system; and 
(2)	That the pipeline in which the connection has discharged or is to discharge has sufficient capacity for the disposition of such sewage and wastes. 
(d)	Any person who shall be dissatisfied with the action of the city manager in denying a permit, granting a permit wherein conditions are imposed, or in modifying or revoking a permit, or with any other order of the city manager in which such person may be affected, within 30 days after the date of such action of the city manager, may appeal to the council by giving notice thereof to the city manager and to the city clerk. In the event of such appeal, the city manager shall transfer to the council a report setting forth the reasons for denying the permit, requiring a change in the permit, imposing conditions prior to granting the permit, or modifying or revoking the permit, or the reasons for any other order made by the city manager affecting the person appealing. The council shall have the full power to review any action on the part of the city manager or any order made by him, and the determination of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-3.301—6-3.304)  
Sec. 11-4-6. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly to a public sewer the following wastes: 
(1)	Any water or waste having a temperature exceeding 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius); 
(2)	Any water or waste having a pH lower than six or higher than nine or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damages or hazards to pipelines, structures, or equipment of the wastewater facilities or to personnel who operate and maintain the system; 
(3)	Any water or waste containing synthetic detergents in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or create problems in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(4)	Any water or waste containing BOD, suspended solids, fats, oil, or grease of such character and quantity which would harm the wastewater facilities or cause unusual attention or expense to be required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; 
(5)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, or fuel oil or any liquid, solid, or gas which would cause, or tend to cause, flammable or explosive conditions to result in the wastewater facilities; 
(6)	Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases or pollutants in such quantities which, alone or in combination with other waste substances, may create a hazard for humans, animals, or the local environment, interfere detrimentally with or jeopardize the integrity of the wastewater facilities, cause a public nuisance, cause any hazardous condition to occur in the wastewater facilities or endanger public safety, cause violations of effluent or water quality limitations, or preclude the selection of the most cost-effective alternative for wastewater treatment and sludge disposal; 
(7)	Any solid or viscous substance of such quantity which may cause obstructions to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to proper wastewater facilities operations. Such objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, and other similar paper products, either whole or ground; 
(8)	Any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, or lawn sprays, cooling water, or any other uncontaminated water; 
(9)	Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations; 
(10)	Any nonbiodegradable cutting oil, commonly called soluble oil, which forms persistent water emulsions; 
(11)	Any excessive concentration of nonbiodegradable oil, petroleum oil, or refined petroleum product; 
(12)	Any dispersed biodegradable oil or fat, such as lard, tallow, or vegetable oil, in excessive concentrations which would tend to cause adverse effects on the wastewater facilities; 
(13)	Any waste with an excessively high concentration of cyanide; 
(14)	Any substance promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases; 
(15)	Any waste containing excessive quantities of iron, boron, chromium, phenol, plastic resin, copper, nickel, zinc, lead, mercury, cadmium, selenium, arsenic, or any other objectionable material toxic to humans, animals, the local environment, or to biological or other wastewater treatment processes; 
(16)	Any quantity of radioactive material waste; 
(17)	Any water or waste containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits established by the city manager; 
(18)	Quantities of flow or pollutant concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug; or 
(19)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet effluent quality limitations established by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
(b)	If waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics set forth in subsection (a) of this section and which, in the judgment of the city manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city manager may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment of an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)	Require payment to cover added capital, operating, and maintenance costs of handling and treating the wastes. 
If the city manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any water or waste, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.208)  
Sec. 11-4-7. - Damaging and obstructing sewers and drains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or permit to be placed, any bulky substance in any sewer opening or in the house connection or drain connecting with any public main or lateral sewer. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or permit to be placed, any substance having a tendency to obstruct the free flowage of such sewers or to damage them in any way. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.210)  
Sec. 11-4-8. - State and federal discharge standards. 
State or federal requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than the requirements and limitations of this chapter. These shall include federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory when promulgated. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.308)  
Secs. 11-4-9—11-4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 11-4-41. - Generally. 
(a)	Required. Every house or building shall have a house drain constructed in accordance with the city's plumbing code. Every building shall be connected to the public sewer system by a separate, independent, properly designed and constructed building sewer. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction, and methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the city's standard plans and specifications, and shall be administered by the city inspector. 
(b)	Prohibited connections. No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(c)	Time limit. All public buildings, manufacturing places, and private residences shall be connected with the public sewer system, within one month after the date of the acceptance of the sewers by the city council. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-3.201, 6-3.203)  
Sec. 11-4-42. - Sewer connection fees. 
The owners or agents of buildings to be connected with the public sewers shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.204)  
Sec. 11-4-43. - Interceptors for commercial establishments. 
All garages and washrooms for automobiles and other vehicles, restaurants, hotels, canneries, packinghouses, creameries, and butcher shops shall be provided with a proper means for intercepting mud, grease, and other things of such character which might clog the sewer system. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.202)  
Sec. 11-4-44. - Screening sewage. 
(a)	Domestic. Domestic sewage consisting essentially of human wastes may be passed into the city sewers without screening. 
(b)	Industrial. Industrial wastes, upon an order of the city manager, shall be screened through the equivalent of a screen with 16 meshes to the linear inch in both directions, with the allowance that if mechanical screens are used, openings in the screen plates shall be of equivalent screen capacity, subject to the approval of the city manager or designated representative. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.207)  
Secs. 11-4-45—11-4-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 11-4-81. - Generally. 
Every person to whom a permit shall have been granted for the discharge of domestic sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system of the city shall pay to the city for the use of such facilities a monthly sewer service charge as adopted by the council by resolution at any regular or regularly adjourned meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.211)  
Sec. 11-4-82. - More than one business in one building. 
Persons conducting more than one line of business in the same building, so arranged that the building practically comprises one store with entrances from one department to another, shall be considered as conducting one business and shall pay the sewer service charge which applies to the business carried on therein which is required to pay the highest rate. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.212)  
Sec. 11-4-83. - Industrial plants. 
(a)	In order to facilitate the determination of charges to industrial plants to be made pursuant to the provisions of section 11-4-81, each person who holds an industrial waste connection permit shall submit to the city manager or authorized representative, at the time he calls for the purpose of determining the discharge for the past month, a statement showing the gallonage of waste discharged into the city sewers during the preceding month. 
(b)	Every person operating an industrial plant and finding it impracticable to attempt to measure the discharge of waste into the city sewers by meter may determine the quantity of such sewage in such manner and by such methods as may be practical in the light of conditions and attendant circumstances of the case. Such determination shall be subject to the approval of the city manager; provided, however, that should the method of measuring the discharge of waste adopted by any person operating an industrial plant not meet with the approval of the city manager, the person operating the industrial plant shall install, at the cost of such person, a meter approved by the city manager which will accurately measure by a recording dial or device the flow into the city sewer system. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.213)  
Sec. 11-4-84. - Payment. 
The sewer service charges shall be charged, collected, and enforced in the same manner, at the same time, and by the same person as are the charges for water furnished by the city. The amount of sewer service charges shall be included in the total amount due for water. All laws, rules, and regulations of the city applicable to the charges, collection, and enforcement of rates for water furnished by the city are hereby made applicable to this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.214)  
Sec. 11-4-85. - Changes in rates. 
The city manager from time to time may submit to the council for its consideration or the council may instruct the city manager to submit changes, additions, or amendments to the rate schedule provided for in this article as may be considered necessary and/or desirable. After considering such changes, additions, or amendments, the council may change the rate schedule by resolution adopted by the council at any regular or regularly adjourned meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.215)  
Sec. 11-4-86. - Nonpayment. 
(a)	In the event of any person neglecting, failing, or refusing to pay the sewer service charges established by or pursuant to this article by the tenth day of the month following the month for which the sewer service charges are due, or in the event of any person neglecting, failing, or refusing to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter, any other applicable law, rule, or regulation of the city, or any duly authorized requirement of the city manager, the city manager shall cause the water service to be disconnected by the disconnection of the connection of the premises of such person to the city water system. 
(b)	In the event of the disconnection of any water service because of the failure of the person affected by such disconnection to pay the sewer service charges required by this article, such person shall pay to the city a charge in the amount established by resolution in addition to any and all sewer service charges due, before the premises of such person shall be again connected with the water system and served with city water. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-3.216, 6-3.217)  
Secs. 11-4-87—11-4-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - INDUSTRIAL USERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-4-121. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any industrial discharger whose discharge has been determined by the city to be unacceptable in accordance with this chapter or who disagrees with any other determination of the city may apply to the city council for a review in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)	Within 30 days of the notice of determination or order issued under this chapter, the discharger may: 
(1)	Comply with the conditions of the determination or order; or 
(2)	File with the city council an appeal of the determination or order, and request a public hearing. 
(c)	Within 30 days of the request for a public hearing, the city council shall give notice to the discharger of the time and place for the hearing, at least ten days before the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the discharger may appear personally or through counsel, cross examine witnesses, and present evidence in his own behalf. The city council shall confirm or revoke the determination or order, following presentation of all evidence. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.501)  
Sec. 11-4-122. - Pretreatment. 
(a)	Any person whose proposed discharge has been determined by the city manager to be unacceptable for discharge to the public sewer according to the provisions of this section may apply to the city for permission to pretreat the discharge. The acceptability of all pretreatment systems or devices shall be determined by the city. No pretreatment method or device shall be installed or modified without the prior approval of the city. 
(b)	In case pretreatment is required, the application for industrial waste connection permit shall include plans that indicate the method of collection and pretreatment proposed. A permit shall not be issued until such plans have been reviewed and approved by the city manager. 
(c)	Approval of a pretreatment method shall not relieve the discharger of the responsibility for complying with discharge standards as contained in the industrial waste connection permit. All costs associated with acquisition, installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of pretreatment facilities shall be borne by the discharger. In addition, any extraordinary administrative or investigative expenses incurred by the city as the result of the installation of use of pretreatment facilities shall be charged to the discharger. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.307(a))  
Sec. 11-4-123. - Monitoring. 
(a)	Periodic measurement of flow rates, flow volumes, BOD, suspended solids and such other wastewater characteristics as deemed appropriate may be required as a condition of the industrial waste connection permit. All sampling and flow measurement of industrial waste shall be performed by the city. All analysis of industrial waste shall be performed by a state-certified independent laboratory approved by the city manager. All sampling and analysis shall be performed according to appropriate procedures contained in "Standard Methods," or approved by the city manager. 
(b)	If the request is denied, the city will require the discharger to reduce the quantity and/or strength of its discharge to the limits prescribed in this section. Noncompliance with this requirement may result in the imposition of additional charges by the city as described in section 11-4-124. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.307(b))  
Sec. 11-4-124. - Industrial user fees. 
For the purpose of defraying the costs of the industrial user pretreatment program, the following additional fees shall be assessed of industrial users: 
(1)	Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance of the industrial discharge shall be negotiated at the time an industrial discharge permit is issued, based on the quantity and characteristics of the discharge. 
(2)	An industrial waste connection permit application fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(3)	A charge based on actual costs will be assessed to every applicant for sewerage discharge when the city finds that the proposed discharge requires special studies or the use of consultant services to evaluate issues including, but not limited to: adequacy of the wastewater treatment facility to accept the proposed discharge; the need for, or adequacy of, pretreatment systems; appropriateness of connection fees and capacity fees; and environmental studies. These charges shall not be deemed a part of the sewer connection fee and shall be paid prior to the commencement of any study. 
If special studies or consultant services are required, the city shall select the persons by whom the studies or other services will be performed and shall enter into agreements as may be necessary to bring the studies or services to completion. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.218)  
Sec. 11-4-125. - Surcharge. 
(a)	A surcharge of 300 percent of the monthly capacity or loading charge for the amount in excess of the discharge limit will be assessed. Separate surcharges will be assessed for each violated parameter (flow, BOD, suspended solids) and for each occurrence of violation. 
(b)	Surcharge fees are additive to the normal capacity and loading charges which are calculated based on the formulae prescribed by city council resolution. 
(c)	If an industrial discharger exceeds prescribed discharge limits for the same parameter for two months or more in successive calendar years, such discharger must submit a revised application for industrial waste connection permit requesting revised discharge limits. The city, at its sole discretion, may either approve or disapprove the request for revision of discharge limits. 
(d)	If the request is approved, the discharger may purchase additional capacity through payment of a fee established by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.309)  
Secs. 11-4-126—11-4-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION PERMIT 
 
Sec. 11-4-151. - Required. 
No person shall discharge any industrial waste to sewage facilities of the city without an industrial waste connection permit. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(a))  
Sec. 11-4-152. - Application and issuance. 
(a)	Applicants for a permit shall complete an application form available at the office of the city manager. The completed application form, supplementary information, and an application fee must be submitted to the office of the city manager at least 90 days prior to the intended date of initiating discharge for new dischargers. Existing industrial dischargers shall submit a completed application form to the office of the city manager within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(b)	Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the city manager shall, at his discretion, approve the permit application; approve the permit application with modifications; disapprove the permit application; or notify the applicant that additional information is needed. The city manager may request such information as he deems appropriate in addition to that requested on the permit application form. No application shall be considered complete unless the application fee is included. 
(c)	If the application is approved, the city manager shall sign and date the application form on the appropriate line. A copy of the approved application form, along with any modifications or conditions, shall be returned to the applicant. The approved and signed application form with modifications and conditions shall serve as the industrial waste connection permit until the expiration date shown on the form. 
(d)	An industrial waste connection permit shall be issued by the city manager to any discharger or proposed discharger of industrial wastewater who: 
(1)	Files an application for industrial waste connection permit as described in this chapter; 
(2)	Agrees to comply with this and all other city ordinances relating to sewerage facilities use and charges; and 
(3)	Demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city manager that the discharge will not interfere with the safe operation of the public sewer, cause upset of the treatment process, cause the city to violate its NPDES permit, or interfere with reclamation of the treated wastewater effluent or wastewater sludge. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(a), (i))  
Sec. 11-4-153. - Contents. 
An industrial waste connection permit shall specify the discharger, the discharge location, the expiration date of the permit and the allowable quantity and quality of industrial waste to be discharged to the public sewer. The permit also may require pretreatment of the industrial waste prior to discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, restriction of waste discharge to certain hours of the day or to certain months during the year, relocation of point of discharge, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs to the city occasioned by the waste discharge, and such other conditions as may be deemed necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(b))  
Sec. 11-4-154. - Altering a discharge. 
No person shall discharge industrial waste in violation of the terms and conditions set by the permit. Any discharger desiring to change the nature of the discharge or alter the pretreatment process after a permit has been issued shall obtain a new permit for the altered discharge before making the change. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(c))  
Sec. 11-4-155. - Transferability and successor in interest. 
(a)	Permits are not transferable from one location to another and all discharge of wastes shall be made strictly in accordance with all provisions contained in the permit, and at the location designated by the city in the permit. 
(b)	The city shall transfer a valid permit to the successor in title or interest of the premises for which the permit was granted if such successor files with the city a written application signed by the successor, agreeing to comply with all conditions of the permit, giving the mailing address of the successor, and such evidence of the transfer or title or interest as the city may require. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(d))  
Sec. 11-4-156. - Change of conditions or restrictions. 
The city may change the conditions or restriction of a permit as conditions require or changes in federal or state statutes or regulations dictate. The city shall specify a reasonable period of time to comply with any changes in the permit required by the city. Dischargers shall comply with changes dictated by federal or state statutes or regulations according to any time limits established by the statute or regulation. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(g))  
Sec. 11-4-157. - Time limit. 
The industrial waste connection permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed five years from the date of issuance. Ninety days prior to the expiration date of the permit, the discharger should apply for renewal of the permit or a new permit. The city manager shall review the application, and, at his discretion, renew the old permit, issue a new permit, or deny the application. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(h))  
Sec. 11-4-158. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)	The city manager may suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 45 days when such suspension is necessary to stop discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, to the local environment, or to the public sewer. Any discharger notified of suspension of his permit shall immediately cease and desist the discharge. If the discharger fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager shall take such steps as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance. 
(b)	The council may revoke a permit upon a finding that a discharger has violated any provisions of this chapter or any terms and conditions of the permit. No revocation shall be ordered until a hearing has been held by the council. At the hearing, the discharger may appear personally or through counsel, cross examine witnesses, and present evidence on his own behalf. Notice of the hearing, and a description of the issues to be considered, shall be given to the discharger at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)	Any discharger whose permit has been revoked shall immediately stop all discharges of liquid-carried wastes covered by the permit. The city manager may disconnect or permanently block from the public sewers any discharge whose permit has been revoked if such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order of revocation. Before any further discharge of industrial waste may be made by the discharger, he must apply for a new permit, pay all charges that would be required upon initial application, and pay all delinquent fees, charges, and penalties he may owe to the city. Costs incurred to the city in revoking the permit and disconnecting the city sewer shall be paid by the discharger before a new permit is issued. 
(Code 1966, § 6-3.306(e), (f))  
Chapter 5 - WATER SYSTEM  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-5-1. - Authority to turn off water in emergency. 
The city shall have the right and power to turn off the water in the mains and pipes of the water system without notice at any time, in case of an emergency.  
Sec. 11-5-2. - Regulations during water shortages. 
The department of public works, with the approval of the city council, during a time of serious water shortage or expected water shortage, may declare a limited period or certain hours each day when water may be used for irrigation purposes or any purposes other than actual house or sanitary purposes. All persons violating such regulations, if declared, will be subject to penalties as set forth in this chapter.  
Sec. 11-5-3. - Application for water service; contents of application. 
Before water may be served from the city water mains to any person or premises, such person or the owner or occupant of such premises shall make a written application for such service upon a form provided by the city at the office of the city clerk. The information, required in all instances where application is made for water, shall include the name and address of the applicant, name of the street upon which such property fronts and the official house number, if any, assigned to the premises for which water is desired, together with the applicants status as owner or lessee. 
(Code 1966, § 6-4.08)  
Sec. 11-5-4. - Deposits by applicants for water service. 
(a)	Every application for water service shall be accompanied by cash deposits which shall be adopted by resolution. A service charge as established by resolution shall also be paid with each application. An applicant for water service whose credit with the city has been previously established need make no deposit. The payment by any person of his water bill by the 15th of each month to the city for a period of at least one year shall be presumed to have established acceptable credit for such purposes with the city. 
(b)	Lessors or renters of the premises upon which water service is furnished who have paid their water bills to the city by the 20th of each month for a period of a least one year shall, upon demand, have their deposits as provided in subsection (a) of this section returned to them when their accounts are closed, but the amount of any unpaid bills shall be deducted from such deposit before such deposit is returned. No deposit need be returned without the surrender of the receipt issued therefor. At the expiration of one year after a closing bill has been rendered, the amount of the deposit or the balance thereof shall be forfeited and the same shall be transferred to the water operating fund.  
Sec. 11-5-5. - Location of water meters. 
Water meters are to be located in the public rights-of-way unless permission for another location is granted by the city when it is not practical to place such meter in the right-of-way. Water meters shall not be placed in driveways unless permission is granted by the city.  
Sec. 11-5-6. - Water meter serving two or more independent consumers. 
(a)	Where a premises served with one meter is occupied by two or more independent consumers under one ownership, the lessor or renter making application for service shall be required to sign the application for service, thereby being responsible for all bills connected with water service at such premises. 
(b)	The owner may have separate services installed for each independent consumer, if he wishes, as an alternative to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 6-4.08)  
Sec. 11-5-7. - Bypassing water around meter. 
All city water used on any premises served with a meter must pass through the meter. No bypass or connection around any meter shall be installed, maintained or used. Consumers shall be held responsible, and charged for, all water passing through the meter or meters serving those consumers.  
Sec. 11-5-8. - Water service extensions. 
(a)	Upon the application of a bona fide applicant for service, the city shall, at its own expense, furnish and install service pipe of suitable capacity for a distance of not more than 60 feet from its water mains to the curbline or property line of property abutting upon public street, highway, alley, lane, or road along which it already has water mains. 
(b)	The consumer, at his own expense, shall install that portion of the service inside the curb or property line. Such installation shall include a shutoff valve inside the property line at a location accessible in case of an emergency. The materials furnished by the consumer in the construction of such service extension shall at all times be and remain the sole property of the consumer and, when necessary, shall be maintained and repaired by the consumer at his own expense.  
Sec. 11-5-9. - Permit to tap, open or connect with fixtures and water mains or pipes. 
No person shall tap, open or connect with any fixture or water main or pipe which forms any part of the system of the waterworks of the city without first notifying and obtaining permission from the city, and no permit shall be given to any person whose indebtedness to the city for water or damage to fire hydrants, meters, pipes or fixtures, is delinquent, or who has on one or more occasions taken water from the distributing system without having received permission as provided in this section.  
Sec. 11-5-10. - Duties of plumber connecting service pipe. 
Whenever any plumber or any other person connecting a service pipe to the property side of the meter shall use the water for testing the pipes, they must leave the service box in as good condition as found, and shall leave the water shut off if found so, and shall notify the city at the time the connection is made. Any damage caused by the carelessness of any plumber or other person to any part of the meter box or connection shall be charged to and paid by such plumber or other person.  
Sec. 11-5-11. - Check valves. 
If the placing of an approved check valve or other device on the side of the meter of any consumer is necessary for the safety and protection of the water system or appliances thereof, such check valve, after approval by the city, shall be immediately installed inside the property line by and at the expense of the consumer, at the order of the city.  
Sec. 11-5-12. - Shutoff valves. 
The city may require any water service to be equipped with an adequate shutoff valve (not a cock) at the expense of the consumer or owner within 30 days of notice to that effect by the city to install the same. Whenever the city requires a water service to be equipped with such an adequate shutoff valve, such valve shall be located inside the property line and on the street side of any fixture, including sprinklers. In a business zone the required shutoff valve may be located between the property line and the meter, but a minimum of two feet away from the meter and in a safe adequate box approved by the city.  
Sec. 11-5-13. - Taking water from an unmetered or portable metered outlet. 
(a)	No person, within or without the city, may take water from an unmetered outlet of the water system without making application to and receiving permission from the city. 
(b)	Applicants receiving permission to take water shall pay the rates as established by resolution for streets, subdivisions, and other development projects including underground utilities such as storm, sanitary and water mains, or apply for a portable water meter and pay the rates as established in such resolution.  
Sec. 11-5-14. - Private connections to city water supply; emergency connection installed by the city. 
No person shall install, maintain or use any physical connection between any private source of water supply and the city water supply; however, subject to the approval of the board of health of the state, the city may install and maintain emergency connections with other public utilities serving for domestic use.  
Sec. 11-5-15. - Services and water meters to the property of department of public works; maintenance of services and water meters. 
All services and water meters installed by the city shall remain the property of the city and shall be maintained, renewed and repaired by the city when rendered unserviceable through ordinary usage; provided, however, that where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the consumer, or any member of his family or person in his employ, any expense caused thereby shall be charged against and collected from the consumer in the same manner as a water bill.  
Sec. 11-5-16. - Faucet required with temporary connections. 
Consumers using a temporary connection for water service shall place a faucet inside the property line, and no excavation for such connection, if located on city property, shall be kept open or unguarded. The service or meter box shall be kept in the same condition as the city left it; namely, not dangerous to the public.  
Sec. 11-5-17. - Fire hydrants generally. 
(a)	Fire hydrants are provided for use in extinguishing fires, flushing mains and emergency uses, and shall be opened and used only by the public works or the fire department of the city, or by such persons authorized to do so by the city manager. 
(b)	All persons using water through fire hydrants or other hydrants owned or controlled by the city shall be required to get a permit to do so from the city, which shall give no such permit to any person who has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or whose indebtedness to the city for water used, or damage to hydrants, meters, pipes or fixtures, is delinquent. 
(c)	Every person authorized to open fire hydrants shall be required to replace caps on the outlets when such hydrants are not in use. Failure to do so shall be deemed sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal to grant subsequent permits for the use of such fire hydrants.  
Sec. 11-5-18. - Damage to system. 
Where fire hydrants, meters, pipes or other fixtures, any of which being the property of the city, are broken off or damaged, the total cost of damage and the labor shall be paid by the person responsible for such damage and loss.  
Sec. 11-5-19. - Opening street hydrants or other parts of system; meddling with street service; drawing water from mains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open any street hydrant or stopcock, gate, valve, or to meddle with any street service, water connection or any water meter connected to any service pipe connected with the water mains or water pipes of the city; to turn on or off water mains or water pipes of the city; to tap, break or injure any water mains or water pipes of the city, laid in any street, avenue or alley, or other public place; to tap any water service pipe between the point of connection with the main and the meter; to take or draw water from the mains, pipes or hydrants of the city, without paying established rates thereof; or in any way to trespass upon the public property of the department of public works without permission first being obtained from the city.  
Sec. 11-5-20. - Use of water by consumer; leaks; wasting water. 
No consumer shall supply water to any person other than the occupants of the premises of such consumer; provided, however, that such consumer may supply water to such persons for use on the premises or in the performance of any contract for the improvement of the street or other public place after having given notice and received permission from the city. No consumer shall permit leaks or waste of water.  
Sec. 11-5-21. - Steam boilers, hydraulic elevators, pressure pumps or similar apparatus; alternative. 
(a)	No person shall draw water from the city's water main into any steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, pressure (25 pounds or more) pump or similar apparatus. The owner in such case shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply for a least 12 hours, into which tank water direct from the city main shall empty in such a manner as to positively eliminate backsiphoning, and there shall be no cross connections. 
(b)	As an alternative to subsection (a) of this section, the consumer may provide a service valve ahead of any steam boiler, hydraulic elevator or pressure pump, after such service valve shall be approved by the city.  
Sec. 11-5-22. - Cross connection control and backflow prevention. 
(a)	Health regulations. No physical connection between the potable water supply of the city and that of any other water supply source will be permitted except in compliance with the current regulations of the state department of health services contained in title 17 of the California Code of Regulations, chapter 5, group 4, sections 7583—7605 (hereafter known as state regulations). 
(b)	City requirements. To comply with the state regulations, the city requires installation of approved backflow protection devices at a location approved by the city pursuant to state regulation by, and at the expense of the customer, before service will be granted under any of the following conditions: 
(1)	When an approved fresh water supply is already available from a well, spring, reservoir, or other source. If the customer agrees to abandon this other supply and agrees to remove all pumps and piping necessary for utilization of this supply, the installation of backflow prevention devices will not be required. 
(2)	When nonpotable water, or water otherwise polluted, is available for industrial or fire protection purposes, or where fresh water hydrants are or may be installed. 
(3)	Where the premises are now or may be engaged in processes, which produce industrial wastes, or where the premises are or may be engaged in handling sewage or any other dangerous substances. 
(4)	Where the premises are such that there is special danger of backflow of sewage or other contaminated liquids through plumbing fixtures of water-using or treating equipment, or storage tanks and reservoirs. 
(5)	Where an approved water supply line terminates at an outlet, which is used to supply water for construction or other activities where water is transported. These installations shall be located where they will prevent the return of any water from a vessel or any other source into the approved water supply line. 
(c)	Plumbing changes required. In special circumstances, where the customer is engaged in the handling of especially dangerous or corrosive liquids, or light industrial or process water, the city may require the customer to eliminate certain plumbing or piping connections as an additional precaution and as a protection to the backflow prevention devices. In making plumbing connections beyond the backflow prevention device to the service, the customer shall be guided entirely by local or state regulations, and not by the city. 
(d)	Relief valve required. As a protection of the customer's plumbing system, a suitable pressure relief valve must be installed and maintained by the customer, and at the expense of the customer, when backflow prevention devices are used. The relief valve shall be installed between the backflow device and the water heater, in accordance with the local or state plumbing ordinances and the state regulations, and not pursuant to any regulations or rules of the city. 
(e)	Backflow protection on additional water supply lines. Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a customers premises, then any and all water supply lines from the city's mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow device in conformance with state regulations, regardless of the use of the additional water supply lines. 
(f)	Protection against interstreet main flow. Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building structure or premises through which an inter-street main flow may occur shall have an approved backflow device on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the private property side of the respective meter or service lines. 
(g)	Inspection of backflow prevention devices. The double check valve or other approved backflow protection devices may be inspected and tested periodically for watertightness by the city. In addition, the state regulations require that the owner of any premises on which check valves or other protective devices are installed shall have the device inspected by a certified backflow device tester for watertightness and reliability at least once every year. The devices shall be serviced annually, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found defective, and all costs of repair and maintenance shall be borne by the customer, in accordance with state regulations. 
(h)	Discontinuance of service for defective apparatus. The service of water to any premises may be immediately discontinued by the city if any defect is found in the backflow device installation or other protective devices, if it is found that dangerous unprotected cross connections exist, or the customer fails to comply with the state regulations, including the annual inspections and testing. Services will not be restored until such defects are corrected by and at the expense of the customer. 
(Code 1966, § 6-4.32; Ord. No. 2001-417, § I, 6-4-2001)  
Sec. 11-5-23. - Restrictions on potable water use. 
(a)	No person shall irrigate outdoor ornamental landscapes or turf with potable water more than two days per week (calculated as Sunday through Saturday). In addition, customers with street addresses ending in odd numbers shall only irrigate outdoor ornamental landscapes or turf with potable water on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Customers with street addresses ending in even numbers or without street addresses shall only irrigate outdoor ornamental landscapes or turf with potable water on Wednesdays and Sundays. 
(b)	Each of the following actions is prohibited, except where necessary to address an immediate health and safety need or to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a state or federal agency: 
(1)	The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures; 
(2)	The use of a hose that dispenses potable water to wash a motor vehicle, except where the hose is fitted with a shut-off nozzle or device attached to it that causes it to cease dispensing water immediately when not in use; 
(3)	The application of potable water to driveways and sidewalks; and 
(4)	The use of potable water in a fountain or other decorative water feature, except where water is part of a recirculating system. 
(c)	In addition to any other remedies provided by state law or this Code, violations of this section shall be an infraction. In its discretion, the city may issue administrative citations pursuant to chapter 7 of title 2 of this code for any violations. However, in the event of any appeal, the city manager or the planning commission, at the election of the appellant, shall act as the hearing officer pursuant to the procedures in article 3 of chapter 7 of title 2. All appeals shall be heard within 30 days of the date of the notice of appeal unless agreed to by the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 465, § 2, 8-5-2014)  
Secs. 11-5-24—11-5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - PROPERTY LOCATED WITHIN CITY 
 
Sec. 11-5-51. - Rates and charges. 
Rates and charges for metered water sold within the city for all uses shall be as established by resolution.  
Sec. 11-5-52. - When minimum charge applicable. 
Where the period of service within the city is less than one full month and the water consumed is less than the minimum, the minimum charge shall prevail; if the water consumed is more than the minimum, the meter reading shall prevail.  
Sec. 11-5-53. - Service charges for initial installation. 
Service charges for initial installation of water services within the city for all uses shall be established by council resolution and shall be paid at the time of application.  
Sec. 11-5-54. - Service charge where metered service already exists. 
Where a meter service within the city already exists, a service charge as established by resolution shall be paid by each applicant at the time of applying for service.  
Sec. 11-5-55. - Installation of a larger meter. 
The cost to the consumer for replacing a three-quarters-inch or larger meter with a larger meter within the city shall be determined by resolution.  
Secs. 11-5-56—11-5-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - PROPERTY OUTSIDE CITY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-5-91. - Rates and charges. 
Rates and charges for metered water sold without the city for all uses shall be as established by resolution.  
Sec. 11-5-92. - When minimum charge applicable. 
Where the period of service without the city is less than one full month and the water consumed is less than the minimum, the minimum charge shall prevail; if the water consumed is more than the minimum, the meter reading shall prevail.  
Sec. 11-5-93. - Installation of water service. 
(a)	Generally. Charges for installation of a water service outside the city where an existing water main is available, shall be the cost of labor and material necessary to install the service. 
(b)	Labor charges; cost of materials; estimate; refunds. Labor charges for installation of a water service outside the city will be based on the wage scale of the man performing the labor. Cost of materials, including all pipes, fittings, meter, meter box, material, etc., necessary to install a service from the water main to and including meter, will be based on the cost of material to the city. The city shall make an estimate of the service to be installed and the applicant shall make a deposit of this amount with the finance department at the time of the application, any overcharge will be refunded and any undercharge will be billed to the applicant on completion of installation.  
Secs. 11-5-94—11-5-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXTENSIONS 
 
Sec. 11-5-121. - Scope. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to extension of water mains and water service outside the city.  
Sec. 11-5-122. - Application for new water main and water service. 
Application may be made by a person outside the city for a new water main and water service to be installed from the nearest existing water main to a point where water service is required. Application for a new water main and water service outside the city shall be made to the city manager and subject to the approval of the city council. If the city council believes the additional water service outside the city would for any reason endanger the existing water supply of the city, they may reject the application.  
Sec. 11-5-123. - Commencement of work; reimbursement agreement. 
If the council approves the extension of a water main, the property owner shall construct such main to serve his property. The city may elect to oversize such main. The city shall enter into a ten-year reimbursement agreement with the property owner whereby any adjoining property owners electing to connect to the new main shall pay a front footage charge to be reimbursed to the property owner constructing the water main. Such reimbursement agreement shall be on terms approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the department of public works, shall be in effect ten years from the date of signing and shall be void after such ten-year period.  
Sec. 11-5-124. - Water mains of recognized subdivision may serve one or more water services. 
A water main laid on any road, street, avenue, alley, regularly accepted right-of-way or regularly accepted streets or alleys of a recognized subdivision outside the city may serve one or more water services.  
Sec. 11-5-125. - Limit on water service. 
Each water service shall be limited to one premises only, and such service shall not be extended to other premises.  
Sec. 11-5-126. - New water mains or services to be property of city. 
Any new water main or service installed under the conditions of this article shall remain at all times the property of the city, be subject to all regulations governing the department of public works, and be accessible to the city at all times.  
Secs. 11-5-127—11-5-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 11-5-161. - Payment and collection generally. 
Water rates and charges fixed and established by this chapter shall be paid by consumers and shall be collected by the finance department.  
Sec. 11-5-162. - Nonpayment of water bills; notice to consumer. 
Charges for water service and use become delinquent if not paid on or before the last day of the month billed. If a bill for services becomes delinquent, the finance department shall send the user a written notice that if the bill is not paid within five days, the water service shall be discontinued.  
Sec. 11-5-163. - Penalty for delinquency. 
Unpaid water charges become delinquent after the last working day of the month billed. There shall be imposed a penalty equal to ten percent of the amount due which shall be charged for each month of delinquency after the last working day of the original billing.  
Sec. 11-5-164. - Customer's checks returned unpaid by banks. 
All checks returned to the city for insufficient funds or accounts closed shall be subject to a handling fee as established by resolution which shall be paid to the city, and the service shall be considered delinquent as set forth in this article.  
Sec. 11-5-165. - Reconnection of service upon payment of delinquent account. 
If service is disconnected because of such delinquency, a charge as established by resolution shall be made for reconnection; provided, however, that no such reconnection shall be made until the delinquent account is paid.  
Sec. 11-5-166. - Turning on of water after service is discontinued. 
Where a service has been discontinued for nonpayment of bills and the owner or consumer has turned the water on again, or permitted the water to be turned on at the service, the meter will be turned off and locked, and a charge as established by resolution shall be made to turn on the service.  
Sec. 11-5-167. - Discontinuance of water service. 
On failure to comply with the rules and regulations established as a condition of the use of water, or to pay the rates or any penalty imposed in the time and manner provided by this article, water may be shut off on any and all services where the delinquent consumer is being supplied with water, until payment of all amounts due is made with additional charges for reconnection as established by resolution.  
Sec. 11-5-168. - Adjustment of complaints. 
The department of finance shall have the power to adjust complaints, and in the event of any dispute as to the water charges to be paid by any water consumer, the finance department shall determine the charges, subject to the approval of the city council.  
Sec. 11-5-169. - Charges where house, building or part of a building becomes vacant; request for the discontinuance of service. 
In case a house or other building or part of building where water is furnished becomes vacant, the regular rate shall be charged and collected from the owner or renter thereof, whether water is used or not, unless the city is notified thereof in writing, requesting discontinuance of service.  
Sec. 11-5-170. - Defective water meters. 
If a meter fails to register during any period, or is known to register inaccurately, the consumer shall be charged with the minimum for the service in question.  
Sec. 11-5-171. - Examinations of meters at consumer's request. 
(a)	Any consumer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished, be examined and tested by the city for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the amount of water which is being delivered through it. Such demand shall be made in writing to the city and shall be accompanied by a deposit as established by resolution. It shall be the duty of the city to cause the meter to be examined and tested for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the water being delivered through it. 
(b)	If upon examination and test, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the meter shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, the fee as established by resolution shall be returned to the person making the application and the water bill for the previous billing period adjusted in such a manner as the city manager may deem fair and just. If the meter is found to register not over three percent high, the fee shall be forfeited to the city and the water bill paid as rendered. 

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA 
Zoning-Subdivision


ARTICLE 1 - APPLICABILITY AND ZONING MAP
CHAPTER 4-10. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CODE
Sections:

Sec. 4-10-010. - Purposes of the Zoning and Subdivision Code.
The City of Gustine Zoning and Subdivision Code carries out the policies of the Gustine General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and
structures within the City, consistent with the General Plan. This Zoning and Subdivision Code is adopted to protect and to promote the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of residents, and businesses in the City. More specifically, the purposes of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code are to:
A.

Provide standards and guidelines for the continuing orderly growth and development of the City that will assist in protecting the rural character
and community identity of Gustine;

B.

Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan transportation, water supply, sewerage, energy, and other public
facilities and utilities;

C.

Minimize automobile congestion through pedestrian-oriented development, compact community form, safe and effective traffic circulation, and
adequate on- and off-street parking facilities; and

D.

Ensure compatibility between different types of development and land uses.

Sec. 4-10-020. - Authority for the Zoning and Subdivision Code.
This Zoning and Subdivision Code is enacted based on the authority vested in the City of Gustine by the State of California, including but not limited to:
the State Constitution; the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.); the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section
66410 et seq.), and the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.).
Sec. 4-10-030. - Responsibility for Administration.
This Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be administered by: the Gustine City Council, hereafter referred to as the "Council;" the Planning Commission,
referred to as the "Commission;" the City Manager's designee; the Planning Director, referred to as the "Director;" and the Gustine Community
Development Department, Planning Division, hereafter referred to as the "Department." See also Chapter 4-70 (Zoning and Subdivision Code
Administration).
Sec. 4-10-040. - Applicability of the Zoning and Subdivision Code.
This Zoning and Subdivision Code applies to all land uses, subdivisions, and development within the City of Gustine, as follows.
A.

New land uses or structures, changes to land uses or structures. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Zoning and Subdivision Code for
any person to establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace any use of land or structure, except in compliance with the requirements of
Section 4-22.020 (General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses), and Chapter 4-72 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and
Parcels). No Building Permit or Grading Permit shall be issued by the City unless the proposed construction complies with all applicable
provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

B.

Subdivisions. Any subdivision of land proposed within the City after the effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be consistent
with the minimum lot size requirements of Article 3 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, anoning Standards), Article 6 of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code (Subdivision Regulations and Procedures), and all applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

C.

Continuation of an existing land use. An existing land use is lawful and not in violation of the Zoning and Subdivision Code only when operated
and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, including Chapter 4-72 (Nonconforming Uses,
Structures, and Parcels). However, the requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code are not retroactive in their effect on a land use that
was lawfully established before the effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or any applicable amendment, except as otherwise
provided by Chapter 4-72

D.

Effect of Zoning and Subdivision Code changes on projects in progress.
1.

A planning permit application (see Article 5 - Planning Permit Procedures) that has been accepted by the Department as complete prior to
the effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or any amendment shall be processed in compliance with the requirements in effect
when the application was accepted as complete if said application is vested. If the application is not vested, then said application and
development shall comply with the new Zoning and Subdivision Code.

2.

A project that is under construction on the effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or any amendment, need not be changed to
satisfy any new or different requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, provided that the approved use of the site shall be
established, including the completion of all structures and other features of the project as shown on the approved permit, before the

1/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
expiration of the permit, or applicable time extension.
E.

Minimum requirements. The provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare. When this Zoning and Subdivision Code provides for discretion on the part of a City official or body, that
discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than set forth in this Zoning and Subdivision Code, as may be determined
by the applicable review authority to be necessary to promote orderly land use and development, environmental resource protection, and the
other purposes of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

F.

Conflicting requirements:
1.

Zoning and Subdivision Code, and Municipal Code provisions. If conflicts occur between requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision
Code, or between this Zoning and Subdivision Code, the City of Gustine Municipal Code, or other regulations of the City, the most
restrictive shall apply.

2.

Development agreements or specific plans. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code and
standards adopted as part of any development agreement or applicable specific plan, the requirements of the development agreement or
specific plan shall apply.

3.

Private agreements. This Zoning and Subdivision Code applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a
greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or restriction (for example, CC&Rs),
without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The City shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is
a party to the covenant or agreement, or a portion thereof.

G.

Other requirements may apply. Nothing in this Zoning and Subdivision Code eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by
the City, or any permit, approval or entitlement required by any other applicable special district or agency, and/or the regulations of any State or
Federal agency.

Sec. 4-10-050. - Rules of Interpretation.
A.

Authority. The City Manager or designee, commonly referred to as Planning Director or Director, has the authority to interpret any provision of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code. Whenever the City Manager's designee determines that the meaning or applicability of any Zoning and Subdivision
Code requirement is subject to interpretation, the Director may issue an official interpretation. The City Manager's designee may also refer any issue
of interpretation to the Commission for their determination.

B.

Language. When used in this Zoning and Subdivision Code, the words "shall," "must," "will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is
not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense
includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word
indicates otherwise. The words "includes" and "including" shall mean "including but not limited to . . ."

C.

Time limits. Whenever a number of days is specified in this Zoning and Subdivision Code, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice provided
in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. A time limit shall extend to 5 p.m. on
the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday.

D.

Zoning Map boundaries. See Section 4-20.020 (Zoning Map and Zoning Districts).

E.

Allowable uses of land. See Section 4-20.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements).

F.

State law requirements. Where this Zoning and Subdivision Code references applicable provisions of State law (for example, the California
Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, or Public Resources Code), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable State law provisions as
they may be amended from time to time.

CHAPTER 4-12. - ZONING MAP
Sections:

Sec. 4-12-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the City and adopts the City's Zoning Map.
Sec. 4-12-020. - Zoning Map and Zoning Districts.
The Council hereby adopts the City of Gustine Zoning Map (hereafter referred to as the "Zoning Map"), which is on file with the Department. The Zoning
Map is hereby incorporated into this Zoning and Subdivision Code by reference as though it were fully included here.
A.

Zoning districts established. The City of Gustine shall be divided into zoning districts that implement the Gustine General Plan. The zoning
districts shown in Table 1-1 are hereby established, and shall be shown on the Zoning Map.

B.

Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official
Zoning Map, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the Director as follows.
1.

Where district boundaries approximately follow lot, alley, or street lines, the lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be construed as

2/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
the district boundaries;
2.

If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the Zoning Map, the location
of the boundary will be determined by using the scale appearing on the Zoning Map; and

3.

Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the street or alley will be included within
the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side of the vacated or abandoned street or alley.
TABLE 1-1 - ZONING DISTRICTS

Zoning

Name of Zoning District

General Plan Designation
Implemented by Zoning District

District
Symbol
Residential Districts
R-E

Residential Estate

Residential Estate

R-1

Single-Family Residential

Low Density Residential

R-2

Medium Density Residential

Medium Density Residential

R-3

Multiple Residential

Medium/High Density Residential

P-D

Planned Development

Planned Development

Commercial Districts
C-N

Neighborhood Commercial

Neighborhood Commercial

C-O

O ce Commercial

O ce Commercial

C-1

Downtown Commercial

Retail Business District

C-2

General Commercial

General and Service Commercial

C-H

Highway Commercial

Highway Commercial

Industrial and Public Districts
I

Controlled Industrial

Controlled Industrial

M

Manufacturing

Manufacturing

A-C

Agricultural-Commercial

Agricultural Commercial

AP

Airport

Public

P-I

Public/Institutional

Public, Open Space

Combining Districts
-MU

Mixed Use

Mixed Use

ARTICLE 2 - ALLOWABLE LAND USES AND ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS

3/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

CHAPTER 4-20. - DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-20-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter describes the City's requirements for the approval of proposed development and new land uses. The permit requirements established by
this Zoning and Subdivision Code for specific land uses are in Chapters 4-22 through 4-28.
Sec. 4-20-020. - General requirements for development and new land uses.
Each land use and/or structure shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or replaced in compliance with the following
requirements.
A.

Allowable use. The land use shall be allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in the zoning district applied to the site. The basis for
determining whether a use is allowable is described in Section 4-20.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements).

B.

Permit and approval requirements. Any planning permit or other approval required by Section 4-20-030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit
Requirements) shall be obtained before the issuance of any required grading, building, or other construction permit, and before the proposed
use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in Section 4-20-040 (Exemptions from Planning
permit Requirements).

C.

Development standards, conditions of approval. Each land use and structure shall comply with the development standards of this Chapter, the
provisions of Article 3 (Site Planning, Design, and Operational Standards), and any applicable conditions imposed by a previously granted
planning permit.

D.

Legal parcel. The site of a proposed development or new land use shall be a parcel that was legally created in compliance with the Subdivision
Map Act and the City's Subdivision Ordinance.

Sec. 4-20-030. - Allowable land uses and planning permit requirements.
A.

Allowable land uses. The uses of land allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in each zoning district are listed in Chapters 4-22, 4-24, and 4-26
(Tables 2-1, 2-4, and 2-7, respectively), together with the type of planning permit required for each use. Each land use listed in Tables 2-1, 2-4, and 2-7
is defined in Article 8 (Glossary).
1.

Establishment of an allowable use.
a.

Any one or more land uses identified by Tables 2-1, 2-4, and 2-7 as being allowable within a specific zoning district may be established on
any parcel within that zoning district, subject to the planning permit requirements of Subsection B, and compliance with all applicable
requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

b.

Where a single parcel is proposed for development with two or more of the land uses listed in the tables, the overall project shall be
subject to the highest permit level required by Subsection B. for any individual use. For example, a new building proposed in the C-1
zoning district with an auto parts sales store on the ground floor and professional offices on the second floor would require Use Permit
(UP) approval because Table 2-4 requires Use Permit approval for "Auto parts sales with no installation services," even though an "Office Professional" is listed in the C-1 zone as a permitted use, requiring only a Zoning Clearance.

2.

Use not listed.
a.

A land use that is not listed in Tables 2-1, 2-4, or 2-7, and is determined by the Director to not be included in Article 8 (Glossary) under the
definition of a listed land use, is not allowed within the City, except as otherwise provided Subsection A.3, or Section 4-20-040 (Exemptions
from Planning permit Requirements).

b.

A land use that is not listed in the tables within a particular zoning district is not allowed within that zoning district, except as otherwise
provided Subsection A.3, or Section 4-20-040

3.

Similar and compatible use may be allowed. The Director may determine that a proposed use not listed in this Article is allowable as follows:
a.

Required findings. The Director may determine that a proposed use is similar to, and compatible with a listed use and may be allowed,
only after first making all of the following findings:
(1)

The characteristics of, and activities associated with the use are similar to one or more of the listed uses, and will not involve a
greater intensity than the uses listed in the district;

(2)

The use will be consistent with the purposes of the applicable zoning district;

(3)

The use will be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan;

(4)

The use will be compatible with the other uses allowed in the district; and

(5)

The use is not listed as allowable in another zoning district.

A determination that a use qualifies as a "similar use" and the findings supporting the determination shall be in writing.

4/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
b.

Applicable standards and permit requirements. When the Director determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is similar to a listed use, th
be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what other standards and
Zoning and Subdivision Code apply.

c.

Referral for determination. The Director may refer the question of whether a proposed use qualifies as a similar and compatible use
directly to the Commission for a determination at a public meeting.

d.
B.

Appeal. A determination of similar and compatible use may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

Permit requirements. Tables 2-1, 2-4, and 2-7 within Chapters 4-22, 4-24, and 4-26 provide for land uses that are:
1.

Permitted subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, subject to first obtaining a Zoning Clearance
(Section 4-52-070). These are shown as "P" uses in the tables;

2.

Allowed subject to the approval of a Use Permit (Section 4-52-050), and shown as "UP" uses in the tables;

3.

Allowed subject to the type of City approval required by a specific provision of Chapter 4-44 (Standards for Specific Land Uses), and shown as "S"
uses in the tables; and

4.

Not allowed in one or more zoning districts, and shown as "-" in the tables.

Note: A land use authorized through the approval of a Zoning Clearance or Use Permit may also require Architectural Review approval (Section 4-52040), a Building Permit, or other permit required by the Municipal Code.
Sec. 4-20-040. - Exemptions from planning permit requirements.
The planning permit requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code do not apply to the land uses, structures, and activities identified by this
Section. These are allowed in all zoning districts subject to compliance with this Section.
A.

General requirements for exemption. The land uses, structures, and activities identified by Subsection B. below are exempt from the planning
permit requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code only when:
1.

The use, activity or structure is established and operated in compliance with the setback requirements, height limits, parking
requirements, and all other applicable standards of this Article (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), Article 3 (Site
Planning, Design, and Operational Standards), and, where applicable, Chapter 4-72 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels); and

2.
B.

Any permit or approval required by regulations other than this Zoning and Subdivision Code is obtained (for example, a Building Permit).

Exempt activities and land uses. The following are exempt from the planning permit requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code when in
compliance with Subsection A. above.
1.

Decks, paths and driveways. Decks, platforms, on-site paths, and driveways that are not required to have a Building Permit or Grading
Permit.

2.

Fences and walls. See Section 4-30-030 (Fences, Walls, and Screening). A Building Permit is required for any fence or wall over six feet in
height.

3.

Interior remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the gross floor area of the structure, or change the permitted use of the
structure.

4.

Repairs and maintenance.
a.

Single-family dwellings. Ordinary repairs to, and maintenance of, single-family dwellings.

b.

Multi-family, and non-residential structures. Ordinary repairs to, and maintenance of multi-family residential and non-residential
structures, if:
(1)

The work does not change the approved land use of the site or structure, or add to, enlarge or expand the land use and/or
structure; and

(2)
5.

Any exterior repairs employ the same materials and design as the original construction.

Small, portable residential accessory structures. A single portable structure not exceeding 120 square feet in size per lot or unit,
including pre-manufactured storage sheds and other small structures in residential zoning districts that are exempt from Building Permit
requirements in compliance with the Municipal Code and the Uniform Building Code. Additional structures may be approved in
compliance with Section 4-44-020 (Accessory Building and Uses), where allowed by the applicable zoning district. Additional structures may
be approved in compliance with Section 4-44-020 (Accessory Building and Uses), where allowed by the applicable zoning district.

6.

Solar collectors. The addition of solar collectors to the roof or side of a building, provided that the collectors comply with applicable height
limit requirements; and ground-mounted solar collectors that comply with the setback requirements and height limitations of the
applicable zoning district. Collectors that are not visible from off the site are subject to Architectural Review.

7.

Spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs, and constructed fish ponds, and similar equipment and structures that do not:
exceed 120 square feet in total area including related equipment; contain more than 2,000 gallons of water; or exceed three feet in depth.

8.

Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or public agency of utilities intended to service existing or
nearby approved developments shall be permitted in any zoning district. These include: water; gas; electric; supply or disposal systems;
including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, etc., but not
including new transmission lines and structures. However, all routes of proposed gas, water, and electric transmission lines shall be

5/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
submitted to the Commission for its approval, after having been reviewed b the Planning Department and City Engineer. Such permission
shall be received prior to the acquisition of rights-of-way. See Section 4-30-110 for utility undergrounding requirements. Satellite and
wireless communications antennas are not exempt, and are instead subject to Chapter 4.46 (Telecommunications Facilities).

Sec. 4-20-050. - Temporary uses.
Requirements for establishing a temporary use (for example, a construction yard, seasonal sales lot, special event, temporary office trailer, etc.) are in
Section 4-52-030 (Limited Term Permits).
CHAPTER 4-22. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-22-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the residential zoning districts, determines the type of planning permit/approval required
for each use, and provides basic standards for site layout and building size.
Sec. 4-22-020. - De nitions of the residential zoning districts.
The definitions of each residential zoning district and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:
A.

R-E (Residential Estate) zoning district. The R-E district is applied to areas appropriate for large-lot, single-family residential development,
together with limited agricultural uses. The maximum allowable density is two dwelling units per acre. The R-E zoning district is consistent with
and implements the Residential Estate District land use designation of the General Plan.

B.

R-1 (Single-Family Residential) zoning district. The R-1 zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for neighborhoods of detached singlefamily homes, and related, compatible uses. The maximum allowable density is 2 - 7 dwelling units per acre. The R-1 zoning district is consistent
with and implements the Low Density Residential land use designation of the General Plan.

C.

R-2 (Medium Density Residential) zoning district. The R-2 zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for neighborhoods with a mixture of
housing types, including detached single-family homes, zero lot line homes, duplexes, and related, compatible uses. The maximum allowable
density is 10 dwelling units per acre. The R-2 zoning district is consistent with and implements the Medium Density Residential land use
designation of the General Plan.

D.

R-3 (Multiple Residential) district. The R-3 zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for a variety of housing types, including small-lot
single-family housing, and various types of multi-family housing (for example, duplexes, triplexes, and townhouses). The maximum allowable
density is 15 dwelling units per acre. The R-3 zoning district is consistent with and implements the Residential - Medium/High Density land use
designation of the General Plan.

E.

P-D (Planned Development) district. The P-D zoning district is applied to greenfield areas within the City that are intended for the development
of new neighborhoods. As noted by the General Plan, "This use combines residential development densities to allow for a broad range of
housing options, while trying to eliminate "cookie-cutter" housing. The P-D zoning district is also intended to provide for new neighborhoods
that are based upon traditional neighborhood development (TND) design features. The P-D zoning district is consistent with and implements
the Planned Development land use designation of the General Plan. Allowabe density is 1 to 6 units per gross acre.

Sec. 4-22-030. - Residential zoning district land uses and permit requirements.
Table 2-1 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in each residential zoning district, and the planning permit required to
establish each use, in compliance with Section 4-20-030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements).
Note: Where the last column in the table ("Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the
use. Provisions in other sections of this Zoning and Subdivision Code may also apply.

6/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

TABLE 2-1

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Residential Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

R-E

R-1

R-

R-

P-

2

3

D(4)

Regulations

AGRICULTURAL & OPEN SPACE USES
Agricultural accessory structure

UP

—

—

—

—

Crop production, horticulture, orchard, vineyard

P(3)

P(3)

-

-

P(4)

Farm Animals

UP

-

-

-

-

Golf course, country club

UP

-

-

-

P(4)

Public and Private Schools

-

UP

UP

UP

P(4)

Equestrian facility

UP

-

-

-

P(4)

Park, playground

-

UP

UP

UP

P(4)

Private residential recreation facility

UP

-

-

UP

P(4)

Religious facility

-

-

-

UP

P(4)

4-44-020

RECREATION, EDUCATION & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

4-44.030

Key to Zoning District Symbols
R-

Residential Estate

E
R-

Multiple Residential

3
Single-Family Residential

1
R-

R-

P-

Planned Development

D
Medium Density Residential

2

Notes:

7/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.
(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020.

(3)

Allowed without Zoning Clearance if use complies with all other applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.

(4)

Use allowed in the PD zoning district only when authorized through Planned Development Permit approval.

TABLE 2-1

P

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

for Residential Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use
Regulations

R-

R-

R-

R-

P-

E

1

2

3

D(4)

Home occupation

P

P

P

P

P(4)

4-44-050

Mobile home - In mobile home park

P

P

P

P

P(4)

4-44-080

Mobile home - Outside of mobile home park

P

P

-

-

-

4-44-070

Mobile home park

-

-

UP

UP

P(4)

4-44-080

Multi-family housing, 2 units

-

-

P

P

P(4)

4-44-090

Multi-family housing, 3 or 4 units

-

-

UP

UP

P(4)

4-44-090

Multi-family housing, 5 or more units

-

-

-

UP

P(4)

4-44-090

Residential accessory use or structure

P

P

P

P

P(4)

4-44-020

Residential care facility, 6 or fewer clients

P

P

P

P

P(4)

Residential care facility, 7 or more clients

UP

UP

UP

UP

P(4)

Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE)

-

-

UP

UP

P(4)

Residential component of mixed use project

-

-

-

UP

P(4)

Rooming or boarding house

-

-

UP

UP

-

Second unit

P

P

P

P

P(4)

Single-family dwelling

P

P

P

-

P(4)

RESIDENTIAL USES

4-44-060

4-44-140

8/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Key to Zoning District Symbols
R-

Residential Estate

E
R-

Multiple Residential

3
Single-Family Residential

1
R-

R-

P-

Planned Development

D
Medium Density Residential

2

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020.

(3)

Allowed without Zoning Clearance if use complies with all other applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.

(4)

Use allowed in the PD zoning district only when authorized through Planned Development Permit approval.

TABLE 2-1

P

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

for Residential Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

R-

R-

R-

R-

P-

E

1

2

3

D(4)

-

-

-

UP

P(4)

UP

P(4)

Regulations

RETAIL TRADE
Accessory retail and services
Neighborhood market
SERVICES
Adult day care - 6 or fewer clients

P

P

P

P

P(4)

Adult day care - 7 or more clients

UP

UP

UP

UP

UP(4)

Child day care - Large family day care home

UP

UP

UP

UP

UP

Child day care - Small family day care home

P

P

P

P

P(4)

Child or adult day care center

-

UP

UP

UP

P(4)

Medical services - Extended care

-

-

UP

P(4)

4-44.040

4-44.040

9/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Public buildings and uses

UP

UP

UP

UP

P(4)

S

S

S

S

S

TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS & INFRASTRUCTURE
Telecommunications facility

4-44.140, 446

Utility facility

UP

UP

UP

UP

P(4)

Utility infrastructure

P

P

P

P

P(4)

Key to Zoning District Symbols
R-

Residential Estate

R-

E
R-

Single-Family Residential

P-

1
R-

Multiple Residential

3
Planned Development

D
Medium Density Residential

2

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020.

(3)

Allowed without Zoning Clearance if use complies with all other applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.

(4)

Use allowed in the PD zoning district only when authorized through Planned Development Permit approval.

Sec. 4-22-040. - Residential zoning district general development standards.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and established in
compliance with the requirements of this Section, and those in Articles 3 and 4 of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
A.

Subdivision standards. A subdivision proposed within a residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in Table 2-2, except that
where a different minimum lot size is required by Article 4 for a specific land use, the standards of Article 4 shall control.
TABLE 2-2 - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT MINIMUM LOT SIZE

Zoning District

Minimum Lot Size
Area (net)

Width

Depth

Interior Lot

Corner Lot

R-E

15,000 sf

100 ft

100 ft

R-1

6000 sf

60 ft

65 ft

R-2

7,500 sf (1)

60 ft

65 ft

R-3

7,500 sf (1)

60 ft

65 ft

No less than 1.5 times the
width nor more than 3
times the width

10/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

PD

7,500 to 15,000 sf (1)

65 ft

65 ft

Notes:
(1)

A condominium, townhome, or planned development project may be subdivided with smaller parcels for ownership purposes, with the
minimum lot area requirement determined through the subdivision review process, provided that the overall development site complies
with the lot area requirements of this Chapter, and the total number of dwellings is in compliance with the maximum density established
by underlying General Plan designation.

B.

Site planning and building standards, R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones. Development proposed within the R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones shall comply
with the standards in Table 2-3; except that where different standards are required by Article 4 for a specific land use, the standards of Article 4
shall control.

C.

Standards for the P-D zone. Proposed subdivisions, development, and new land uses within the P-D zone shall comply with the standards
adopted as part of the approved Planned Development Permit or specific plan, as applicable. See Section 4-22-050 (P-D District Development
Standards).

D.

Use of substandard parcel. A parcel within the R-E, R-1, R-2, or R-3 zones that is substandard with respect to the requirements for new parcels
in Subsection A. may be developed only with one single-family dwelling, provided that the parcel was in single ownership on June 21, 1965. No
new structure shall be allowed on a substandard parcel if the parcel was acquired from the owner of record of contiguous property, or the
contiguous owner's transferee after June 21, 1965. Refer to Section 4-72-060
TABLE 2-3 - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Requirement by Zoning District
Development

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

PD

Feature

Residential

Single-Family

Medium

Multiple

Planned

Estate

Residential

Density

Residential

Development

Residential
Residential

Maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a project. The actual number of units allowed will be determined by the
City through subdivision or planning permit approval, as applicable.

density
Maximum density
as per Gen. Plan
Minimum density

2 dwellings

6 dwellings

10 dwellings

15 dwellings

6 dwellings per

per acre

Per gross acre

per acre

per acre

gross acre

Each legal parcel in a residential zoning district will be allowed one single-family dwelling regardless of lot area, in

allowed

compliance with Section 4-22-040D. and 4-72-060

Setbacks

Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required. See Section 4-30-090 for exceptions to these requirements,
and Chapter 4-42 for setback requirements that apply to speci c land uses.

Front

30 ft

20 ft

30 ft

Sides - Interior

20 ft

5 ft

20 ft

Side - Street side

25 ft

15 ft

25 ft

Rear

20 ft, 1,000 sf left

10 ft, 800 sf left

uncovered on rear

uncovered on rear

uncovered on rear

1/3 of lot

1/3 of lot

1/3 of lot

Accessory
structures

15 ft

15 ft

20 ft, 1,000 sf left

See 4-44-020 (Accessory Buildings and Uses) and
4-44-030 (Residential Accessory Uses and Structures)

11/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Maximum percentage of total lot area that may be covered by structures.

Lot coverage

35%

40%

50%

60%

35%

Maximum allowable height of structures. See Section 4-30-040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height measurement

Height limit

requirements, and height limit exceptions.
Maximum height

30 ft

30 ft

Landscaping

See Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Chapter 4-36 (Parking and Loading)

Signs

See Chapter 4-38 (Signs)

30 ft

35 ft

30 ft

Sec. 4-22-050. - P-D district development standards.
Proposed development and new land uses within the P-D zoning district shall be planned and designed in compliance with the standards of this
Section.
A.

Permit requirements. Development within a P-D zoning district shall be authorized through the City approval of:
1.

A specific plan in compliance with the requirements of Government Code Section 65450 et seq., the design objectives of Subsection B., and
all other applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code; or

2.

A Master Plan and Precise Development Plan approved in compliance with Section 4-52-080 (Master Plan and Precise Development Plan).

The specific plan or Master Plan/Precise Development Plan shall determine the specific allowable land uses and development standards
applicable to the proposed site.
B.

Design objectives. Proposed development and new land uses within the P-D zoning district shall be designed to provide complete, pedestrianoriented neighborhoods, with the following characteristics.
1.

A distinct neighborhood center that provides a neighborhood square, green, or park, together with a civic facility such as a community
center or school. The neighborhood center shall be located so that a minimum of 80% of the dwellings within the new neighborhood are
within one-fourth mile of the center.

2.

Streets with sidewalks, and planter strips between curb and sidewalk, planted and maintained with canopy street trees.

3.

An interconnected street system that provides multiple pedestrian and vehicle access points between each new neighborhood and the
existing community street system.

4.

A variety of housing types, including detached single-family homes of varying sizes and design, together with lower density multi-family
housing, provided that multi-family housing may only include single-story uses, or townhouses, but shall not include stacked flats. The
density of housing shall be highest adjacent to neighborhood centers, and shall be the lowest at neighborhood edges.

5.

All buildings designed so that they address the street, with residential structures designed to locate only habitable interior space adjacent
to street setbacks. Garages shall be set back from building facades adjacent to streets, and accessed by driveways from the street, or from
alleys.

6.

Developments within the PD Zone District may deviate from lot sizes and other development standards where a higher quality
development with unique amenities are proposed. Higher quality development and unique amenities shall be determined by the City
Council and as may be recommended by the Planning Commission.

CHAPTER 4-24. - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-24-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the commercial zoning districts, determines the type of planning permit/approval required
for each use, and provides basic standards for site layout and building size.

12/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-24-020. - De nitions of commercial zoning districts.
The purposes of the individual Commercial Zoning Districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows.
A.

C-N (Neighborhood Commercial) district. The C-N zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for convenience and commercial activities that
are located in the vicinity of residential neighborhoods and are oriented to primarily serving them. The C-N zoning district is consistent with and
implements the Neighborhood Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

B.

C-O (Office Commercial) district. The C-O zoning district is applied to areas appropriate primarily for office uses, and limited supporting
commercial uses. The C-O zoning district is consistent with and implements the Office Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

C.

C-1 (Downtown Commercial) district. The C-1 zoning district is applied to the central commercial core and includes a full range of retail services
and professional and governmental offices. The C-1 zoning district is consistent with and implements the Retail Business land use designation of
the General Plan.

D.

C-2 (General Commercial) district. The C-2 zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for a mixture of commercial and light industrial
activities. The C-2 zoning district is consistent with the General and Service Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

E.

C-H (Highway Commercial) district. The C-H zoning district is applied to areas of high automobile access and is designed to accommodate autooriented commerce and the needs of highway travelers. The C-H zoning district is consistent with and implements the Highway Commercial
land use designation of the General Plan.

Sec. 4-24-030. - Commercial zoning district land uses and permit requirements.
Table 2-4 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in the Commercial Zoning Districts, and the planning permit required
to establish each use, in compliance with Section 4-20-030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements).
Note: Where the last column in the table ("Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the
use. Provisions in other sections of this Zoning and Subdivision Code may also apply.

TABLE 2-4

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Commercial Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by

Speci c Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

C-

C-

C-

C-

C-

N

O

1

2

H

Agricultural product processing

-

-

-

UP

-

Artisan/craft product manufacturing

-

-

UP

UP

-

Construction contractors

-

-

-

P

-

Furniture and xtures manufacturing, cabinet shop

-

-

-

P

-

Industrial research and development

-

-

-

P

-

Laboratory - Medical, analytical

-

-

-

P

-

Laundry, dry cleaning plant

-

-

-

UP

-

Regulations

INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING & PROCESSING, WHOLESALING

13/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Manufacturing/processing - Light

-

-

-

P

-

Media production

-

-

-

P

-

Printing and publishing

-

-

-

P

-

Recycling - Reverse vending machines

-

-

-

P

P

Recycling - Small collection facility

-

-

-

P

-

Storage - Outdoor

-

-

-

UP

UP

Storage - Personal storage facility (mini-storage)

-

-

-

UP

UP

Storage - RV and boat

-

-

-

UP

-

Storage - Warehouse, indoor storage

-

-

-

UP

-

Wholesaling and distribution

-

-

-

P

-

Winery

-

-

-

UP

-

4-44-110

4-44-120

Key to Zoning District Symbols
C-

Neighborhood Commercial

N
C-

General Commercial

2
O ce Commercial

O
C-

C-

C-

Highway Commercial

H
Downtown Commercial

1

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020.

TABLE 2-4

P

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

for Commercial Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use
14/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

C-

C-

C-

C-

C-

N

O

1

2

H

Bar/tavern

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Club, lodge, private meeting hall

-

UP

UP

UP

UP

Commercial recreation facility - Indoor

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Commercial recreation facility - Outdoor

-

-

-

-

UP

Community center

UP

UP

P

P

UP

Conference/convention facility

-

-

UP

-

UP

Fitness/health facility

UP

UP

UP

P

P

Library, museum

UP

UP

P

P

UP

Night club

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Park, playground

P

P

P

P

P

Religious facility

UP

UP

-

UP

-

School - Elementary, middle, secondary

-

-

-

-

-

School - Specialized education/training

UP

UP

UP

UP

-

Sports and entertainment assembly facility

-

-

-

UP

UP

Studio - Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc.

P

P

P

P

P

Theater, auditorium

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Emergency shelter

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Home occupation

P

P

P

P

P

Live/work unit

P

P

UP

UP

-

Multi-family housing

-

-

-

-

-

Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE)

UP

-

-

UP

-

Residential care facility, 7 or more clients

UP

-

-

UP

-

Residential units in a mixed-use project

P

P

P

P

-

Regulations

RECREATION, EDUCATION & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

RESIDENTIAL USES

4-44-050

4-44-060

15/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Key to Zoning District Symbols
C-

Neighborhood Commercial

N
C-

General Commercial

2
O ce Commercial

O
C-

C-

C-

Highway Commercial

H
Downtown Commercial

1

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

TABLE 2-4

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Commercial Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c Use

Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

C-

C-

C-1

C-2

C-H

N

O

Accessory retail uses

P

P

P

P

P

Alcoholic beverage sales

UP

-

UP

UP

UP

Artisan shop

P

-

P

P

P

Auto and vehicle sales and rental

-

-

-

UP

UP

Auto parts sales with no installation services

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Building and landscape materials sales - Indoor

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Building and landscape materials sales - Outdoor

-

-

UP

P

UP

Construction and heavy equipment sales and rental

-

-

-

P

-

Drive-through retail

-

-

-

S

S

Extended hour retail

-

-

UP(4)

UP(4)

UP(4)

Regulations

RETAIL TRADE

4-44-100

16/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Farm supply and feed store

-

-

-

P

-

Farmers market

UP

-

UP

UP

-

Fuel dealer (propane for home and farm use, etc.)

-

-

-

P

-

Furniture, furnishings and appliance store

-

-

P

P

P

Gas station

-

-

-

UP

UP

General retail - 10,000 sf or less

-

-

S

S

S

General retail - 10,001 to 19,999 sf

-

-

S

S

S

General retail - 20,000 sf or more

-

-

S

S

S

Groceries, specialty foods - 10,000 sf or less

P

-

S

S

S

Groceries, specialty foods - More than 10,000 sf

-

-

S

S

S

Mobile home, boat, or RV sales

-

-

-

UP

UP

Neighborhood market

UP

-

UP

UP

UP

O ce-supporting retail

P

P

P

P

P

Outdoor retail sales and activities

P

-

P

P

P

Produce stand

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Restaurant, cafe, co ee shop

P

P

P

P

P

Second hand store

-

-

P

UP

UP

Shopping center

-

-

-

UP

UP

4-44-150

4-44-100

Key to Zoning District Symbols
C-

Neighborhood Commercial

N
C-

General Commercial

2
O ce Commercial

O
C-

C-

C-

Highway Commercial

H
Downtown Commercial

1

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

17/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
(3)

Use Permit required when site abuts a residential zone.

(4)

Use not allowed ona site abutting a residential zone.

TABLE 2-4

P

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

for Commercial Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

C-

C-

C-

C-

C-

N

O

1

2

H

ATM

P

P

P

P

P

Bank, nancial services

UP

P

P

P

P

Business support service

-

P

P

P

P

Medical services - Doctor o ce

P

P

P

P

UP

Medical services - Clinic, lab, urgent care

-

UP

UP

UP

UP

Medical services - Extended care

-

UP

-

-

UP

O ce - Accessory

P

P

P

P

P

O ce - Business/service

P

P

P

P

P

O ce - Government

-

P

P

UP

-

O ce - Processing

-

UP

P

P

-

O ce - Professional

-

P

P

P

-

Catering service

-

-

-

P

-

Child or adult day care center

UP

UP

-

-

-

Drive-through service

-

-

-

P

P

Equipment rental

-

-

-

P

-

Kennel, animal boarding

-

-

-

UP

-

Lodging - Bed & breakfast inn (B&B)

-

-

UP

-

UP

Regulations

SERVICES - BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, PROFESSIONAL

SERVICES - GENERAL

4-44-040

18/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Lodging - Hotel or motel

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Lodging - Recreational vehicle (RV) park

-

-

-

-

UP

Maintenance service - Client site services

-

-

-

P

-

Mortuary, funeral home

-

UP

-

UP

-

Personal services

P

P

P

P

P

Personal services - Restricted

-

-

-

UP

-

Public safety facility

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Repair service - Equipment, large appliances, etc.

-

-

-

P

-

Social service organization

-

UP

P

P

-

Vehicle services - Major repair/body work

-

-

UP

P

UP

Vehicle services - Minor maintenance/repair

-

-

UP

P

UP

Veterninary clinic, animal hospital

-

-

UP

P

UP

Key to Zoning District Symbols
C-

Neighborhood Commercial

N
C-

General Commercial

2
O ce Commercial

O
C-

C-

C-

Highway Commercial

H
Downtown Commercial

1

TABLE 2-4

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Commercial Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use
Regulations

19/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

C-

C-

C-

C-

C-

N

O

1

2

H

Broadcasting studio

-

UP

UP

P

UP

Parking facility, public or commercial

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Pipeline, utility transmission or distribution line

UP

UP

UP

UP

UP

Telecommunications facility

S

S

S

S

S

TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS & INFRASTRUCTURE

4-44-160, 446

Transit station or terminal

-

-

UP

UP

UP

Utility facility

-

-

-

UP

UP

Utility infrastructure

P

P

P

P

P

Key to Zoning District Symbols
C-

Neighborhood Commercial

C-

N
C-

2
O ce Commercial

C-

O
C-

General Commercial

Highway Commercial

H
Downtown Commercial

1

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

Sec. 4-24-040. - Commercial zoning district general development standards.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in
compliance with the requirements in Tables 2-5 and 2-6, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading,
etc.) in Article 3 of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
TABLE 2-5 - C-N, C-O, AND C-1 DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Development Feature

Requirement by Zoning District
C-N

C-O

Neighborhood

O

C-1
ce Commercial

Commercial
Minimum lot size

Downtown
Commercial

Minimum area and width for parcels proposed in new subdivisions.
20/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Area (net)

5,000 sf

5,000 sf

2,500 sf

Width

50 ft

50 ft

25 ft

Residential density
Maximum density
Setbacks

See Gen. Plan Table 3-2 for Mixed Use Guidelines.
Determined by the City through site plan and development plan review and approval

Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required for primary structures. See Section 4-30-090 for
exceptions to these requirements.

Front

None required

20 ft

None required

Side - Interior (each)

10 ft adjacent to an R zone; none

10 ft adjacent to an R zone; 5 ft

None required

required otherwise

otherwise

Side - Corner

None required

20 ft

Rear

10 ft adjacent to an R zone; none

None required

None required

required otherwise
Lot coverage

Maximum percentage of total lot area that may be covered by structures. When expressed as a range,
the review authority may limit the maximum coverage allowed a speci c project to less than the
maximum of the range, as determined appropriate for the site and project.

Maximum coverage
Height limit

100%

60%

100%

Maximum allowable height of structures. See Section 4-30-040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.

Maximum height

30 ft

30 ft

Landscaping

See Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Chapter 4-36 (Parking and Loading)

Signs

See Chapter 4-38 (Signs)

35 ft

TABLE 2-6 - C-2 AND C-H DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Development Feature

Minimum lot size

Requirement by Zoning District
C-2

C-H

General Commercial

Highway Commercial

Minimum area and width for parcels proposed in new subdivisions.

Area (net)

5,000 sf

7,500 sf

Width

25 ft

50 ft

Residential density

Maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a project. The actual number of units allowed
will be determined by the City through subdivision or planning permit approval, as applicable.

21/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Maximum density

Residential not allowed

Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required for primary structures. See Section

Setbacks

4-30-090 for exceptions to these requirements.l;;
Front

10 feet when adjacent to an R zone; none require otherwise.

Side - Interior (each)
Side - Corner
Rear

Maximum percentage of total lot area that may be covered by structures. When expressed as

Lot coverage

a range, the review authority may limit the maximum coverage allowed a speci c project to
less than the maximum of the range, as determined appropriate for the site and project.
Maximum coverage

100%

Maximum allowable height of structures. See Section 4-30-040 (Height Limits and Exceptions)

Height limit

for height measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
Maximum height

35 ft

Landscaping

See Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Chapter 4-36 (Parking and Loading)

Signs

See Chapter 4-38 (Signs)

Sec. 4-24-050. - CD district standards for street frontages and building facades.
A.

Applicability. The requirements of this Section apply to proposed development within the CD zoning district. Each new non-residential structure, and
all alterations to existing structures involving any change in the facade at the street frontage, shall comply with the following standards. The review
authority may approve minor variations to these standards as deemed appropriate, provided that the review authority also first finds that the minor
variation will still produce a new or altered building that complies with the intent of this Section.

B.

Limitation on the location of allowable land uses. Each land use shall be located as follows.
1.

The ground floor of each non-residential structure shall be limited to pedestrian-oriented uses. These may include walk-in uses such as
restaurants, retail stores, health/fitness facilities, personal services, community service organizations, and similar uses. The review authority
may modify this requirement when existing structures are reused for different tenants or uses, or when this requirement is determined by the
review authority to be infeasible because of excessive storefront vacancies.

2.

Ground floor, street fronting business/service offices may be approved if the review authority first determines that the use will not impair the
pedestrian character of the street, provided that:
a.

Parcels on the block occupied by office uses that are not pedestrian oriented constitute less than 50 percent of the block frontage;

b.

The remainder of the block is characterized primarily by retail and/or restaurant uses; and

c.

The facade design of the structure that accommodates the office contributes to the visual interest of the street and conspicuously
expresses the nature of the use.

C.

Building placement. A non-residential building facade parallel to the street shall be located at the back of the public sidewalk, except that:
1.

The facade may be set back a maximum of six feet to accommodate a wider public sidewalk; and

2.

A setback of 16 feet from the street property line may be allowed for 50 percent of the facade length to accommodate plazas, landscape, public
art, water fountains, benches, outdoor dining, and other pedestrian amenities.

D.

Architectural treatment. Building design shall comply with the following requirements.
1.

Building wall articulation. To encourage visual continuity and pedestrian activity, at least 60 percent of the total street frontage ground floor
length of any new or reconstructed building shall be differentiated architecturally by recessed windows and entries, display windows, offset

22/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
surfaces, differentiated piers and columns, offset planes, textured materials, awnings, or other details, or other displays of interest to
pedestrians.
2.

Parapets. Any parapet extension of a storefront on a street-fronting facade shall be incorporated and integrated into the design of the entire
building on all facades and frontages, and shall not be limited to street front facades.

3.

Windows. Downtown buildings shall provide ground level windows designed as follows:
a.

Clear, untinted glass shall be used at and near the street level to allow maximum visual interaction between sidewalk areas and the
interior of buildings. Mirrored, reflective glass or tinted glass shall not be used except as an architectural or decorative accent.

b.

Windows shall be provided along at least 60 percent of each ground floor facade facing a street; except that where the review authority
determines that a substantial length of windowless wall is unavoidable, eye-level display, a contrast in wall treatment, an offset wall line,
decorative features, outdoor seating or landscaping shall be used to enhance visual interest and pedestrian orientation.

4.

Railings and decorative grilles. Any decorative railing or grille work that is placed in front of or behind street level windows shall be at least 75
percent open to perpendicular view and no more than six feet in height above grade. No security gate or grille shall be installed on the exterior
of any structure.

5.

Upper story design features. A minimum of 50 percent of the building frontage width above the first story shall be differentiated by recessed
windows, balconies, offset planes, or other architectural details that provide dimensional relief.

E.

Pedestrian access. The primary entrance of each ground floor use shall be recessed a minimum of four feet when accessed from the public sidewalk.
Walk-up facilities and entries shall be recessed and provide adequate queuing space to avoid interruption of pedestrian flow.

CHAPTER 4-26. - INDUSTRIAL AND PUBLIC DISTRICTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-26-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the Industrial and Public Districts, determines the type of planning permit/approval required
for each use, and provides basic standards for site layout and building size.
Sec. 4-26-020. - De nitions of industrial and public districts.
The purposes of the individual Industrial and Public Districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows.
A.

I (Controlled Industrial) district. The I zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for industrial parks, research/office parks, warehouses and
manufacturing activities not generating significant off-site impacts. The I zoning district is consistent with the Controlled Industrial land use
designation of the General Plan.

B.

M (Manufacturing) district. The M zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for a full range of manufacturing, processing, fabrication and
storage activities generating heavy truck and equipment traffic. The M zoning district is consistent with the Manufacturing land use designation
of the General Plan.

C.

A-C (Agricultural-Commercial) district. The A-C zoning district is applied to properties that are intended to be transitional between urban and
rural uses, which emphasize crop production, but which may also accommodate support uses directly related to, or part of, an on-site
agricultural enterprise or operation. The A-C zoning district is consistent with the Agricultural-Commercial land use designation of the General
Plan.

D.

AP (Airport) district. The AP zoning district is intended to protect the development of the Municipal Airport for the benefit of the public and to
promote compatible uses of adjacent or nearby land; and to reserve land on the airport site for aircraft operations and related support facilities.
The AP zoning district is consistent with the Public land use designation of the General Plan.

E.

P-I (Public-Institutional) district. The P-I zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for public facilities, utilities, and public gathering facilities
including: parks, public schools, libraries, government offices, etc. The P-I zoning district is consistent with and implements the Public land use
designation of the General Plan.

Sec. 4-26-030. - Industrial and public district land uses and permit requirements.
Table 2-7 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in the Industrial and Public Districts, and the planning permit required
to establish each use, in compliance with Section 4-20.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements).
Note: Where the last column in the table ("Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the
use. Provisions in other sections of this Zoning and Subdivision Code may also apply.

23/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

TABLE 2-7

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Industrial & Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c Use

Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

I

M

A-C

AP

P-1

-

-

P

-

P

Regulations

AGRICULTURAL, RESOURCE-BASED & OPEN SPACE USES
Agricultural accessory structure
Dairies

UP

Aquaculture

-

-

P

-

-

Energy production facility (biomass, cogeneration, etc.)

-

-

UP

-

-

Crop production, horticulture, orchard, vineyard

P(3)

P(3)

P(3)

-

P(3)

Fertilizer/manure storage yards/fertilizer plants

UP

Ranch/Farm o ce

P

Greenhouses and plant nurseries

4-44-020

-

UP

P(3)

-

-

Agricultural chemical mixing and storage

-

-

UP

-

-

Agricultural product processing and storage

-

UP

P

-

-

Artisan/craft product manufacturing

UP

UP

-

-

-

Construction contractors

-

UP

UP(4)

-

-

Fertilizer plants and yard

-

-

UP

-

-

Furniture and xtures manufacturing, cabinet shop

-

UP

-

-

-

Laboratory - Medical, analytical

P

P

-

-

-

Laundry, dry cleaning plant

-

UP

-

-

-

Manufacturing/processing - Heavy

-

UP

-

-

-

Manufacturing/processing - Light

UP

P

-

-

-

Manufacturing/processing - Medium intensity

-

UP

-

-

-

INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING & PROCESSING, WHOLESALING

24/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Media production

UP

P

-

-

-

Printing and publishing

UP

P

-

-

-

Recycling - Reverse vending machines

P

P

-

-

-

Recycling - Scrap and dismantling yards

-

UP

-

-

-

Recycling - Small collection facility

-

UP

-

-

-

Research and development

P

P

-

-

-

Storage - Outdoor

-

UP

-

-

-

Storage - Personal storage facility (mini-storage)

UP

UP

-

-

-

Storage - RV and boat

-

UP

-

-

-

Storage - Warehouse, indoor storage

UP

UP

-

-

-

Wholesaling and distribution

UP

P

-

-

-

Winery

-

UP

UP

-

-

4-44-120

Key to Zoning District Symbols
I

Controlled Industrial

AP

Airport

M

Manufacturing

P-I

Public/Institutional

A-

Agricultural-Commercial

C

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

(3)

Zoning Clearance not required if the use complies with all other applicable City approval requirements and standards.

(4)

Agriculturally-related construction contractors allowable in the A-C Zone by UP.

25/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

TABLE 2-7

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Industrial & Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

I

M

A-C

AP

P-

Regulations

1
RECREATION, EDUCATION & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES
Bar/tavern

-

UP

-

-

-

Club, lodge, private meeting hall

-

UP

-

-

-

Commercial recreation facility - Indoor

-

UP

-

-

-

Commercial recreation facility - Outdoor

-

UP

UP

-

UP

Community center

-

-

-

-

UP

Conference/convention facility - Ag oriented/support

-

-

UP

-

UP

Equestrian facility

-

-

UP

-

UP

Fitness/health facility

UP

UP

-

-

UP

Library, museum

-

-

-

-

P

Night club

-

UP

-

-

-

Park, playground

-

-

UP

-

P

(3)
Religious facility

-

-

-

-

UP

School - Elementary, middle, secondary

-

-

-

-

UP

School - Specialized education/training

-

-

-

-

UP

Sports and entertainment assembly facility

-

-

-

-

UP

Studio - Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc.

-

-

-

-

UP

Theater, auditorium

-

-

-

-

UP

-

-

UP

-

-

RESIDENTIAL USES
Bed and Breakfast Inn

26/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Caretaker quarters

-

UP

P(4)

UP

UP

Emergency shelter

-

P

-

-

UP

Home Occupation

P

Live/work unit, single family dwelling

-

UP

P(4)

-

-

Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE)

-

-

-

-

UP

Residential care facility, 7 or more clients

-

-

-

-

UP

Key to Zoning District Symbols
I

Controlled Industrial

AP

Airport

M

Manufacturing

P-I

Public/Institutional

A-

Agricultural-Commercial

C

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

(3)

Allowed in A-C Zone when used to buffer residential uses in adjacent residential zone.

(4)

One residence or caretaker unit in the A-C Zone, with a min. lot size of 0.5 acres; plus a 2nd unit for a family member or on-site agricultural
worker, manufactured or conventional home (no mobile homes).

TABLE 2-7

P

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

for Industrial & Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by

Speci c Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED

Speci c

BY DISTRICT

Use

I

M

A-

AP

C

P-

Regulations

1

RETAIL TRADE
Accessory retail uses

-

-

-

UP

UP

Auto and vehicle sales and rental

-

UP

-

-

27/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Auto parts sales with no installation services

-

UP

-

-

-

Building and landscape materials sales - Indoor

-

UP

-

-

-

Building and landscape materials sales - Outdoor

-

UP

-

-

-

Construction and heavy equipment sales and rental

-

UP

-

-

-

Convenience store

-

UP

-

-

-

Drive-through retail

-

-

-

-

-

Extended hour retail

-

-

-

-

-

Farm supply and feed store

-

UP

-

-

-

Farmers market

-

-

UP

-

-

Fuel dealer (propane for home and farm use, etc.)

-

UP

-

-

-

Furniture, furnishings and appliance store

-

-

-

-

-

Gas station

-

S

-

UP

-

General retail - 10,000 sf or less

-

-

-

-

-

General retail - 10,001 to 19,999 sf

-

-

-

-

-

General retail - 20,000 sf or more

-

-

-

-

-

Groceries, specialty foods - 10,000 sf or less

-

-

-

-

-

Groceries, specialty foods - More than 10,000 sf

-

-

-

-

-

Mobile home, boat, or RV sales

-

UP

-

-

-

O ce-supporting retail

-

UP

-

-

-

Outdoor retail sales and activities

-

UP

-

-

-

Produce stand

-

UP

UP

-

-

Restaurant, cafe, co ee shop

-

UP

-

UP

-

Second hand store

-

UP

-

-

-

Shopping center

-

-

-

-

-

Warehouse retail

-

UP

-

-

-

4-44-100

4-44-150

Key to Zoning District Symbols
I

Controlled Industrial

AP

Airport
28/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

M

Manufacturing

P-I

A-

Agricultural-Commercial

Public/Institutional

C

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

(3)

Allowed in A-C Zone when used to buffer residential uses in adjacent residential zone.

(4)

One residence or caretaker unit in the A-C Zone, with a min. lot size of 0.5 acres; plus a 2nd unit for a family member or on-site agricultural
worker, manufactured or conventional home (no mobile homes).

TABLE 2-7

P

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

for Industrial & Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

I

M

A-

AP

C

P-

Regulations

1

SERVICES - BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, PROFESSIONAL
ATM

P

-

-

-

-

Bank, nancial services

-

-

-

-

-

Business support service

-

UP

-

-

-

Medical services - Doctor o ce

-

-

-

-

-

Medical services - Clinic, lab, urgent care

-

-

-

-

-

Medical services - Extended care

-

-

-

-

-

O ce - Accessory

P

P

-

-

-

O ce - Business/service

UP

-

-

-

-

O ce - Government

UP

-

-

-

-

O ce - Processing

UP

-

-

-

-

O ce - Professional

UP

-

-

-

-

SERVICES - GENERAL
29/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Adult day care

-

Agricultural Auction Facilities

-

-

-

UP

UP

Catering service

-

P

-

-

-

Child day care center

-

UP

-

-

UP

Drive-through service

-

-

-

-

-

Equipment rental

-

UP

-

-

-

Kennel, animal boarding

-

UP

UP

-

-

Maintenance service - Client site services

-

UP

-

-

-

Mortuary, funeral home

-

UP

-

-

-

Personal services

-

-

-

-

-

Personal services - Restricted

-

-

-

-

-

Public safety facility

P

P

-

-

-

Repair service - Equipment, large appliances, etc.

-

UP

-

-

-

Repair service - Farm and ranch equipment

-

UP

UP

-

-

Social service organization

UP

-

-

-

UP

Vehicle services - Major repair/body work

-

P

-

-

-

Vehicle services - Minor maintenance/repair

-

P

-

-

-

Veterninary clinic, animal hospital

-

UP

UP

-

-

4-44-040

Key to Zoning District Symbols
I

Controlled Industrial

AP

Airport

M

Manufacturing

P-I

Public/Institutional

A-

Agricultural-Commercial

C

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

30/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

TABLE 2-7

P

Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements

required (2)

Permitted Use, Zoning Clearance

for Industrial & Zoning Districts
UP Use Permit required (2)
S

Permit requirement set by Speci c

Use Regulations
— Use not allowed
LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY

Speci c

DISTRICT

Use

I

M

A-C

AP

P-

Regulations

1
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS & INFRASTRUCTURE
Airport and related facilities

-

-

-

UP

-

Broadcasting studio

UP

-

-

-

-

Parking facility, public or commercial

UP

UP

UP(3)

-

UP

Pipeline, utility transmission or distribution line

UP

UP

UP

UP

UP

Public scales

-

-

UP

-

UP

Telecommunications facility or tower

UP

P

UP

-

UP

4-44-150, 446

Transit station or terminal

P

UP

-

-

UP

Utility facility

UP

P

UP

-

UP

Utility infrastructure

P

P

P

P

P

Key to Zoning District Symbols
I

Controlled Industrial

AP

Airport

M

Manufacturing

P-I

Public/Institutional

A-

Agricultural-Commercial

C

Notes:
(1)

See Article 8 for land use definitions.

(2)

Architectural Review may also be required; see Section 4-52-020

31/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
(3)

Truck parking facility allowable by UP in support of Agricultural operations; also allowable as a permitted use (P) when used in bona fide agric
same property and owned by the property occupant or property owner; minimum five acre panel.

(Ord. No. 461, § 1(Exh. A), 10-2-12)

Sec. 4-26-040. - Industrial district general development standards.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in
compliance with the requirements in Table 2-8, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in
Article 3 of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
TABLE 2-8 - M AND I DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Development Feature

Minimum lot size

Requirement by Zoning District
M

I

Manufacturing

Controlled Industrial

Minimum area and width for parcels proposed in new subdivisions.

Area (net)

5,000 sf

15,000 sf

Width

50 ft.

80 ft

Residential density
Maximum density
Setbacks

Maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a project.
Residential not allowed

Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required for primary structures. See Section
4-30-090 for exceptions to these requirements.
Setbacks in this district must comply with the

Setbacks in this district must comply with the

Side - Interior (each)

Front

Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Fire

Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Fire

Side - Corner

Code and are subject to Architectural Review.

Code and are subject to Architectural Review.

Rear
Lot coverage

Maximum percentage of total lot area that may be covered by structures. When expressed as
a range, the review authority may limit the maximum coverage allowed a speci c project to
less than the maximum of the range, as determined appropriate for the site and project.
60%

Height limit

60%

Maximum allowable height of structures. See Section 9-30-040 (Height Limits and Exceptions)
for height measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.

Maximum height

50 ft

Landscaping

See Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Chapter 4.36 (Parking and Loading)

Signs

See Chapter 4.38 (Signs)

50 ft

Sec. 4-26-050. - Agricultural commercial district—General development.

32/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
A.

Minimum lot size - twenty (20) acres
Maximum residential density - residential not permitted except in support of on-site Agricultural-Commercial Activity, such as with a care-taker unit
and residence of a family farm or agricultural business; mobile homes not permitted.
Residential setbacks - see R-E Zone
Commercial setbacks, lot coverage, height, etc. - see C-1 Zone.

B.

Subdivision Considerations - In order to determine conformity with the Gustine General Plan objectives of avoiding sprawl and preserving the
agricultural character of Gustine, prior to approving a subdivision in the Agricultural - Commercial Zone, an applicant must identify, and the City must
find conformity based upon;
1.

The applicant's reasons for the subdivision;

2.

Relationship to current parcel sizes and parcel configurations in the vicinity;

3.

Compatibility with existing agricultural uses in the vicinity.

Sec. 4-26-060. - Controlled industrial (I) district additional standards.
All primary structures within the Controlled Industrial (I) zoning district shall be of concrete or masonry construction.
Sec. 4-26-070. - Airport (AP) district standards.
A.

AP zoning district site planning and development standards. Within the AP zoning district, the minimum size for new parcels, building setbacks and
height limits, lot coverage and landscaping requirements shall be established by the review authority through the subdivision, Use Permit, and/or
Architectural Review process, as applicable. Proposed development and new land uses shall otherwise comply with all applicable provisions of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code and the Merced County Airport Land Use Plan, including any requirements in Article 4 applicable to a specific land use.

B.

Interference with aircraft operations prohibited. No use shall be permitted in any airport zoning district that would interfere with aircraft takeoffs
or landings at the Gustine Municipal Airport, or otherwise would constitute an airport hazard, whether or not the use would otherwise be permitted
by Table 2-7.

Sec. 4-26-080. - Public/institutional (P-I) district standards.
Within the P-Z zoning district, the minimum size for new parcels, building setbacks and height limits, lot coverage and landscaping requirements shall
be established by the review authority through the subdivision, Use Permit, and/or Architectural Review process, as applicable. Proposed development
and new land uses shall otherwise comply with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, including any requirements in Article 4
applicable to a specific land use.
CHAPTER 4-28. - COMBINING DISTRICTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-28-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter regulates new and existing structures and land uses in the combining districts. The provisions of this Chapter provide guidance for
development in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary zoning districts, where important site, environmental, safety, compatibility, or
design issues require particular attention in project planning.
Sec. 4-28-020. - Applicability of combining districts.
The provisions of this Chapter apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code. Any perceived conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be
resolved in compliance with Section 4-10-040.F (Conflicting Requirements).
A.

Mapping of combining districts. The applicability of any combining district to a specific site is shown by the combining district Zoning Map
symbol established by Chapter 4-12 (Zoning Map), being appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district on the Zoning Map.
The combining districts are applied to property through the rezoning process (Chapter 4-76 - General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning and
Subdivision Code Amendments).

B.

Allowed land uses, permit requirements, development standards. Except as may be otherwise provided by this Chapter for a specific
combining district:
1.

Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by this Article may be allowed within a combining district, subject to any
additional requirements of the combining district;

2.

Development and new land uses within a combining district shall obtain the planning permits required by this Article for the primary
zoning district; and

33/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
3.

Development and new land uses within a combining district shall comply with all applicable development standards of the primary zoning dis

Sec. 4-28-030. - MU (mixed use) combining district.
A.

Purpose. The Mixed Use MU combining district is applied to areas within the City where the General Plan intends that new development projects
emphasize the combination of residential and nonresidential land uses, to improve the economic vitality, and pedestrian-orientation of specific
commercial areas within the City. The MU combining district is consistent with and implements the Mixed Use land use designation of the General
Plan.

B.

Applicability. The Mixed Use MU combining district shall only be utilized within areas identified as Mixed Use District on the General Plan Land Use
Map.

C.

Allowed land uses and permit requirements. Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by this Article may be allowed within the
MU combining district, subject to the planning permit requirements of the primary district, except that:
1.

Any use identified by Section 4-24-030 (Commercial District Land Uses and Permit Requirements) as a permitted ("P") use in Table 2-4 shall
instead require Use Permit approval within the MU combining district unless it is proposed as part of a mixed use project that combines
residential and nonresidential uses on the same site; and

2.
D.

Proposed projects shall comply with the Mixed Use Designation Guidelines in Table 3-2 of the Land Use Element of the General Plan.

Site planning and development standards. Each land use and structure proposed within the MU combining district shall comply with the
development standards of the primary zoning district, and other applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code; provided that the
application of the MU overlay to property may include establishing a higher height limit than the underlying zone, to more effectively accommodate
the residential component of a mixed use project.

CHAPTER 4-29. - SPECIALIZED DISTRICTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-29-010. - Mobile home park combining district (T).
(a)

Purpose. This section applies to the mobile home park combining district (T). The purpose of the mobile home park combining district (T) is to
provide an exclusive district designation that is applied to land for mobile home use and to establish rules and regulations by which the city may
regulate standards of lot, yard, park area, landscaping, walls and enclosures, signs, access, and vehicle parking in relation to mobile home
subdivisions and mobile home parks pursuant to the powers granted to the city by the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state, and to
name the commission as the agency for executing the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section shall also apply to travel trailer parks,
recreational trailer parts, temporary trailer parks, and tent camps, unless specifically exempted by the provisions of Health and Safety Code div. 13,
pt. 2 (Health and Safety Code § 18000 et seq.) or by the provisions of this section.

(b)

Compliance. Trailers shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters in the city unless they are situated in the T district or as provided in section 4-6257. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a trailer court or camp other than in the T district.

(c)

Uses permitted. Mobile home parks, trailer courts, travel parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer parks, tent camps, and mobile home
subdivisions shall be the only uses permitted in the T district. Land in the T district shall have no other uses permitted other than as set forth in this
section. A temporary real estate office located within a subdivision may be used only for and during the original sale of lots within a subdivision, but
not to exceed a period of one year. Such period of time may be extended for one additional year for good cause upon the approval of the
commission. Factory-built houses may be placed within a mobile home subdivision. As used in this section, the terms "mobile home" and "mobile
home space" shall include factory-built houses.

(d)

Area requirements.
(1)

Combining with multiple residential district (R-3). No mobile home park or mobile home subdivision in the T district, when combined with the
R-3 district, shall have an area of less than four acres, and not more than 12 mobile home spaces shall be provided on each acre of the gross
area of the mobile home park.

(2)

Combining with highway commercial district (C-H). No mobile home park or mobile home subdivision in the T district, when combined with
the C-H district, shall have an area of less than three acres, and not more than 15 mobile home spaces shall be provided on each acre of the
gross area of the mobile home park.

(e)

Location of spaces; mobile home parks and subdivisions. Mobile home spaces in the T district shall be located as follows:
(1)

No mobile home space shall be located closer than 20 feet from the property line of the mobile home park when such line is also a public
street. The term "street," as used in this section, shall not include alley.

(f)

(2)

No mobile home shall be placed closer than five feet from any other portion of the property line of a mobile home park.

(3)

No mobile home shall be placed closer than five feet from its side lot or space boundary line.

Mobile home parks; development standards in T districts.
(1)

Front yards. Each mobile home park shall have a front yard of 20 feet extending for the full width of the parcel devoted to such use, and such
area shall be landscaped and maintained in a clean and orderly manner.

34/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
(2)

Side yards and rear yards. Each mobile home park shall have a rear yard and a side yard on both sides of the parcel devoted to such use of not
less than five feet, except that where a side or rear yard abuts a street, the yard shall be not less than 20 feet.

(3)

Storage areas. Storage areas shall be provided for the storage of boats, campers, camping trailers, utility trailers, and extra vehicles at the
following ratio: 100 square feet of vehicle storage area shall be provided for each mobile home space. Each vehicle storage area shall be
completely enclosed with a fence six feet in height and shall be screened from exterior view.

(4)
(g)

Pet exercise areas. If pets are allowed, a separate area of at least 250 square feet shall be provided for their exercise.

Mobile home subdivisions; lot development standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in the subdivision or zoning regulations,
the following shall be the minimum standards of development within the T district for mobile home subdivisions:
(1)

Height. No building, structure, or vehicle, except a recreation building, erected on or moved onto a lot shall have a height which exceeds 30 feet.

(2)

Front yards. There shall be a front yard depth of not less than 20 feet. No recreation building shall be stored in such front yard.

(3)

Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard depth of not less than five feet.

(4)

Side yards. There shall be a side yard of at least five feet on both sides; provided, however, that an open carport or patio, and the support
columns thereof, may be placed within four feet of the side property line.

(5)

Lot size. Every lot shall be of a size and shape which will provide reasonable area for private use and development and for the convenient
placement of one mobile home and appropriate accessory buildings or structures.

(6)

Roofed area. The total roofed area, including the mobile home and accessory buildings or structures, shall not exceed 75 percent of the net
area of the lot.

(h)

Landscaping. The setback area abutting a public street in the T district shall be planted in grass, shrubs, trees, or other appropriate decorative
materials and shall be kept landscaped and maintained in a clean and orderly manner.

(i)

Fences. A solid fence not less than six feet in height shall be placed and maintained in the T district around the interior perimeter of a mobile home
park or subdivision.

(j)

Access. All mobile home spaces in the T district shall be served from internal, private streets within the mobile home park or subdivision, and there
shall be no direct access from a mobile home space to a public street or alley.

(k)

Internal streets. All private, internal streets in T districts within mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall be paved with surfacing and
improvements, to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The pavement width shall not:

(l)

(1)

Be less than 28 feet in width if parking is prohibited on either side of the paved surface and adequate guest parking is provided;

(2)

Be less than 32 feet if parking is permitted on one side of the paved surface; or

(3)

Be less than 40 feet if parking is permitted on both sides of the paved surface.

Parking requirements. In every mobile home park or subdivision in the T district, two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile
home space. One off-street guest parking space shall also be provided for every four mobile home spaces if on-street parking is not provided. Each
off-street guest parking space shall be accessible to each of the four mobile home spaces and shall be within a reasonable distance of the four
mobile home spaces.

(m)

Open space. Recreation or open space of at least 1,000 square feet in area, plus 150 square feet for each mobile home space over ten, shall be
provided in each mobile home park or subdivision in the T district. Such open space may be used in more than one location, but no one location shall
contain less than 1,000 square feet.

(n)

Mobile home subdivisions; application of state laws. The provisions of Health and Safety Code div. 13, pt. 2 (Health and Safety Code § 18000 et
seq.), Health and Safety Code div. 13, pt. 6 (Health and Safety Code § 19960 et seq.), and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder shall
apply to mobile home subdivisions in the T district; provided, however, that all installations of all utilities shall comply with city standards when such
standards exceed state standards.

(o)

Mobile home subdivisions; maintenance of nondedicated common areas and improvements. All common areas, including open or green spaces,
community recreation facilities, washrooms, common walkways, parking areas, private streets, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, and all improvements
set forth in section 4-5-242 relating to subdivisions which are not dedicated and accepted in the T district, may be constructed only upon full and
adequate provision for their preservation and future maintenance in a manner acceptable to the commission. Such provision may be satisfied by a
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions duly signed and acknowledged by the owners; articles of incorporation or association, to be
filed with the secretary of state, forming a corporation or association, which shall include clauses empowering the entity created to own and maintain
all the properties within its jurisdiction and to exercise the powers and duties of the entity which shall be fully set forth in the declaration; bylaws of
the entity which shall set forth the rules of membership, fees, assessments, membership rights, and principles; and forms of deeds incorporating the
declaration by reference to its recording data. All documents shall be referred to the city attorney for review and have the approval of the
commission as to their sufficiency to accomplish this purpose. The owners of the individual lots, as a condition of ownership of such lots, shall
participate in the legal entity so formed and be responsible to such legal entity for the cost of performing the necessary maintenance. Any failure to
properly maintain the common areas and improvements shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance
endangering the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.

(p)

Signs. Not more than one sign for each entrance to a public street from the mobile home park or subdivision in the T district shall be constructed.
Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area or eight feet in height from the ground and shall be parallel to the property line. If illuminated, the
illumination shall be by indirect lighting. Each sign shall be adjacent to the entrance from the public street to the mobile home park or subdivision

35/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
and not closer than 300 feet to any other such sign. No flashing or intermittent lighting shall be permitted.
(q)

Plans; applications; fees. Applications for T district mobile home park or mobile home subdivision approval shall be on forms furnished by the
planning department. To cover the costs of investigations, plan checking, and other incidental administrative costs, the applicant shall pay to the city
treasurer at the time of filing plans for the development of a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision a fee determined by the council.

(r)

Plans; approval. Whenever a T district mobile home park or subdivision plan is submitted to the city by the state division of housing pursuant to the
provisions of the Health and Safety Code div. 13, pt. 2 (Health and Safety Code § 18000 et seq.) and Health and Safety Code div. 13, pt. 6 (Health and
Safety Code § 19960 et seq.), the park plan shall be submitted to the commission for approval as to proper zoning and compliance with the
provisions of this section. The commission, by a majority vote of all its members, shallhave the authority to grant such approval or to vary the terms
and conditions of this section by making them less restrictive when, as, and if, in a particular instance, hardship, or peculiar circumstance, it appears
equitable to vary them, and the main purpose and intent of the provisions of this section can still be preserved.

(s)

Reversions to former classifications. Any land classified in the T district shall revert to its former classification if development is not commenced
within 18 months and completed within three years after the effective date of the ordinance classifying such land in the T district.

State law reference— Mobile homes and manufactured housing, Health and Safety Code § 18000 et seq.; mobile home parks, Health and Safety Code § 18200 et
seq.; factory built housing, Health and Safety Code § 19960 et seq.
Sec. 4-29-020. - Residential-professional districts (R-4).

Subject to the

Conditional

Minimum

Minimum Lot

Maximum

Maximum

Minimum

Minimum Side

Minimum Rear

provisions of

use

Building Site

Width Required

Allowable

Allowable

Front

Yard Required

Yard Required

article 5 of this

permit

Required

(feet)

Lot

Height

Yard

(feet)

(feet)

chapter, none

required

(square feet)

Coverage

(feet)

Required

but the

by

following uses

all

or uses which, in

Structures

(feet)

the opinion of
the commission,
are similar shall
be permitted.
(See section 4-6252.)

Subsection

(a) All uses

Corner

Interior

Corner

Interior

Corner

Interior

Corner

Interior

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

As speci ed in the R-3 district (as found in this table)

permitted in the
R-3 district (as
found in this
table)

36/170

7/11/2019

(b) Hotels,

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Yes

7,500

7,500

50

50

motels, rooming

60

35

20

percent

5

6

15

15

except

houses and

20 on

boardinghouses,

street

lodges, clubs,

side

and rest homes

(c) Bars,

Yes

In accordance with requirements for principal use and as speci ed in the conditional use permit

Yes

7,500

restaurants or
co ee shops
accessory to
uses permitted
in the district,
and where
entrance to such
is from a lobby
or court without
direct access to
a public street
(d) Professional
o ces and

7,500

50

50

60

35

20

10

5

5

5

percent

clinics

(e) One sign not

No

15

over eight
square feet,
appurtenant to
the principal use
of the property

37/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

(f) Landscaped

Yes

7,500

7,500

50

50

10

public or private

35

20

5

5

5

5

percent

parking lots
when adjacent
to a C or M
district
(g) Commercial
and professional
uses shall be
allowed to have
reduced front
and side setback
requirements as
approved by the
commission.
Each reduction
shall be
reviewed in
relation to
adjacent uses
and setbacks.

Sec. 4-29-030. - Combing parking district (-P).

Subject to

Conditional

Minimum

Minimum Lot

Maximum

Maximum

Minimum

Minimum Side

Minimum Rear

Mini

the

use

Building Site

Width Required

Allowable

Allowable

Front

Yard Required

Yard Required

Lot

provisions

permit

Required

(feet)

Lot

Height

Yard

(feet)

(feet)

Area

of article 5

required

(square feet)

Coverage

(feet)

Required

Fam

(feet)

Unit

of this

by

chapter,

all

(squ

none but

Structures

feet)

the
following
uses or uses
which, in
the opinion
of the
commission,
are similar
shall be
permitted.
(See section
4-6-252.)

38/170

7/11/2019

Subsection

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Corner

Interior

Corner

Interior

Corner

Interior

Corner

Interior

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

Lot

(a) As
speci ed in
the district
in which the
-P district is
combined

39/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

ARTICLE 3 - SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4-30. - STANDARDS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USES
Sections:

Sec. 4-30-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter expands upon the zoning district development standards of Article 2 by addressing additional details of site planning, project design, and
the operation of land uses. The intent of these standards is to ensure that proposed development is compatible with existing and future development
on neighboring properties, and produces an environment of stable and desirable character, consistent with the General Plan and any applicable
specific plan.
Sec. 4-30-020. - Applicability.
The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all proposed development and new land uses, except as specified in Chapter 4-72 (Nonconforming
Uses, Structures, and Parcels), and shall be considered in combination with the standards for the applicable zoning district in Article 2 (Zoning Districts,
Allowable Land Uses, and Permit Requirements), and those in Article 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses). If there is a conflict, the standards in Article 4
shall control.
Sec. 4-30-030. - Fences, Walls, and Screening.
A.

Applicability. The requirements of this Section apply to all fences and walls unless otherwise stated.
1.

Exemptions. These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by regulations of a State or Federal agency, or by the City for reasons of
public safety.

B.

Height limits. Each fence, wall, and hedge shall comply with the height limitations shown in Table 3-1. See also Figure 3-1. A fence or wall with a
height greater than six feet and a length greater than 50 feet shall require Architectural Review in compliance with Section 4-52-020, except for open
and wire fencing in the RE zoning district.
TABLE 3-1 - MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FENCES AND WALLS

Location

Maximum Height (1)

40/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Within front yard setback

3 ft

Within side or rear yard setback

7 ft (2)

Within street side setback

3 ft

At intersections of alleys, streets, and driveways within sight visibility

3 ft

areas. See 9-30-040.E
Outside of a required setback

3 ft

Within front yard setback

As determined by the height limit for structures within the applicable
zoning district.

Notes:
(1)

Additional height may be authorized through Use Permit approval (Section 4-52-050) for commercial uses, school grounds, tennis courts and
similar areas.

(2)

A fence or wall may be allowed up to eight feet in height when the portions of the fence above six feet are of an open design (e.g., lattice,
wrought iron or grille work), provided that a Building Permit may be required.

C.

Measurement of fence and wall height. Fence height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the grade at the base of the fence and the
top edge of the fence material.

D.

Specific fence and wall requirements.
1.

Fencing between different land uses. Fencing between different land uses shall be provided in compliance with Subsection F. (Screening).

2.

Swimming pools, spas, and similar features. Swimming pools/spas and other similar water features shall be fenced in compliance with
Building Code requirements, regardless of the other requirements of this Section.

3.

Outdoor equipment, storage, and work areas. Non-residential outdoor uses and equipment adjacent to a residential use shall be fenced
and/or screened in compliance with Subsection F. (Screening).

4.

Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect archaeological or historic resources, trees, or other similar sensitive
features during site preparation and construction. This fencing shall be approved by the Director.

E.

Prohibited materials. The following fence materials are prohibited unless approved by the Director for animal control, special security needs, or
required by a City, State, or Federal law or regulation.
1.

Barbed wire, or electrified fence, except where authorized by the Director within an I or M zoning district;

2.

Razor wire in conjunction with a fence or wall, or by itself within any zoning district, except where authorized by the Director in the M zoning
district.

3.
F.

Chain link fences without slats, except where approved by the Architectural Review Committee within any C, I or M zoning district.

Screening. This Subsection establishes standards for the screening and separation of adjoining residential and nonresidential land uses, equipment
and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas.
1.

Screening between different land uses. A commercial or industrial land use proposed on a site adjacent to a residential zoning district shall
provide screening at the parcel boundary as follows. Other nonresidential uses adjacent to a residential use may also be required by the review
authority to comply with these requirements.
a.

The screen shall consist of plant materials and a solid, decorative wall of masonry or similar durable material, six feet in height (up to eight
feet may be allowed in compliance with Subsection B. (Height limits). Openings or pedestrian connections may be required at the
discretion of the review authority.

b.

The maximum height of the wall shall comply with the provisions of Subsection B. (Height limits).

c.

The decorative wall shall be architecturally treated on both sides, subject to the approval of the review authority.

d.

A landscaping strip with a minimum width of five feet shall be installed adjacent to a screening wall, except that 10 feet of landscaping
shall be provided between a parking lot and a screening wall, in compliance with Section 4-34-040-C-4-d.

e.

The review authority may waive or approve a substitute for the requirements of this Subsection F.1 if the review authority first determines
that:
(1)

The relationship of the proposed uses make the required screening unnecessary;

(2)

The intent of this Section can be successfully met by means of alternative screening methods;

41/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

2.

(3)

Physical constraints on the site make the required screening infeasible; or

(4)

The physical characteristics of the site or adjoining parcels make the required screening unnecessary.

Mechanical equipment, loading docks, and refuse areas.
a.

Roof or ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view from adjoining public streets and rights-of-way and
adjoining areas zoned for residential uses. This equipment includes air conditioning, heating, ventilation ducts, and exhaust vents, loading
docks, refuse storage areas, and utility services, electrical transformers, gas meters, etc.

b.

The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, architectural
style and landscaping.

3.

Outdoor building materials and garden supply areas. See Section 4-44-100 (Outdoor Display and Sales).

4.

Outdoor storage and work areas. See Section 4-44-110 (Outdoor Storage).

Sec. 4-30-040. - Height Limits and Exceptions.
A.

Purpose. This Section describes the required methods for measuring the height of structures in compliance with the height limits established by this
Zoning and Subdivision Code, and exceptions to those height limits.

B.

Maximum height of structures. The height of each structure shall not exceed the height limit established for the applicable zoning district by Article
2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), except as otherwise provided by this Section.

C.

Height measurement. The maximum allowable height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the natural grade of the site at the lowest
elevation of the structure, to the highest point on the roof of the structure. The location of natural grade shall be established in a manner consistent
with parcels in the vicinity as determined by the Director, and shall not be artificially raised to gain additional building height.
Figure 3-1 - Height Measurement

D.

Exceptions to height limits. The following structures and structural features may exceed the height limits of this Zoning and Subdivision Code as
noted:
1.

Chimneys, cupolas, flag poles, monuments, spires, theater lofts, towers, vents, mechanical equipment screening, water tanks, and similar
structures, may exceed the height limit of the applicable zoning district by a maximum of eight feet, except where a greater height is authorized
in compliance with following Subsection D.2 through Architectural Review approval.

2.

The height limits of Article 2 may be increased by a maximum of 20 percent through Use Permit approval in compliance with Section 4-52-050,
and subject to the approval of the Fire Chief.

3.

Telecommunications facilities, including antennas, poles, towers, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, may exceed the height limit
established for the applicable zoning district in compliance with Chapter 4-44 (Telecommunications Facilities).

E.

Height limit at street corners. Development proposed adjacent to any public or private street or alley intersection in other than the C-D (Downtown
Commercial) zoning district shall be designed to provide a traffic safety visibility area for pedestrian and traffic safety. See Figure 3-3.
1.

Measurement of visibility area. A traffic safety visibility area is a triangle measured as follows, and may include private property and/or public
right-of-way.
The visibility area shall be defined by measuring 35 feet from the intersection of the extension of the front and street side curb lines (or the
right-of-way lines where there is no curb) and connecting the lines across the property.

2.

Height limit. No structure, sign, vehicle, equipment, landscape element, or other visible obstructions shall exceed 36 inches in height within the
traffic safety visibility area, except for trees with their canopy trimmed to a minimum of eight feet above grade.
Figure 3-3 - Required Traffic Safety Visibility Area

42/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-30-050. - Noise standards.
A.

Purpose. This Section implements the policies of the Noise Element of the General Plan, and provides standards for noise mitigation that are
intended to protect the community health, safety, and general welfare by limiting exposure to the unhealthful effects of noise.

B.

Applicability. No use, activity, or process shall exceed the maximum allowable noise levels established by this Section, except for the following noise
sources:
1.

Emergencies. Public safety warning devices (e.g., ambulance, fire, and police sirens), sound for alerting persons to the existence of an
emergency, or the performance of authorized emergency work;

2.

State or Federal preempted activities. Any activity regulated by State or Federal law;

3.

Public health and safety activities. Construction, maintenance, and/or repair operations by public agencies and/or utility companies or their
contractors that are serving public interests, and/or protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare;

C.

4.

Parks. Public agency sanctioned recreational activities and programs conducted in public parks; and

5.

Solid waste collection. The authorized collection of solid waste.

Noise source standards.
1.

Noise level limitations. No use, activity, or process within the City shall generate noise in excess of the levels identified by Tables 3-2 and 3-3, as
the noise is measured at the property line of a sensitive noise source identified in Tables 3-2 and 3-3.
a.

If the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable noise level standard in any category shown in Table 3-2, the applicable
standards shall be adjusted to equal the ambient noise level.

b.

If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped to allow measurement of the ambient noise
level, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the applicable noise level standards identified
in Table 3-2.

Notwithstanding the above requirements, no person shall allow or cause the generation of any noise of a type, volume, pitch, tone, repetition,
or duration that would be found to be a nuisance by a reasonable person beyond the boundaries of the property where the noise is generated.
TABLE 3-2 - MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE LEVEL BY RECEIVING LAND USE

Noise Sensitive Land Use

Outdoor Activity

Interior Spaces

Area (1)(2)
dBA Ldn

dBA Ldn

dBA Leq

Residential

65

45

N.A.

Transient lodging

65

45

N.A.

Hospitals, extended care

65

45

N.A.

Theater, auditorium

N.A.

N.A.

35

Religious facility, meeting hall

65

N.A.

40

43/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

O ces

N.A.

N.A.

45

School, library, museum

N.A.

N.A.

45

Playground, park

70

N.A.

N.A.

Notes:
(1)

Where the location of outdoor activity areas is unknown, the exterior noise level standard shall be applied to the property line of the
receiving land use.

(2)

Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 65 dB Ldn/CNEL or less using a practical application of the bestavailable noise reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 70 dB Ldn/CNEL may be allowed provided that available exterior
noise level reduction measures have been implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.

TABLE 3-3 - NOISE STANDARDS FOR SHORT-DURATION EVENTS NEAR RESIDENTIAL AREAS
Duration of Sound

Maximum Allowable Sound Level (1)

(Minutes per Hour)

Day/Evening dB (7am to 10pm)

Night dB (10pm to 7pm)

30 - 60

50

40

15 - 30

55

45

5 - 15

60

50

1-5

65

55

Less than 1 minute

70

60

Notes:
(1)

If the offensive noise contains a steady, audible tone (such as a screech or hum), is a repetitive noise such as hammering, or contains
speech or music, the maximum allowable sound level shall be reduced by 5 dB.

2.

Acoustical analysis required. Where the Director determines that a proposed non-residential use on a site adjacent to a residential zoning
district may generate noise in excess of any limit established by Table 3-2, and/or where the use may generate noise in outdoor areas in excess
of 60 dBA, the planning permit application for the use shall include an acoustical analysis by a qualified professional approved by the Director.
a.

Contents. The analysis shall determine the potential for stationary source noise impacts to neighboring land uses, include field
measurements to determine more precise locations for existing and projected future noise levels (based on traffic projections in the
Circulation Element of the General Plan or as otherwise accepted by the City), and recommend appropriate mitigation measures.

b.

Preferred mitigation measures for receptor sites. When development is subject to high noise levels requiring mitigation, the following
measures shall be considered and preference shall be given where feasible in the following order:

3.

(1)

Site layout, including setbacks, open space separation and shielding of noise sensitive uses with non-noise-sensitive uses;

(2)

Acoustical treatment of buildings; or

(3)

Structural measures: construction of earth berms and/or wood or concrete barriers.

Limitation on hours of construction. In order to allow construction schedules to take advantage of the weather and normal daylight hours, and
to ensure that nearby residents as well as nonresidential activities are not disturbed by the early morning or late night activities, the City has
established the following limits on construction.
TABLE 3-4 - ALLOWABLE HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION

Monday through Friday

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

44/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Saturday

8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

Sunday

Construction activities may be allowed by the Commission or Council
only between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.

4.

Limitation on truck deliveries. Truck deliveries to a commercial or industrial parcel adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be limited to
the daylight hours unless the Director authorizes other delivery times based on the determination that there is either no feasible alternative, or
there are overriding transportation and traffic management benefits to scheduling deliveries at night.

D.

Noise receptor standards. Where noise-sensitive land uses are proposed in areas exposed to existing or projected noise levels in excess of the
standards in Tables 3-2 and 3-3, the City shall require an acoustical analysis as part of the environmental review process so that noise mitigation may
be included in the project design, so that proposed structures are designed to limit intruding noise in interior rooms to 45 dBA Ldn. At the discretion
of the Director, the requirement for an acoustical analysis may be waived if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
1.

The development is for less than five single-family dwellings or less than 10,000 square feet of total gross floor area for office buildings,
churches, or meeting halls;

2.

The noise source in question consists of a single roadway or railroad for which up-to-date noise exposure information is available. An acoustical
analysis will be required if the noise source is a stationary noise source, or if there are multiple noise sources that could affect the project;

3.

The projected future noise exposure at the exterior of proposed buildings or outdoor activity areas does not exceed 65 dBA Ldn;

4.

The topography of the area is essentially flat; and

5.

Effective noise mitigation, as determined by the Director, is incorporated into the project design. Such measures can include, but are not limited
to, the use of building setbacks, building orientation, noise barriers.
If closed windows are required for compliance with interior noise level standards, air conditioning or a mechanical ventilation system will be
required.

E.

Noise measurement. Exterior noise levels shall be measured at the property line of the noise sensitive land use receiving the noise. Noise
measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the 'A' weighted scale at slow meter response. Fast meter response shall be used only
for an impulsive noise.

Sec. 4-30-060. - Outdoor lighting.
Outdoor lighting on commercial private property shall comply with the following requirements.
A.

An outdoor light fixture shall be limited to a maximum height of 14 feet or the height of the nearest building, whichever is less.

B.

Outdoor lighting shall utilize energy-efficient (high pressure sodium, low pressure sodium, hard-wired compact flourescent, or other lighting
technology that is of equal or greater energy efficiency) fixtures/lamps.

C.

Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or recessed to reduce light bleed to adjoining properties, by:
1.

Ensuring that the light source (e.g., bulb, etc.) is not visible from off the site; and

2.

Confining glare and reflections within the boundaries of the site to the maximum extent feasible.

Each light fixture shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way, so that no on-site light fixture
directly illuminates an area off the site.
D.

No permanently installed lighting shall blink, flash, or be of unusually high intensity or brightness, as determined by the Director.

Sec. 4-30-070. - Performance standards.
A.

Purpose. This Section provides performance standards that are designed to minimize various potential operational impacts of land uses and
development within the City, and promote compatibility with adjoining areas and land uses.

B.

Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to all new and existing land uses, including permanent and temporary uses in all zoning districts,
unless an exemption is specifically provided. Uses existing on the effective date of this Section shall not be altered or modified thereafter to conflict
with these standards.

C.

Combustibles and explosives. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the Uniform Fire
Code, and California Code of Regulations Title 19.

D.

Dust. Activities that may generate dust emissions (e.g., construction, grading, commercial gardening, and similar operations) shall be conducted to
limit the emissions beyond the site boundary to the maximum extent feasible. Appropriate methods of dust management shall include the following,
subject to approval by the Public Works Director and compliance with San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District.
1.

Scheduling. Grading shall be designed and grading activities shall be scheduled to ensure that repeat grading will not be required, and that

45/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
completion of the dust-generating activity (e.g., construction, paving or planting) will occur as soon as possible.
2.

Operations during high winds. Clearing, earth-moving, excavation operations or grading activities shall cease when the wind speed exceeds 25
miles per hour averaged over one hour.

3.

Limiting the area of disturbance. The area disturbed by clearing, demolition, earth-moving, excavation operations or grading shall be
minimized at all times.

4.

Dust control. Fugitive dust emissions shall be controlled by regular watering, paving or other treatment of permanent on-site roads and
construction roads, the covering of trucks carrying loads with dust content, and/or other dust-preventive measures (e.g., hydroseeding, etc.).

5.

Revegetation. Graded areas shall be revegetated as soon as possible to minimize dust and erosion. Disturbed areas of the construction site
that are to remain inactive longer than three months shall be seeded and watered until grass cover is grown and maintained; and

E.

Ground vibration. No ground vibration shall be generated that is perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of the
site, except for vibrations from temporary construction or demolition activities, and motor vehicle operations.

F.

Light and glare. Light or glare from mechanical or chemical processes, or from reflective materials used or stored on a site, shall be shielded or
modified to prevent emission of light or glare beyond the property line. Outdoor lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section 4-30-060
(Outdoor Lighting).

G.

Liquid waste. No liquid shall be discharged into a public or private body of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in
compliance with applicable regulations of the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

H.

Noise. The City's noise standards are in Section 4-30-050 (Noise Standards).

I.

Odor. No obnoxious odor or fumes shall be emitted that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property line of the site.

J.

Radioactivity, electrical disturbance or electromagnetic interference. None of the following shall be emitted:
1.

Radioactivity, in a manner that does not comply with all applicable State and Federal regulations; or

2.

Electrical disturbance or electromagnetic interference that interferes with normal radio or television reception, or with the function of other
electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site; or that does not comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and other applicable State and Federal regulations.

Sec. 4-30-080. - Public improvement requirements.
The development of an approved project shall include the construction of improvements to each public street frontage of the site as required by the review
authority and City public improvement standards. These on-site and/or off-site improvements may include the widening of an existing street, and/or the installation
or reinstallation of curb, gutter, and sidewalk; the installation of street trees and other landscaping within the public right-of-way; the installation of drainage
facilities as required by the City Engineer, and/or other improvements determined by the review authority to be reasonably related to the needs for pedestrian and
vehicle circulation, and community infrastructure demands created by the project. See also Section 4-30-110 (Underground Utilities).
Sec. 4-30-090. - Setback regulations and exceptions.
A.

Purpose. This Section provides standards for the use and minimum size of setbacks. These standards provide open areas around structures for:
visibility and traffic safety; access to and around structures; access to natural light, ventilation and direct sunlight; separation of incompatible land
uses; and space for privacy, landscaping and recreation.

B.

Setback requirements.
1.

Minimum setbacks for all structures. Each structure shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district, and with any
setbacks established for specific uses by Article 4, except as otherwise provided by this Section. No portion of any structure, including eaves or
roof overhangs, shall extend beyond a property line; or into an access easement or street right-of-way.

2.

Infill development within previously approved projects. Where the City has established specific setbacks for individual vacant parcels through
the approval of a specific plan, subdivision map, or other entitlement, those setbacks shall apply to continuing development within the
approved project instead of the setbacks required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

3.

Exemptions from setback requirements. The minimum setback requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code apply to all development
and new land uses, except the following:
a.

A projection into a required setback allowed by Subsection E.;

b.

A fence or wall six feet or less in height above the grade of the site, when located outside of a front or street side setback;

c.

Decks, earthworks, free-standing solar devices, steps, terraces, and other site design elements that are placed directly upon grade and do
not exceed a height of 18 inches above the surrounding grade at any point;

C.

d.

A sign in compliance with Chapter 4-38 (Signs); and

e.

A water well, related equipment and structures not exceeding a height of 48 inches above grade.

Measurement of setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows, except that the Director may require different setback measurement methods
where he or she determines that unusual parcel configuration makes the following infeasible or ineffective. See Figure 3-4.
1.

Front yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel (or
edge of access easement on a private street) to the nearest point of the wall of the structure, except as follows. The front property line is the

46/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
most narrow dimension of a lot adjacent to a street.
a.

Averaging. In an R-E or R-1 zoning district, where four or more parcels in one block have been improved with structures (other than
accessory structures) on June 21, 1965, the required front yard depth for the applicable zoning district shall not apply, but rather, the
required front setback on the block shall be not less than the average depth of the front yards of the parcels with existing structures.

b.

Mapped street with future improvements. If the City has established a plan that identifies a right-of-way for the future construction of a
new street or the widening of an existing street, a required front or street side setback shall be measured from the line shown on the plan.

c.

Infill development on a parcel within a previously approved project. Where the City has established specific setback requirements for
individual single-family residential parcels through the approval of a specific plan, subdivision map, or other entitlement, prior to the
effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, those setbacks shall apply to infill development within the approved project instead of
the setbacks required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

d.

Flag lots. The front setback on a parcel with a fee ownership strip extending from a street or right-of-way to the building area of the parcel
shall be measured from the nearest point of the wall of the structure to the point where the access strip meets the bulk of the parcel;
establishing a building line parallel to the lot line nearest to the public street or right-of-way.

e.

Corner lots. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of the structure to the nearest point of the most narrow
street frontage property line. If the property lines on both street frontages are of the same length, the property line to be used for front
yard setback measurement shall be determined by the Director.

2.

Side yard setbacks. The side yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the
nearest point of the wall of the structure; establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear
yards.

3.

Street side yard setbacks. The side yard on the street side of a corner parcel shall be measured from the nearest point on the side property line
bounding the street, or the edge of an easement for a private road, whichever results in the greatest setback from the roadway.

4.

Rear yard setbacks. The rear yard shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line to the nearest line of the
structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line.
a.

The Director shall determine the location of the required rear yard setback on a double-frontage parcel.

b.

Where a parcel has no rear lot line because its side lot lines converge to a point, an assumed line five feet long within the parcel, parallel to
and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining the depth of the
required rear yard.

Figure 3-4 - Location & Measurement of Setbacks
D.

Limitations on uses of setbacks.
1.

2.

Structures. Required setback areas shall not be occupied by structures other than:
a.

The fences and walls permitted by Section 4-30-030 (Fences and Walls); and

b.

The projections into setbacks allowed by Subsection F.

Storage. No front or street side setback shall be used for the accumulation, placement or storage of automobiles or other motor vehicles,
building materials, scrap, junk or machinery except for the following:
a.

Automobiles or other motor vehicles regularly in use, that are parked within a designated off-street parking area; and

b.

Building materials required for construction on the parcel, immediately before and during a construction project which has a valid Building
Permit in force.

3.

Parking. Required residential parking spaces shall not be located within required setback areas. Temporary (overnight) parking is allowable
within required setback areas only on paved driveways, in compliance with Section 4-36-070 (Parking Design and Development Standards).

4.

Storage of habitable trailer prohibited. No habitable trailer shall be stored or parked within any required street setback area in any nonresidential zoning district except where limited display areas are authorized through Use Permit approval (Section 4-62-050).

47/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
5.
E.

Mechanical equipment. See Subsection F.

Allowed projections into setbacks. Architectural features attached to the primary structure may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the
front, side and rear yard setbacks, in compliance with Table 3-3. See also Figure 3-5.
TABLE 3-3 - ALLOWABLE PROJECTIONS INTO SETBACKS

Projecting Feature

Allowed Projection into Speci ed Setback
Front

Side

Rear

Setback

Setback

Setback

6 ft.

May project to property line

6 ft.

(2)

6 ft.

(2)

(2)

6 ft.

Bay window, or similar habitable projecting feature

24 in.

24 in. (1)

24 in.

Chimney/ replace, 6 ft. or less in breadth

24 in.

24 in. (1)

24 in.

Cornice, eave, awning, roof overhang

36 in.

24 in. (1)

36 in.

Deck, landing, porch, stairway - Uncovered, unenclosed,
and less than 30 in. above grade
Balcony, deck, landing, porch, stairway - Which may be
roofed but is otherwise unenclosed
Balcony, deck, landing, porch, stairway - Covered and

Not allowed in setback

enclosed
Balcony, deck, landing, porch, stairway - Uncovered and
unenclosed, 30 in. or more above grade

Notes:

F.

(1)

Feature may project no closer than 3 feet to any side or rear property line.

(2)

Feature may project no closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line.

Setback requirements for specific structures:
1.

Accessory structures. See Section 4-44-020 (Accessory Uses and Structures).

2.

Fences. See Section 4-30-030 (Fences and Walls).

48/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
3.

Detached decks and other site design elements. Detached decks, freestanding solar devices, steps, terraces, and other site design elements whic
directly upon the grade, and which exceed a height of 18 inches above the surrounding grade at any point, shall conform to the setback requireme
Zoning and Subdivision Code for detached accessory structures. (Note: a site design element less than 18 inches above grade is exempt from setba
requirements.)

4.

Swimming pools, hot tubs, etc. A swimming pool, hot tub, or spa on a parcel of 15,000 square feet or less shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from side and rear property lines, and shall not be located within a front setback. A swimming pool, hot tub, or spa on a parcel larger than
15,000 square feet shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. All equipment associated with a pool, hot tub
and/or spa on any parcel shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district.

5.

Mechanical equipment. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment located outside of a structure shall comply with the setback requirements of
the applicable zoning district. Examples of this equipment include swimming pool pumps and filters, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning,
and similar equipment.

Sec. 4-30-100. - Solid waste/recyclable materials storage.
A.

Purpose. This Section provides standards which recognize the City's support for and compliance with the California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling
Access Act (Public Resources Code Sections 42900 through 42911).

Figure 3-5 - Solid Waste Enclosure
B.

Applicability. These requirements apply to new multi-family residential and nonresidential development, or changes to existing multi-family
residential or nonresidential development that increase gross floor area by 25 percent or more.

C.

Extent of storage area required. Solid waste and recyclables storage areas shall be provided in the number, dimensions, and types required by the
local waste hauler. Additional storage areas may be required, as deemed necessary by the Director.

D.

Enclosure requirements. Storage areas shall be fully enclosed by a six-foot high masonry wall or other solid enclosure that is architecturally
compatible with adjacent structures. Gates shall be solid and continuously maintained in working order. Landscaping shall be provided to soften and
screen the enclosure in compliance with Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards). See Figure 3-6.

Sec. 4-30-110. - Undergrounding of utilities.
All electric and telephone facilities, fire alarm conduits, street lighting wiring, cable television and other wiring conduits, and similar facilities shall be placed
underground by the developer. The Council may grant a modification, including a complete waiver of the undergrounding requirement, after considering the
general purposes and nature of the proposed development.
CHAPTER 4-32. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES
Sections:

Sec. 4-32-010. - Purpose.
As required by Government Code Section 65915, this Chapter offers incentives for the development of housing that is affordable to the types of
households and qualifying residents identified in Section 4-32-020. This Chapter is intended to implement the requirements of Government Code
Sections 65302, 65923, and 65915, et seq., and the Housing Element of the General Plan.

49/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-32-020. - Eligibility for bonus and incentives.
In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives as provided by this Chapter, a proposed housing development shall comply with the
following requirements, and satisfy all other applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, except as provided by Section 4-32-030 (Types
of Bonuses and Other Incentives Allowed).
A.

Resident requirements. The housing development be designed and constructed so that at least:
1.

20 percent of the total number of proposed units are for lower income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5;
or

2.

10 percent of the total number of proposed units are for very low income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50105;
or

3.

50 percent of the total number of proposed units are for qualifying residents (senior citizens) as defined by Civil Code Section 51.2; or

4.

20 percent of the total dwelling units in a condominium project as defined in Civil Code Section 2351(f), for persons and families of
moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

A density bonus granted in compliance with Section 4-32.030 shal not be included when determining the number of housing units that is equal
to the percentages required above.
B.

Minimum project size to qualify for density bonus. The density bonus provided by this Chapter shall be available only to a housing
development of five or more units.

C.

Condominium conversion projects. A condominium conversion project shall comply with the eligibility and other requirements in Government
Code Section 65915.5.

Sec. 4-32-030. - Types of bonuses and incentives allowed.
The amount of a density bonus, and the extent of other incentives allowed a housing development shall be determined by the Council in compliance
with this Section.
A.

Extent of bonus and incentives allowed. A housing development that satisfies all applicable provisions of this Chapter shall be entitled to a
density bonus as identified in Subsection B., and at least one of the other incentives identified in Subsection C., except:
1.

As provided by Government Code Section 65915.5 for a condominium conversion project; and

2.

That if an applicant agrees to construct both 20 percent of the total units for lower income households and 10 percent of the total units for
very low income households, the developer is entitled to a density bonus and at least one additional incentive identified in this Section.

If a density bonus and/or other incentives cannot be accommodated on a site due to strict compliance with the provisions of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code, the Council may waive or modify other development standards as necessary to accommodate all bonus units and other
incentives to which the development is entitled.
B.

Density bonus. The calculation of a density bonus in compliance with this Subsection that results in fractional units shall be rounded up to the
next whole number, as required by State law. For the purposes of calculating a bonus, the residential units do not have to be based upon
individual subdivision maps or parcels.
1.

General bonus. A density bonus for a housing development that complies with the eligibility requirements in Sections 4-32-020.A.1, A.2, or
A.3 shall consist of at least a 25 percent increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed by the applicable General Plan
designation and zoning district, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant.

2.

Bonus for condominium project. A density bonus for a condominium project that complies with the eligibility requirements in Section 432-020.A.4 shall consist of at least a 10 percent increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed by the applicable General Plan
designation and zoning district, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant.

C.

Other incentives. A qualifying project shall be entitled to at least one of the following concessions or incentives identified by Government Code
Section 65915(b), in addition to the density bonus allowed by Subsection B.:
1.

A reduction in the site development standards of this Zoning and Subdivision Code (e.g., site coverage limitations, setbacks, reduced parcel
sizes, and/or parking requirements), or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the
California Building Standards Commission in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 18901 et seq.;

2.

Approval of mixed-use zoning not otherwise allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in conjunction with the housing development, if
non-residential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, and the non-residential land uses are compatible with the
housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where the project will be located; and/or

3.

Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer and are acceptable by the City or the City that will result in
identifiable cost reductions.

The Council shall approve one or more of the above incentives, notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, unless it makes a written
finding, based on substantial evidence, that the additional concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing
costs as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units to be set in compliance with Government Code

50/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Section 65915(c).
D.

Applicant requested incentives. An applicant may submit to the City a request for specific incentives or concessions in compliance with this
Section, and shall meet and confer with the Director. Upon conceptual agreement between the Developer and Director of the proposed
incentivies identified by the Developer, the Director shall agendize the conceptual agreement for City Council's approval or disapproval. The City
Council and Developer may establish alternative incentives as mutully agreed upon.

Sec. 4-32.040. - Continued availability.
The planning permit application for the affordable housing development shall include procedures proposed by the developer to maintain the
continued affordability of the units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus and other incentives, in compliance with this Section.
A.

Duration of affordability. The applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure the continued availability of the units that qualified the housing
development for a density bonus and other incentives, as follows.
1.

Lower income units. The continued availability of lower income units shall be maintained for 30 years, or a longer time if required by the
construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.

2.

Low and moderate income units - Development with public funding. A housing development that receives a direct financial contribution
as an additional incentive in compliance with Section 4-32.030 through participation in the cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs,
or subsidizing the cost of construction, shall maintain the availability of low- and moderate-income units for a minimum of 30 years, as
required by Government Code Section 65916.

3.

Moderate income units in condominium. The continued availability of moderate income units in a condominium project shall be
maintained for a minimum of 10 years.

B.

Rent cost requirements. The rents charged for the housing units in the development that qualify the project for a density bonus and other
incentives, shall not exceed the following amounts during the period of continued availability required by this Section:
1.

30 percent of 60 percent of the area median income, for units targeted for lower income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code
Section 50079.5; and

2.

30 percent of 50 percent of the area median income, for units targeted for very low income households, as defined in Health and Safety
Code Section 50105.

Sec. 4-32-050. - Location and type of designated units.
A.

Location/dispersal of units. As required by Government Code Section 65915(g), the location of the designated units within the qualifying housing
development may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the designated units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the project where
feasible, shall contain on average the same number of bedrooms as the non-designated units in the project, and shall be compatible with the design
or use of remaining units in terms of appearance, materials, and finished quality.

B.

Phasing. If a project is to be phased, the density bonus units shall be phased in the same proportion as the non-density bonus units, or phased in
another sequence acceptable to the City.

Sec. 4-32-060. - Processing of bonus requests.
A.

Permit requirement. A request for a density bonus and other incentives shall be evaluated and decided through Use Permit approval in compliance
with Section 4-62-050 (Use Permits), provided that the decision of the Commission on a Use Permit application shall be a recommendation to the
Council, and the density bonus and other incentives shall be approved by the Council.

B.

Findings for approval. In addition to the findings required by Section 4-62-050 for the approval of a Use Permit, the approval of a density bonus shall
require that the review authority first make all of the following additional findings:
1.

The residential development will be consistent with the General Plan;

2.

The approved number of dwellings can be accommodated by existing and planned infrastructure capacities;

3.

Adequate evidence exists to indicate that the project will provide affordable housing in a manner consistent with the purpose and intent of this
Chapter;

4.

In the event that the City does not grant at least one financial concession or incentive as defined in Government Code Section 65915 in addition
to the density bonus, that additional concessions or incentives are not necessary to ensure affordable housing costs as defined in Health and
Safety Code Section 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Government Code Section 65915(c); and

5.

There are sufficient provisions to guarantee that the units will remain affordable for the required time period.

Sec. 4-32-070. - Density bonus agreement.
A.

Procedures. An applicant requesting a density bonus, shall draft, and agree to enter into, a density bonus agreement ("agreement") with the City. The
terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the City Manager, and/or the City Attorney.

B.

Execution of agreement.

51/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
1.

Following execution of the density bonus agreement by all parties, the City shall record the completed agreement on the parcels designated for the
designated dwelling units, at the County Recorder's Office.

2.

The approval and recordation shall take place at the same time as the final map or, where a map is not being processed, before issuance of
Building Permits for the units.

3.
C.

The agreement shall be binding to all future owners, developers, and/or successors-in-interest.

Agreement contents. The density bonus agreement shall include at least the following information:
1.

The total number of units approved for the housing development, including the number of designated dwelling units;

2.

A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards and methodology for
determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost consistent with HUD Guidelines;

3.

The marketing plan for the affordable units;

4.

The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of the designated dwelling units;

5.

Tenure of the use restrictions for designated dwelling units of the time periods required by Section 4-32-040 (Continued Availability);

6.

A schedule for completion and occupancy of the designated dwelling units;

7.

A description of the additional incentives being provided by the City;

8.

A description of the remedies for breach of the density bonus agreement by the owners, developers, and/or successors-in-interest of the
project; and

9.
D.

Other provisions to ensure successful implementation and compliance with this Chapter.

Agreement provisions. The density bonus agreement shall include at least the following provisions:
1.

The developer shall give the City the continuing right-of-first-refusal to lease or purchase any or all of the designated dwelling units at the
appraised value;

2.

The deeds to the designated dwelling units shall contain a covenant stating that the developer or successors-in-interest shall not assign, lease,
rent, sell, sublet, or otherwise transfer any interests for designated units without the written approval of the City;

3.

When providing the written approval, the City shall confirm that the price (rent or sale) of the designated dwelling unit is consistent with the
limits established for low- and very low-income households, as published by HUD;

4.

The City shall have the authority to enter into other agreements with the developer, or purchasers of the designated dwelling units, to ensure
that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by eligible households;

5.

Applicable deed restrictions, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, shall contain provisions for the enforcement of owner or developer
compliance. Any default or failure to comply may result in foreclosure, specific performance, or withdrawal of the Certificate of Occupancy.

6.

In any action taken to enforce compliance with deed restrictions, the City Attorney shall, if compliance is ordered by a court of competent
jurisdiction, take all action that may be allowed by law to recover all of the City's costs of action including legal services.

E.

For-sale housing conditions. In the case of for-sale housing developments, the density bonus agreement shall provide for the following conditions
governing the initial sale and use of designated dwelling units during the applicable use restriction period:
1.

Designated dwelling units shall be owner-occupied by eligible very low or low income households, or by qualified residents in the case of senior
housing; and

2.

3.

The initial purchaser of each designated dwelling unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the City which:
a.

Restricts the sale of the unit in compliance with this Chapter during the applicable use restriction period;

b.

Contains provisions as the City may require to ensure continued compliance with this Chapter and State law; and

c.

Shall be recorded against the parcel containing the designated dwelling unit.

The applicable restriction period shall be a minimum of 10 years for projects with density bonus without financial subsidy or assistance and a
minimum of 30 years for projects receiving financial assistance in compliance with Section 4-32-040 (Continued Availability).

F.

Rental housing conditions. In the case of rental housing developments, the density bonus agreement shall provide for the following conditions
governing the use of designated dwelling units during the use restriction period:
1.

The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining the designated dwelling units for
qualified tenants;

2.

Provisions requiring owners to annually verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter;

3.

Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the City, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying
the designated dwelling units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each unit; and

4.

The applicable use restriction period shall comply with the time limits for continued availability in Section 4-32-040 (Continued Availability).

Sec. 4-32-080. - Control of resale.
In order to maintain the availability of for-sale affordable housing units constructed in compliance with this Chapter, the following resale conditions
shall apply.
A.

The price received by the seller of an affordable unit shall be limited to the purchase price plus an increase based on the Sacramento

52/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
metropolitan area consumer price index, an amount consistent with the increase in the median income since the date of purchase, or the fair
market value, whichever is less. Prior to offering an affordable housing unit for sale, the seller shall provide written notice to the City of their
intent to sell. The notice shall be provided by certified mail to the Director.
B.

Home ownership affordable units constructed, offered for sale, or sold under the requirements of this Section shall be offered to the City or its
assignee for a period of at least 90 days from the date of the notice of intent to sell is delivered to the City by the first purchaser or subsequent
purchasers. Home ownership affordable units shall be sold and resold from the date of the original sale only to households as determined to be
eligible for affordable units by the City according to the requirements of this Section. The seller shall not levy or charge any additional fees nor
shall any "finders fee" or other monetary consideration be allowed other than customary real estate commissions and closing costs.

C.

The owners of any affordable unit shall attach and legally reference in the grant deed conveying title of the affordable ownership unit a
declaration of restrictions provided by the City, stating the restrictions imposed in compliance with this Section. The grant deed shall afford the
grantor and the City the right to enforce the attached declaration of restrictions. The declaration of restrictions shall include all applicable resale
controls, occupancy restrictions, and prohibitions as required by this Section.

D.

The City shall monitor the resale of ownership affordable units. The City or its designee shall have a 90-day option to commence purchase of
ownership affordable units after the owner gives notification of intent to sell. Any abuse in the resale provisions shall be referred to the City for
appropriate action.

CHAPTER 4-34. - LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Sections:

Sec. 4-34-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes requirements for landscaping to enhance the appearance of developments, provide shade, reduce heat and glare, control soil
erosion, conserve water, screen potentially incompatible land uses, preserve the integrity of neighborhoods, improve air quality, and improve
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety.
Sec. 4-34-020. - Applicability.
The provisions of this Chapter apply to all land uses as follows:
A.

New projects. Each new nonresidential and multi-family residential project shall provide landscaping in compliance with this Chapter. Each
single-family subdivision of five or more parcels shall provide street trees in compliance with Section 4-34-050.B.2.d(3).

B.

Existing development. The approval of a Use Permit, Variance, Master Development Plan, or application for Architectural Review for physical
alterations and/or a change in use within an existing development may include one or more conditions of approval requiring compliance with
specific landscaping and irrigation requirements of this Chapter.

C.

Timing of installation. Required landscape and irrigation improvements shall be installed prior to final building inspection. The installation of
landscaping for a residential project may be deferred for a maximum of 90 days in compliance with Section 4-64-050 (Performance Guarantees).

D.

Alternatives to requirements. The review authority may modify the standards of this Chapter to accommodate alternatives to required
landscape materials or methods, where the review authority first determines that the proposed alternative will be equally effective in achieving
the purposes of this Chapter.

Sec. 4-34-030. - Landscape and irrigation plans.
A.

Preliminary Landscape Plan. A Preliminary Landscape Plan shall be submitted as part of each application for new development, or the significant
expansion (i.e., 25 percent or more of floor area), or redevelopment of an existing use, as determined by the Director.

B.

Final Landscape Plan. After land use approval, a Final Landscape Plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a Building Permit. A Final
Landscape Plan shall be approved by the Director prior to the start of grading or other construction, and prior to the issuance of a Building Permit.

C.

Content and preparation. Preliminary Landscape Plans and Final Landscape Plans shall contain the information required for landscape plans by the
Department. All landscape plans submitted in compliance with this Chapter shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect, licensed
landscape contractor, certified nurseryman, or other professional determined by the Director to be qualified, based on the requirements of State law.

D.

Review and approval. After initial application, the Director shall review each Preliminary Landscape Plan and Final Landscape Plan to verify its
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Director may approve the submittal in compliance with this Chapter, or may disapprove or
require changes to a submittal if it is not in compliance.

E.

Statement of surety. When required by the Director, security in the form of cash, performance bond, letter of credit, or certificate of deposit, in an
amount equal to 150 percent of the total value of all plant materials, irrigation, installation, and maintenance shall be posted with the City for a twoyear period. The Director may require statements of surety for phased development projects, a legitimate delay in landscape installation due to
seasonal requirements (including adverse weather conditions) and similar circumstances where it may not be advisable or desirable to install all
approved landscaping before occupancy of the site.

53/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
F.

Minor changes to approved plans. Landscape plan approval may include the Director authorizing minor changes from the requirements of this Chapte

Sec. 4-34-040. - Landscape location requirements.
Landscaping shall be provided in all areas of a site subject to development with structures, grading, or the removal of natural vegetation, as follows.
A.

Setbacks. The setback and open space areas required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code, and easements for utilities and drainage courses
shall be landscaped, except where:
1.

Occupied by approved structures or paving;

2.

A required setback is screened from public view;

3.

They are retained in their natural state, and/or the Director determines that landscaping is not necessary to achieve the purposes of this
Chapter; or

4.

In the case of an easement, the Public Works Director determines that landscaping would interfere with the purposes and proper
functioning of the easement. This determination may include the Public Works Director requiring alternative appropriate landscaping in
consultation with the Planning and Building Director.

B.

Unused areas. Any area of a project site not intended for a specific use, including a pad site in a shopping center intended for future
development, shall be landscaped unless retained in its natural state, and the Director determines that landscaping is not necessary to achieve
the purposes of this Chapter.

C.

Parking areas. Parking areas shall be landscaped in compliance with the following requirements.
1.

Landscape materials. Landscaping materials shall be provided throughout the parking lot area using a combination of trees, shrubs, and
ground cover.

2.

Curbing. Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a concrete curb at least six inches high and six inches wide. The Director
may approve alternative barrier design to protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles.

3.

Location of landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be located so that pedestrians are not required to cross landscaped areas to reach
building entrances from parked cars. This should be achieved through proper orientation of landscaped fingers and islands.

4.

Perimeter parking lot landscaping.
a.

Adjacent to streets. A parking area for a nonresidential use adjoining a public street shall be designed to provide a landscaped
planting strip between the street right-of-way and parking area equal in depth to the setback required by the zoning district or 15
feet, whichever is more. A parking area for a residential use shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district.
(1)

The landscaping shall be designed and maintained to screen cars from view from the street to a height of minimum height of 36
inches, but shall not exceed any applicable height limit for landscaping within a setback.

(2)

Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earth berms, raised planters, or other screening devices
which meet the intent of this requirement. A solid masonry wall with a maximum height of 36 inches may be used only where
the Director determines that no feasible alternative exists.

(3)

Shade trees shall be provided at a minimum rate of one for every 30 linear feet of landscaped area.

(4)

Plant materials, signs, or structures within a traffic safety sight area of a driveway shall comply with Section 4-30-040.E (Height
Limit at Street Corners).

b.

Adjacent to side or rear property lines. Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall provide a perimeter landscape strip at least six
feet wide (inside dimension) where the parking area adjoins a side or rear property line. The requirement for a landscape strip may
be satisfied by a yard or buffer area that is otherwise required. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one for each 30 linear feet of
landscaped area.

c.

Adjacent to structures. When a parking area is located adjacent to a nonresidential structure, a minimum five-foot wide landscape
strip shall be provided adjacent to the structure, exclusive of any building entries, or areas immediately adjacent to the wall of the
structure that serve as pedestrian accessways.

d.

Adjacent to residential. A parking area for a nonresidential use adjoining a residential use or zone shall provide a landscaped buffer
yard with a minimum ten-foot width between the parking area and the common property line bordering the residential use. A solid
masonry wall, solid fence, and a landscape buffer shall be provided along the property line to address land use compatibility issues
such as nuisance noise and light/glare. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one for each 30 linear feet of landscaped area.

5.

Interior parking lot landscaping.
a.

Amount of landscaping.
(1)

Multi-family, commercial, and office uses shall provide landscaping within the parking area at a minimum ratio of 10 percent of
the gross area of the parking lot. One shade tree shall be provided for every three parking spaces.

(2)

Industrial/manufacturing uses shall provide landscaping within the parking area at a minimum ratio of six percent of the gross
area of the parking lot. A minimum of one tree shall be provided for every 10 parking spaces.

b.

Location of landscaping. Landscaping shall be evenly dispersed throughout the parking area to shade as much of the parking area as

54/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
feasible. Use of an orchard-style planting scheme (placement of trees in uniformly-spaced rows) is encouraged for larger parking
areas. Parking lots with more than 100 spaces should provide a concentration of landscape elements at primary entrances, including
specimen trees, flowering plants, enhanced paving, and project identification.

Sec. 4-34-050. - Landscape standards.
A.

Landscape design. The required landscape plan shall be designed to integrate all elements of the project (e.g., buildings, parking lots, and streets) to
achieve their aesthetic objectives, desirable microclimates, and minimize water and energy demand.
1.

Plant selection and grouping. Plant materials shall be selected for: water demand and drought tolerance; adaptability and relationship to the
Gustine environment, and the geological and topographical conditions of the site; color, form, and pattern; ability to provide shade; and soil
retention capability.
a.

Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

b.

The protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged, and may be required by conditions of approval as a
result of project review in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

2.

Minimum dimensions. Each area of landscaping shall have a minimum interior width of ten feet within the residential and commercial zoning
districts, and five feet in the Industrial zoning districts. Wherever this Zoning and Subdivision Code requires a landscaped area of a specified
width, the width shall be measured exclusive of any curb or wall.

3.

Height limits. Landscape materials shall be selected, placed on a site, and maintained to not:
a.

Exceed a maximum height of 36 inches within a required front or street side setback, except for one or more trees with the lowest portion
of their canopy maintained at a minimum height of eight feet above grade; or

b.
4.

Interfere with the proper operation of solar energy equipment or passive solar design on adjacent parcels.

Protective curbing. Required landscaping shall be protected with a minimum six-inch high concrete curb, except adjacent to bicycle paths, or
where otherwise deemed unnecessary the Director.

5.

6.
B.

Safety requirements. Landscape materials shall be located so that at maturity they do not:
a.

Interfere with safe sight distances for vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic;

b.

Conflict with overhead utility lines, overhead lights, or walkway lights; or

c.

Block pedestrian or bicycle ways.

Water features. Decorative water features (e.g., fountains, ponds, waterfalls) shall have recirculating water systems.

Plant material. Required landscape shall include trees, shrubs, and ground covers, as follows.
1.

Size at time of planting. Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect and shall not be less than a 15-gallon container
for trees, five-gallon container for specimen shrubs and six-inch pots for mass planting, unless otherwise approved by the review authority on
the basis that the alternate size will achieve the desired immediate effect equally well.

2.

Trees. Tree planting shall comply with the following standards. Existing trees shall be retained and preserved whenever feasible.
a.

Trees shall not be planted under any structure that may interfere with normal growth (for example, an eave, overhang, balcony, light
standard or other similar structure).

b.

All trees in landscape planters shall be provided with root barriers/root barrier panels.

c.

Trees shall be staked in compliance with standards provided by the Department.

d.

Number of trees:
(1)

Parking area: refer to Section 4-34-040.C.

(2)

Street setbacks: one per 200 square feet of landscaped area.

(3)

Street trees: one per 30-foot length of right-of-way. The Director may modify this requirement depending on the chosen tree species
and its typical spread at maturity.

3.

Groundcover and shrubs. The majority of areas required to be landscaped shall be covered with groundcover, shrubs, turf, or other types of
plants that are predominantly drought tolerant.
a.

A minimum of two, five-gallon size shrubs shall be provided for every six feet of distance along street setbacks, or as approved by the
Director.

b.

Groundcover shall be provided throughout the landscaped area and shall be spaced to achieve full coverage within one year.

c.

Artificial groundcover or shrubs shall not be allowed.

d.

Crushed rock, redwood chips, pebbles, stone, and similar materials shall be allowed up to 15 percent of the total required landscape area.
Artificial or synthetic ground covers are not allowed.

e.
4.

Nonturf areas (e.g., shrub beds) shall be top dressed with a bark chip mulch or approved alternative.

Turf. Turf shall be limited to 50 percent of the total landscaped area on the site where the applicant provides calculations approved by the
Director that demonstrate that the irrigation requirements will not exceed standard low water usage. No turf shall be allowed:
a.

In any area of 10 feet or less in width; or

55/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
b.

On any slope exceeding 10 percent (25 percent, where other project water-saving techniques compensate for the increased runoff). A level bu
shall be provided between bermed turf areas and any hardscape (e.g., any street, walkway, or similar feature).

5.

Soil conditioning and mulching.
a.

A minimum one-foot depth of non-compacted soil shall be available for water absorption and root growth in each planted area.

b.

A minimum of two inches of mulch shall be added in each non-turf area to the soil surface after planting. Any plant type that is intolerant
to mulch shall be excluded from this requirement. Nonporous material shall not be placed under the mulch.

C.

Irrigation system requirements. All landscaped areas except those approved for maintenance with intentionally unirrigated native plants shall
include an automatic irrigation system.
1.

Water-efficient systems (e.g., drip, mini-spray, bubbler-type, or similar system) shall be used unless infeasible. Low-flow sprinkler heads with
matched precipitation rates shall be used when spray or rotor-type heads are specified for watering shrubs and ground cover areas. Turf areas
shall be sized and shaped so they can be efficiently irrigated. Spray or run-off onto paved areas shall be avoided.

2.

Dual or multi-program controllers with separated valves and circuits shall be used when the project contains more than one type of landscape
treatment (e.g., lawn, ground cover, shrub, tree areas), or a variety of solar aspects. Soil moisture-sensing devices and rain sensors shall be used
on larger projects (50,000 plus square feet of landscaped area) to minimize or eliminate over-watering.

D.

3.

Watering shall be scheduled at times of minimal wind conflict and evaporation loss.

4.

Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each valve zone.

5.

Check valves are required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage.

Certification of landscape completion. The completion of required landscaping and irrigation improvements shall certified by the author of the
landscape and irrigation plan, through a signed statement submitted to the Director.

Sec. 4-34-060. - Maintenance of landscape areas.
A.

Maintenance required. All site landscaping shall be maintained in a healthful and thriving condition at all times. Irrigation systems and their
components shall be maintained in a fully functional manner consistent with the originally approved design and the provisions of this Chapter.
Regular maintenance shall include checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting automatic controllers; aerating and dethatching
turf areas; adding/replenishing mulch, fertilizer, and soil amendments; pruning; and weeding all landscaped areas.

B.

Maintenance agreement. Prior to final building inspection or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any commercial, industrial or multi-family
residential building, the applicant shall enter into a landscape maintenance agreement with the City to guarantee proper maintenance in compliance
with Subsection A. The form and content of the agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney and the Director.

C.

Water waste prohibited. Water waste in existing developments resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation leading to excessive runoff, low head
drainage, overspray, and other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures is
prohibited.

D.

Enforcement. Failure to maintain landscape areas in compliance with this Section shall be deemed a nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement in
compliance with the Municipal Code, and/or the applicable planning permit may be revoked.

CHAPTER 4-36. - PARKING AND LOADING
Sections:

Sec. 4-36-010. - Purpose.
The requirements of this Chapter are intended to ensure that sufficient off-street parking facilities are provided for all uses, and that parking facilities
are properly designed, attractive, and located to be unobtrusive while meeting the needs of the specific use.
Sec. 4-36-020. - Applicability.
Each land use and structure, including a change or expansion of a land use or structure shall provide off-street parking and loading areas in compliance
with this Chapter. A land use shall not be commenced and a structure shall not be occupied until the improvements required by this Chapter are
completed and approved by the Director.
Sec. 4-36-030. - General parking regulations.
A.

Parking and loading spaces to be permanent. Each parking and loading space shall be permanently available, marked, and maintained for parking
or loading purposes for the use it is intended to serve. The approval of a Limited Term Permit (Section 4-62-030) may allow the temporary use of a
parking or loading space for other purposes.

B.

Parking and loading to be unrestricted. An owner, lessee, tenant, or other person having control of the operation of a premise for which parking or
loading spaces are required by this Chapter shall not prevent, prohibit or restrict authorized persons from using the spaces without the prior
approval of the Director.

56/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
C.

Vehicles for sale. No vehicle, trailer or other personal property shall be parked on private property for the purpose of displaying the vehicle, trailer, or o
personal property for sale, hire, or rental, unless the property is appropriately zoned, approved by the City for that use, and the person or business at th
is licensed to sell vehicles, trailers, or other personal property. However, one vehicle or trailer owned by the owner, renter, or lessee of the property may
displayed for the purpose of sale for a maximum of one month.

D.

Recreational vehicle parking. The storage (parking for any period longer than 72 hours) of a recreational vehicles and/or boat in a residential zoning
district shall be allowed only when all portions of the vehicle or boat are located entirely within the property boundaries and do not extend into the
public right-of-way. Parking within setback areas shall also comply with Section 4-30-090.D (Limitations on the Use of Setbacks).

Sec. 4-36-040. - Number of parking spaces required.
Each land use shall be provided the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Section. See Sections 4-36-100, and 4-36-110 for off-street
parking requirements for bicycles and motorcycles, respectively.
A.

Parking requirements by land use.
1.

Each land use shall provide the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 3-7, except where a greater number of spaces is
required through Use Permit approval.

2.

A land use not specifically listed by Table 3-7 shall provide parking as required by the Director. The Director shall use the requirements
Table 3-7 as a guide in determining the number of off-street parking spaces required.

3.

In any case where Table 3-7 establishes a parking requirement based on floor area in square feet (for example: 1 space per 1,000 sf of
floor area), the floor area shall be construed to mean gross interior floor area.

B.

Expansion of structure, change in use. When a structure is enlarged, or when a change in its use requires more off-street parking than the
previous use, additional parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with this Chapter except where the number of additional spaces
required is 10 percent or less of the number of existing spaces. See also Chapter 4-72 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

C.

Multi-tenant sites. A site with multiple tenants shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required for each separate use; except
where the site is developed as an integrated center with shared parking and no spaces reserved for a particular use, parking shall be provided
as required by Table 3-7 for a shopping center. When a multi-tenant center includes one or more uses that will need more parking than retail
uses (for example, a fitness center, restaurant, or theater) additional parking shall be required for the non-retail use unless a parking reduction
is approved in compliance with 4-36-050 (Reduction of Parking Requirements).

D.

Excessive parking. The City discourages a land use being provided more off-street parking spaces than required by this Chapter, to avoid the
inefficient use of land, unnecessary pavement, and excessive storm water runoff from paved surfaces. The provision of off-street parking spaces
in excess of the requirements in Table 3-7 is allowed only with Use Permit approval, and when additional landscaping and pedestrian amenities
are also provided to the satisfaction of the review authority.

E.

Bench or bleacher seating. Where fixed seating is provided as benches, bleachers, pews, or similar seating, a seat shall be defined as 18 inches
of bench space for the purpose of calculating the number of required parking spaces as provided in Table 3-7.

F.

Nonconforming parking. A structure with nonconforming off-street parking may be physically changed or undergo a change in use subject to
the following provisions.
1.

Residential uses. No additional parking spaces shall be required, provided the change does not increase the number of dwelling units, nor
eliminate the only portion of the site that can be used for the required or existing parking or access.

2.

Nonresidential uses. The number of existing parking spaces shall be maintained on the site and additional parking shall be provided in
compliance with this Chapter for any additional floor area. If the use of the structure is changed to one that requires more parking than
the previous use, the difference between the parking spaces required for the previous use and the new use shall be provided.

3.

Waiver by Director. The Director may waive covered parking requirements when a nonconforming structure is proposed for rehabilitation
if the Director determines that the existing structure location, lot size, or topography renders the requirement unreasonable.
TABLE 3-7 - PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE

Land Use Type:

Vehicle Spaces Required

Manufacturing Processing and Warehousing
All manufacturing, industrial and processing uses listed in Section 4-

1 space for each 200 sf of o ce area;

26-030, Table 2-7, except the following.

1 space for each 1,000 sf of ground and/or building area devoted to
other than o ce;
1 space for each 5,000 sf of open storage;
1 space for each company vehicle.

Recycling facilities
57/170

7/11/2019

Scraps/dismantling yard

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

1 space for each 300 sf of gross building area, plus 1 space for each
10,000 sf of gross yard area.

Small collection facility
Research and development laboratories

Determined by Use Permit
1 space for each 300 sf of oor area, plus 1 space for each company
vehicle.

Land Use Type:

Vehicle Spaces Required

Recreation, Education, Public Assembly
Clubs, lodge, private meeting hall

1 space for each 200 sf of oor area.

Dance oor

1 space for each 50 sf of oor area.

Equestrian facilities - Commercial stables

1 space for each 5 horses boarded.

Golf
Golf courses and country clubs

4 spaces per hole, plus as required by this table for accessory uses
(e.g., pro shop, bar, restaurant, banquet room, etc.)

Golf driving range

1 space for each tee.

Miniature golf courses

3 spaces for each hole, plus as required by this table for accessory
uses (e.g., game room, food service, etc.)

Commercial recreation facility - Indoor
Bowling alley

4 spaces for each alley.

Game arcade

1 space for each 100 sf of oor area.

Pool or billiard room

2 spaces for each table.

Skating rink

1 space for each 100 sf of rink area.

Commercial recreation facility - Outdoor

Determined by Use Permit

Fitness/health facility

1 space for each 300 sf of oor area.

Library, museum

1 space for each 300 sf of oor area.

Religious facility

1 space for each 4 seats, or 1 space for each 75 sf of oor area,
whichever is greater; plus 1 space for each classroom or o ce.

Schools (public and private)
Kindergarten and nursery schools

1 space per employee plus 1 space per 10 children.

Elementary/junior high

1 space per employee plus 1 space per 8 students.

High school

1 space per employee plus 1 space per 4 students.
58/170

7/11/2019

Colleges and universities (including trade, business, and

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

1 space per 1.5 students.

art/music/dancing schools)
Studios (art, dance, music, photography, etc.)

1 space for each 300 sf of oor area.

Swimming pools (public, private and commercial)

1 space for each 100 sf of pool area.

Tennis/racquetball/handball or other courts

2 spaces for each court, plus 1 space for each 500 sf of oor area for
accessory uses.

Theaters, auditoriums & places of assembly

1 space for each 5 seats, or 1 space for each 75 sf of oor area,
whichever is greater.

Land Use Type:

Vehicle Spaces Required

Residential Uses
Live/work unit

2 spaces

Mobile home
Individual mobile home

1 covered space for each unit.

Mobile home park

1 covered space for each unit plus 0.5 uncovered guest parking space
and 0.25 parking space for each unit for vehicle storage.

Multi-family dwelling

2 covered spaces per unit, plus guest parking at a ratio of 1 uncovered
space per each 5 units.

Multi-family dwelling in a mixed use project

Studio or 1 bedroom unit - 1 space per unit
2 or 3 bedroom unit - 2 spaces per unit
Guest parking - 1 space per each 4 units

Organizational house

1 covered or uncovered space for each bedroom.

Residential care homes
Six or fewer clients

2 covered spaces.

Seven or more clients

1 space for each 2 residential units, plus 1 space for each 5 units for
guests and employees.

Rooming and boarding houses

1 covered or uncovered space for each bedroom.

Second unit, carriage house

1 o -street, all-weather surface parking space, plus the o -street
parking required for the main dwelling.

Senior housing project

1 space for each two units, with half the spaces covered, plus 1 guest
parking space for each 10 units.

Single-family dwelling

2 permanently covered spaces.

59/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Land Use Type:

Vehicle Spaces Required

Retail Trade
All "Retail Trade" uses listed in Section 4-24-030, Table 2-4, except the

1 space for each 200 sf of oor area, plus 1 space per 200 sf of

following

outdoor sales area.

Appliances, building materials, and furniture stores

1 space for each 500 sf of indoor display area for rst 10,000 sf, 1
space for each 1,000 sf of indoor display area over 10,000; 1 space for
each 1,000 sf of outdoor display area.

Auto and vehicle sales and rental

1 space for each 400 sf of oor area for showroom and o ce, plus 1
space for each 2,000 sf of outdoor display area, plus spaces as
required by this Section for parts sales ("retail trade," above), and
vehicle services.

Bar, night club

1 space for each 50 sf of seating area and waiting/lounge area
exclusive of dance oor, plus 1 space for each 30 sf of dance oor.

Convenience store

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area.

Plant nursery, garden supply store

1 space for each 2,000 sf of site area; 1 loading space, 15 ft. x 30 ft., for
each acre.

Produce stand or other outdoor vendor

3 spaces minimum, located at least 20 feet o the public right-of-way
or 20 feet from the front property line with no automobile
maneuvering permitted in the public right-of-way. The Use Permit
may require additional parking, depending on the nature of the sales
proposed.

Restaurant

1 space for each 80 sf of dining area.

Shopping center

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area for centers of less than 30,000 sf,
and 1 space per 300 sf for centers of 30,000 sf or more.

Land Use Type:

Vehicle Spaces Required

Service Uses
Banks and nancial services

1 space for each 300 sf of oor area plus 3 tandem stacking spaces for
each outdoor teller or teller station.

Car wash
Self service

1 drying space for each stall.

Full service

10 spaces, plus 6 spaces for each wash lane for queuing and drying
area.

Child day care

60/170

7/11/2019

Large family day care homes

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

3 spaces minimum; may include spaces provided to ful ll residential
parking requirements and on-street parking so long as it abuts the
site.

Child/adult care centers
Equipment rental

1 space for each employee plus 1 space for each 10 children.
1 space for each 300 sf of oor area; none required for outdoor
storage and rental area provided su cient area is provided within the
yard to accommodate all customer vehicles entirely on-site.

Laundry - Dry cleaning pick-up facilities and Laundromats

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area.

Laundry - Laundries and dry cleaning plants

1 space for each 1,000 sf of oor area.

Lodging
Bed and breakfast inn

1 space for each guest room plus 2 covered spaces for the resident
family.

Hotel or motel

1 space for each unit, plus 1 manager spaces, plus 1 space for each 2
employees on largest shift, plus required spaces for accessory uses.

Recreational vehicle (RV) park

1 space per RV space.

Medical services
Clinics, o ces, and laboratories

1 space for each 200 sf of oor area, or 4 spaces for each doctor,
whichever is greater.

Extended care

1 space for each 3 beds or patients the facility is licensed to
accommodate.

Hospitals
Mortuary, funeral home

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area.
1 space for each 6 seats in sanctuary.

O ces
Business, service, government

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area.

Processing

1 space for each 150 sf of oor area.

Professional

1 space for each 300 sf of oor area

Personal services
All personal service uses except the following

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area

Barber/beauty shops

2 spaces for each barber or beautician, with a minimum of 4 spaces.

Pet grooming

1 space for each 400 sf of oor area.

Service stations

1 space for each 500 sf of oor area, plus 3 spaces for each service
bay.

Storage
61/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Outdoor

1 space for each 3,000 sf of lot area.

Personal storage facilities (mini-storage)

4 spaces for manager o ce.

Vehicle services

4 spaces per service bay, plus spaces for any o ce as required by this
Section for o ces.

Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, kennels
Kennels separate from other facilities

1 space for each 250 sf of oor area.
1 space per employee plus 2 spaces.

Sec. 4-36-050. - Disabled/handicapped parking requirements.
Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), the Federal Accessibility Guidelines, and/or
California Code of Regulations Title 24, as applicable. These spaces shall count toward fulfilling the off-street parking requirements of this Chapter.
Sec. 4-36-060. - Bicycle parking.
Each multi-family project and non-residential land use shall provide bicycle parking in compliance with this Section.
A.

Number of bicycle spaces required.
1.

Multi-family projects shall provide bicycle parking spaces equal to a minimum of 10 percent of the required vehicle spaces, unless separate
secured garage space is provided for each unit. The bicycle spaces shall be distributed throughout the project.

2.

Retail commercial and office uses shall provide bicycle parking spaces equal to a minimum of five percent of the required vehicle spaces,
distributed to serve customers and employees of the project.

B.

Bicycle parking design and devices. Each bicycle parking space shall include a stationary parking device to adequately secure the bicycle, shall
be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length, with a minimum of seven feet of overhead clearance, and shall be conveniently located
and generally within proximity to the main entrance of a structure.

Sec. 4-36-070. - Motorcycle parking.
Parking lots with 50 or more parking spaces shall provide motorcycle parking spaces conveniently located near the main entrance of a structure,
accessed by the same aisles that provide access to the automobile parking spaces in the parking lot.
A.

Number of spaces required. A minimum of one motorcycle parking space shall be provided for each 50 automobile spaces or fraction thereof.

B.

Space dimensions. Motorcycle spaces shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by seven feet.

Sec. 4-36-080. - Reduction of parking requirements.
A.

Shared on-site parking. Where two or more adjacent nonresidential uses have distinct and differing peak parking usage periods, (e.g. a theater and a
bank), a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be allowed through Use Permit approval. Approval shall also require a recorded
covenant running with the land, recorded by the owner of the parking lot, guaranteeing that the required parking will be maintained exclusively for
the use or activity served for the duration of the use or activity.

B.

Waiver of parking. The Director may reduce or waive the number of parking spaces required by Section 4-36-040 (Number of Parking Spaces
Required) based on quantitative information provided by the applicant that documents the need for fewer spaces (e.g., sales receipts, documentation
of customer frequency, information on parking standards required for the proposed land use by other cities, etc.).

C.

Waiver of parking - Downtown off-hour uses. The review authority for a planning permit application within the C-D zoning district may waive the
parking requirements of this Chapter for land uses that are determined by the review authority to operate exclusively at night, when their peak
parking demand occurs after the evening peak period parking demand within the C-D zone generally, and adequate on-street or public parking is
available.

D.

Alternative parking arrangements. Other alternatives to the parking requirements of this Chapter may be approved by the review authority for
projects within the C-D zone the applicant executes an agreement with the City to:
1.

Pay a parking in-lieu fee, if an in-lieu fee program is established by the Council;

2.

Waive the right to protest the formation of a parking district, if a parking district is formed by the Council; or

3.

Provide some other fair share contribution acceptable to the review authority, where authorized by the Council.

The agreement shall be recorded prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the project.

62/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
E.

Off-site parking in the downtown. Where approved by the review authority, parking required for a use proposed within the C-D zoning district may
be located in a common or shared parking facility away from the site of the proposed use.
1.

Evaluation of proposal. In considering a request for shared off-site parking, the review authority shall consider how the distance between the
parking area and the proposed use may affect whether the off-site facility will satisfy the parking needs of the proposed use.

2.

Guarantee of continued availability. Required parking spaces that are approved off-site shall be committed by a recordable covenant, lease, or
other agreement, acceptable to the City Attorney. The parties to the covenant, lease, or agreement shall include the owners, and if applicable,
the lessees of the off-site parking spaces and the owners, and if applicable, the lessees of the subject site, with covenants reflecting the
conditions of approval and the approved off-site parking plan.

3.

Loss of off-site spaces.
a.

Notification to the City. The owner/operator of a business that uses approved off-site spaces to satisfy its parking requirements shall
immediately notify the Director of a change of ownership or use of the property for which the spaces are required, and of termination or
default of the agreement between the parties.

b.

Effect of termination of agreement. Upon notification that a lease for required off-site parking has terminated, the Director shall
determine a reasonable time in which one of the following shall occur:
(1)

Substitute parking is provided that is acceptable to the Director; or

(2)

The size or capacity of the use is reduced in proportion to the parking spaces lost.

Sec. 4-36-090. - Parking design and development standards.
Required parking areas shall be designed and constructed as follows.
A.

Access to parking. Access to parking shall be provided as follows for all parking areas other than garages for individual dwelling units.
1.

Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering area so that vehicles exit to a street in a forward direction. Parking lots shall be designed
to prevent access at any point other than at designated access drives. Single-family homes and duplexes are exempt from this
requirement.

2.

Industrial uses, and commercial uses that provide 50 or more parking spaces shall have access driveways that are not intersected by a
parking aisle, parking space, or another access driveway for a minimum distance of 20 feet from the street right-of-way, to provide a
stacking area for vehicles entering and exiting the parking area. See Figure 3-7.

3.
B.

A minimum unobstructed clearance height of 14 feet shall be maintained above areas accessible to vehicles within nonresidential uses.

Access to adjacent sites. Applicants for nonresidential development are encouraged to provide on-site vehicle access to parking areas on
adjacent nonresidential properties to provide for convenience, safety, and efficient circulation. A joint access agreement running with the land
shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties, as approved by the Director, guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared
access between the properties.
Shared pedestrian access between adjacent properties, including residential developments is also strongly encouraged.

C.

Location. Parking areas shall be located as follows:
1.

Residential parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served.

2.

Nonresidential parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served or within 300 feet of the parcel (within 500 feet in the C-D
zoning district) if shared parking or public parking facilities are used to meet parking requirements.

3.

Nonresidential parking shall not be located within a required front yard setback area. Parking may be located within a required side or rear
yard setback provided it is separated from the side or rear property line by a minimum six-foot landscaped area.

63/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
4.
D.

Nonresidential parking within the C-D zoning district shall not be located between a building and the fronting street.

Parking stall and lot dimensions. Each parking stall, aisle, and other parking lot features shall comply with the minimum dimension
requirements in Gustine City Standards and Specifications. The minimum size requirements for parking spaces shall be 10ft by 20ft.

E.

Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in compliance with Section 4-34-040.C (Landscape Area Requirements - Parking Areas).

F.

Lighting. See Section 4-30-060 (Outdoor Lighting).

G.

Striping and identification. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the parking surface. Car pool spaces
shall be clearly identified for car pool use only. The re-striping of any parking space or lot shall require the approval of a re-striping plan by the
Director.

H.

Surfacing. Parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete or other all-weather
surfacing approved by the Director.

I.

Wheel stops/curbing. Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided for parking spaces located
adjacent to fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas, and structures. Individual wheel stops may be provided in lieu of continuous curbing
when the parking is adjacent to a landscaped area, and the drainage is directed to the landscaped area.
When provided, wheel stops shall be placed to allow for two feet of vehicle overhang area within the dimension of the parking space.

Sec. 4-36-100. - Driveways and site access.
Each driveway providing site access from a street, alley or other public right-of-way shall be designed, constructed and maintained as follows.
A.

Number of driveways.
1.

Multi-family and non-residential projects. A multi-family or non-residential project on a parcel of two acres or less shall be limited to a
maximum of two driveways, unless the Director and City Engineer determine that more than two driveways are required to accommodate
the traffic for the project. Whenever a property has access to more than one street, access shall be generally limited to the lowest volume
street where the impact of a new access will be minimized.

2.

Single-family dwellings and duplexes. A single-family dwelling or duplex shall be allowed one driveway. A circular driveway may be
allowed on a parcel with 70 feet or more of street frontage. A parcel within a residential zoning district with a frontage of 200 feet or more
may have two separate driveways, provided that they are separated by a minimum of 100 feet, or lesser distance as approved by the City
Engineer based on consideration of site topography and traffic safety.

3.

Shared driveways on arterials. The use of shared driveways for adjacent parcels located on an arterial road designated by the General
Plan shall be required where determined by the review authority to be feasible.

B.

Distance from street corners. Each driveway shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from the nearest intersection, as measured from the
centerline of the driveway to the centerline of the nearest travel lane of the intersecting street. For parcels with frontages less than 150 feet, the
minimum distance shall be 100 feet unless a lesser distance is approved by the City Engineer.

C.

Driveway spacing. Driveways shall be separated along the street frontage as follows:
1.

Single-family and duplex residential development. Driveways shall be separated by at least ten feet, unless a shared, single driveway is
approved by the Director. The ten-foot separation does not include the transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway; and

2.

Multi-family and nonresidential development. Where two or more driveways serve the same or adjacent multi-family or nonresidential
development, the centerline of the driveways shall be separated by a minimum of 50 feet. Exceptions to this standard shall be subject to
the approval of the City Engineer.

D.

Driveway width and length.
1.

Single-family dwellings. Each single-family dwelling shall be provided a driveway with a minimum length of 20 from the edge of the rightof-way where there is no sidewalk.

2.
E.

Nonresidential uses. Driveway for nonresidential uses shall comply with adopted Gustine Improvement Standards.

Clearance from obstruction. The nearest edge of a driveway curb cut shall be at least three feet from the nearest property line, the centerline
of a fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic signal, light standards, or other similar facilities. Street trees shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the
driveway access, measured at the trunk. Driveways shall have an overhead clearance of 14 feet in height except within a parking structure which
may be reduced to seven feet, six inches.

F.

Traffic safety visibility area. Structures or landscaping over 30 inches in height shall not be allowed within a traffic safety visibility area. See
Section 4-20-050.E.

G.

Surfacing. All driveways shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete, or paving units. Within other zoning districts, the
Director may authorize the use of other all-weather surfacing, where the Director determines that a surface other than asphalt or concrete is
consistent with the driveways of similar properties in the vicinity, and that the alternate surface will not impair accessibility for emergency
vehicles. A driveway with a slope of 15 percent or more shall be paved with asphalt or concrete in all cases.

Sec. 4-36-110. - Loading space requirements.

64/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
A.

Number of loading spaces required. Nonresidential uses shall provide off-street loading spaces in compliance with Table 3-8, below. Requirements for
listed shall be determined by the Director based upon the requirements for comparable uses.
TABLE 3-8 - REQUIRED LOADING SPACES

Type of Land Use

Loading Spaces Required

Commercial uses

1 space for each 10,000 sf of oor area over the rst 10,000.

Manufacturing, and industrial uses

1 space, plus one additional space for each 10,000 sf of oor area over
the rst 10,000.

O ce uses and public uses

B.

1 space for each 25,000 sf of oor area.

Standards for loading areas. Off-street loading areas shall be provided as follows. These standards and the requirements of Subsection A. may be
reduced by the review authority where the review authority first determines that the operating, shipping and delivery characteristics of the use do
not require the number or type of loading spaces required by this Section.
1.

Dimensions. Loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length, with 14 feet of vertical clearance. Must comply with
Gustine's City Standards and Specifications.

2.

Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting shall also comply with the
provisions of Section 4-30-060 (Outdoor Lighting).

3.

Loading ramps. Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions and
overhead clearances.

4.

Location. Loading spaces shall be:
a.

As near as possible to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, if feasible;

b.

Situated to ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets;

c.

Situated to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case faces a public street, or is located within a required front
yard setback, adjacent public right-of-way, or other on-site traffic circulation areas;

d.

Situated to ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site; and

e.

Situated to avoid adverse impacts upon neighboring residential properties and located no closer than 100 feet from a residential zoning
district unless adequately screened, and authorized through Architectural Review approval.

5.

Screening. Loading areas shall be screened from abutting parcels and streets with dense landscaping or solid masonry walls with a minimum
height of six feet.

6.

Striping. Loading spaces shall be striped, and identified for "loading only." The striping and "loading only" notations shall be continuously
maintained in a clear and visible manner.

CHAPTER 4-38. - SIGNS
Sections:

Sec. 4-38-010. - Purpose.
The regulations established by this Chapter are intended to appropriately limit the placement, type, size, and number of signs allowed within the City,
and to require the proper maintenance of signs. The purposes of these limitations and requirements are to:
A.

Avoid traffic safety hazards to motorists and pedestrians caused by visual distractions and obstructions;

B.

Promote the aesthetic and environmental values of the community by providing for signs that do not impair the attractiveness of the City as a
place to live, work, and shop;

C.

Provide for signs as an effective channel of communication, while ensuring that signs are aesthetically proportioned in relation to adjacent
structures and the structures to which they are attached; and

D.

Safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

Sec. 4-38-020. - Applicability.
A.

Signs regulated. The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all signs in all zoning districts, except on a site for which a specific plan has
established separate sign regulations.

65/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
B.

Applicability to sign content. The provisions of this Chapter do not regulate the message content of signs (sign copy), regardless of whether the messag
is commercial or noncommercial.

C.

Definitions. Definitions of the specialized terms and phrases used in this Chapter may be found in Article 8 (Glossary) under "Sign."

Sec. 4-38-030. - Sign permit requirements.
No sign shall be installed, constructed, or altered unless a Sign Permit and, where applicable a Master Sign Plan approval is first obtained in compliance
with this Section, or the sign is allowed without Sign Permit approval by Subsection E., below. A Building Permit may also be required. After approval of
a Sign Permit and/or Master Sign Plan, each sign installed and maintained on the subject site shall comply with the Permit and Plan.
A.

Fees and plans required. An application for a Sign Permit shall be prepared, filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-60 (Permit
Application Filing and Processing). The application shall also include architectural elevations and plans of all proposed signs drawn to scale, with
all dimensions noted, and include illustrations of copy, colors, materials, and samples of the proposed colors and materials. The plans
submitted shall also show the location of each sign on buildings and the site.

B.

Sign Permit review authority. The Director shall review all Sign Permit applications and approve only those that comply with the findings
required in Subsection D. The Director may require conditions of approval as are reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this Chapter.
The Director may also refer a Sign Permit application to the Commission for Architectural Review and a decision, either for the individual Sign
Permit, or as part of a development project that is otherwise subject to Architectural Review.

C.

Master Sign Plan.
1.

When required. The Director has the authority to approve or disapprove a Master Sign Plan. A Master Sign Plan shall be approved by the
Director (or by the Commission upon referral by the Director) prior to the issuance of any Sign Permit for:
a.

A new nonresidential project with four or more tenants; and

b.

Major rehabilitation work on an existing nonresidential project with four or more tenants, that involves exterior remodeling, and/or
the application proposes modification to 50 percent or more of the existing signs on the site within a one year period. For the
purposes of this Chapter, major rehabilitation means adding more than 50 percent to the gross floor area of the building/buildings,
or exterior redesign of more than 50 percent of the length of any facade within the project.

All signs installed or replaced within the nonresidential project shall comply with the approved Master Sign Plan.
2.

Content of plan. A Master Sign Plan shall include all the information and materials required by Subsection A., and shall provide standards
for the uniform style, construction, size, and placement of signs within the proposed project.

3.

Revisions. The Director may approve revisions to a Master Sign Plan approved by the Director. The Director may approve revisions to a
Master Sign Plan approved by the Commission if the Director first determines that the revision is minor and that the intent of the original
approval, and any applicable conditions are not affected. A new Master Sign Plan approval shall be obtained for revisions that would
substantially deviate from the original approval.

D.

Findings for approval. The approval of a Sign Permit or Master Sign Plan shall require that the review authority first make all the following
findings:
1.

The proposed signs do not exceed the standards of Sections 4-38-060 (Zoning District Sign Standards) and 4-38-070 (Standards for Specific
Types of Signs), and are of appropriate size and height necessary to enable motorists and pedestrians to readily identify the facility or site
from a sufficient distance to safely and conveniently access the facility or site;

2.

The size, location, and design of the signs are visually complementary and compatible with the scale, and architectural style of the primary
structures on the site, any prominent natural features on the site, and structures and prominent natural features on adjacent properties
on the same street; and

3.

The proposed signs are in substantial conformance with the design criteria in Section 4-38-050.D (General Requirements for All Signs Design Criteria for Signs).

E.

Signs and sign changes allowed without a Sign Permit. The following are permitted without a Sign Permit, provided that they comply with
Section 4-38-050 (General Requirements for All Signs), and any required Building Permit is obtained.
1.

Nonstructural modifications, and maintenance.
a.

Modifications to sign copy on conforming signs, or changes to the face or copy of conforming changeable copy signs;

b.

Nonstructural modifications of the face or copy of an existing conforming sign installed in compliance with a Master Sign Plan,
provided that the modifications are consistent with the Master Sign Plan approved in compliance with Subsection C.;

c.

The normal maintenance of conforming signs, except as set forth in 4-38-090.B.

2.

Temporary signs. Temporary signs in compliance with Section 4-38-070.G.

3.

Governmental signs. Signs installed by the City, or a Federal or State governmental agency within a public right-of-way; and any sign,
posting, notice, or similar sign placed by or required by a governmental agency in carrying out its responsibility to protect public health,
safety, and general welfare.

4.

Official flags. Flags of national, State, or local governments, or nationally recognized religious, fraternal, or public service agencies,

66/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
provided that the length of the flag shall not exceed one-fourth the height of the flag pole. The maximum allowed height of a flag pole in a
residential zoning district shall be 12 feet; the maximum height of a flag pole in a non-residential zoning district shall be 30 feet. Additional
height may be authorized through Architectural Review approval. No flag shall be located within the public right-of-way.
5.

Political signs. Political signs are allowed without a Sign Permit provided that the signs:
a.

Are placed on private property, and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area within residential zoning districts and 32 square feet in
area within nonresidential zoning districts;

b.

May be installed on private property with the property owner's consent for up to 45 days prior to an election; and

c.

Shall be removed within seven days following the election. Signs not removed shall be removed by the City at the expense of the
political candidate or organization involved.

6.

Public directional signs and notices. Signs showing the location of public facilities such as public telephones, restrooms, and underground
utilities.

7.

Service station price signs. Service station price signs required by State law.

8.

Street addresses. Street address numbers not exceeding an aggregate area of two square feet.

Sec. 4-38-040. - Prohibited signs.
All signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter shall be prohibited. Examples of prohibited signs include the following:
A.

Abandoned signs;

B.

Animated signs, including electronic message display signs, and variable intensity, blinking, or flashing signs, except time and temperature
displays (which are not considered signs);

C.

Flags, except those allowed by Section 4-38-030.E.4;

D.

Illegal signs;

E.

Moving signs, except barber poles;

F.

Obscene signs;

G.

Permanent off-site signs;

H.

Pennants;

I.

Pole signs and other freestanding signs over six feet in heigh;

J.

Roof signs;

K.

Because of the City's compelling interest in ensuring traffic safety, signs that simulate in color, size, or design, any traffic control sign or signal,
or that make use of words, symbols, or characters in a manner that interferes with, misleads or confuses pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

L.

Signs attached to or suspended from a vehicle parked within a public right-of-way, or in a location on private property that is visible from a
public right-of-way, except a sign painted directly upon, magnetically affixed to, or permanently affixed to the body or other integral part of the
vehicle; and

M.

Temporary and portable signs, except as allowed by Section 4-38-070.A, and 4-38-070.H.

Sec. 4-38-050. - General requirements for all signs.
A.

Sign area measurement. The measurement of sign area to determine compliance with the sign area limitations of this Chapter shall occur as follows.
1.

The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all framing, writing, logo, representation, emblem, or other
display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight lines. See Figure 3-9.

2.

Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area.

67/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

3.

The area of a double-faced (back-to-back) sign shall be calculated as a single sign face if the distance between each sign face does not exceed 18
inches and the two faces are parallel with each other.

4.

Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture or statue-like trademarks), the
sign area shall be measured as their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. See Figure 3-10.

5.

B.

The area of any time and/or temperature device incorporated into a sign shall not be included in the calculation of total sign area.

Freestanding sign height measurement. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the lowest point of the
base of the sign structure, to the highest point of the structure, where the lowest point of the base of the structure does not include fill, planters, or
other material artificially placed to allow increased sign height. See Figure 3-11.

C.

Sign location requirements.
1.

All signs shall be located on the same site as the subject of the sign, except as otherwise allowed by this Chapter. A sign in the Downtown area
may project over an adjacent public right-of-way only when authorized by an encroachment permit and maintains a minimum of eight feet
clearance.

2.

No sign shall be located within the public right-of-way, except as otherwise allowed by this Chapter.

3.

The location of all signs shall be evaluated to ensure:
a.

That the setback is appropriate for the height and area of a freestanding or projecting sign;

b.

That flush or projecting signs relate to the architectural design of the building. Signs that cover windows, or that spill over natural
boundaries and/or cover architectural features shall be discouraged;

D.

c.

That signs do not unreasonably block the sight lines of existing signs on adjacent properties; and

d.

Pedestrian and vehicular safety.

Design criteria for signs. The following design criteria shall be used in reviewing the design of individual signs. Substantial conformance with each of
the following design criteria shall be required before a Sign Permit or Building Permit can be approved.
1.

Color. Colors on signs and structural members should be harmonious with one another and relate to the dominant colors of the building or
buildings being identified. Contrasting colors may be utilized if the overall effect of the sign is still compatible with the building colors and
prevailing colors in the surrounding neighborhood (where a theme can be identified).

2.

Design and construction.
a.

Proposed permanent signs should be designed by professionals (e.g., architects, building designers, landscape architects, interior
designers, or those whose principal business is the design, manufacture, or sale of signs), or others who are capable of producing
professional results.

68/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
b.

All permanent signs should be constructed by persons whose principal business is building construction or a related trade including sign
manufacturing and installation businesses, or others capable of producing professional results. The intent is to ensure public safety,
achieve signs of careful construction, neat and readable copy, and durability so as to reduce maintenance costs and to prevent
dilapidation.

3.

Materials and structure.
a.

Sign materials (including framing and supports) should be representative of the type and scale of materials used on the site of the sign.
Sign materials should match those used on the building and on other signs.

b.

Materials for permanent signs shall be durable and capable of withstanding weathering over the life of the sign with reasonable
maintenance.

c.

The size of the structural members (e.g. columns, crossbeams, and braces) should be proportional to the sign panel they are supporting. In
general, fewer larger supporting members are preferable to many smaller supports.

d.

The use of individual letters incorporated into the building design is encouraged, rather than signs with background and framing other
than the building wall.

e.

The use of reflective materials or surfaces may be approved only where the review authority determines that these materials will not
distract motorists or create other hazards, and should be minimized in all cases.

4.

Street address. The review authority may require that a sign include the street address of the site where it determines that public safety and
emergency vehicle response would be more effectively served than if the street address were displayed solely on one or more buildings on the
site.

E.

Copy design guidelines. The City does not regulate the message content (copy) of signs; however, the following are principles of copy design and
layout that can enhance the readability and attractiveness of signs. Copy design and layout consistent with these principles is encouraged, but not
required.
1.

Sign copy should relate only to the name and/or nature of the business or commercial center.

2.

Permanent signs that advertise continuous sales, special prices, or include phone numbers, etc. should be avoided.

3.

Information should be conveyed briefly or by logo, symbol, or other graphic manner. The intent should be to increase the readability of the sign
and thereby enhance the identity of the business.

F.

4.

The area of letters or symbols should not exceed 40 percent of the background area in commercial districts or 60 percent in residential districts.

5.

Freestanding signs should contain the street address of the parcel or the range of addresses for a multi-tenant center.

Sign lighting. The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or external source, shall be designed to minimize light and glare on
surrounding rights-of-way and properties.
1.

The City prefers that a sign be illuminated by lights within the sign, although signs comprised of individually mounted, internally lit letters are
also acceptable. In the case of a sign comprised of a metal cabinet with a face of plastic or similar material, the face material shall be opaque
except for the letters and artwork that convey the message. It is the intent of the City that a cabinet sign be designed and constructed to appear
as much as possible as illuminated individual letters.

2.

External light sources shall be directed and shielded so that they do not produce glare on any object other than the sign, and/or off the site of
the sign.

3.

The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of residential
properties. In areas with low ambient nighttime illumination levels (i.e., areas of the City with little or no illuminated signing) a sign should be
designed to use light, illuminated copy against a dark or opaque background.

4.

Sign illumination shall not blink, flash, flutter, or change light intensity, brightness or color.

5.

Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.

6.

Neither the direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles.

7.

Reflective-type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed 15 watts shall not be used on the exterior surface of signs so as to expose the face of
the bulb or lamp to a public right-of-way or adjacent property.

8.

Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible.

9.

Permanently installed illuminated panels, visible tubing, and strings of lights outlining all or a portion of a building, other than lighting that is
primarily for indirectly illuminating architectural features, signs, or landscaping, shall be deemed "signs" subject to this Chapter and shall be
counted as part of the allowed sign area. Each line of tubing or lights shall be deemed to have a minimum width of at least six inches for the
purpose of area calculation.

G.

Maintenance of signs. Each sign and supporting hardware, including temporary signs, shall be maintained in good repair and functioning properly at
all times. Any repair to a sign shall be of equal or better in quality of materials and design as the original sign. A sign that is not properly maintained
and is dilapidated shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated in compliance with the Municipal Code.
When an existing sign is removed or replaced, all brackets, poles, and other supports that are no longer required shall be removed. Unpainted areas
shall be painted to match the adjacent portion of the building or sign support structure.

69/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-38-060. - Zoning district sign standards.
Each sign shall comply with the sign type, area, height, and other restrictions provided by this Section, except as otherwise expressly provided in
Section 4-38-030.E (Signs and Sign Changes Allowed Without a Sign Permit) or Section 4-38-070 (Standards for Specific Types of Signs).
A.

Residential zoning districts. Each sign in a residential zoning district established by Section 4-20-020 (Zoning Map and Zoning Districts) shall
comply with the following requirements.
TABLE 3-10 - SIGN STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

Allowed Sign Types

Maximum Sign Height

Maximum Number of Signs

Maximum Sign Area

Allowed

Allowed per Parcel

per Parcel
Wall or freestanding

B.

Wall signs: below edge of roof;

1 of either allowed sign type per

20 sf maximum each;

Freestanding: 6 ft

entrance or street frontage

40 sf total for all signs

Commercial and industrial zoning district sign standards. Each sign in a commercial or industrial zoning district (see Section 4-20-020 - Zoning
Map and Zoning Districts) shall comply with the requirements in Table 3-11, in addition to the provisions of Section 4-38-070 (Standards for
Specific Types of Signs), as applicable.
TABLE 3-11 - SIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL ZONES

Allowed Sign

Maximum

Maximum Number of

Maximum Sign Area

Signs Allowed per Parcel

Allowed per Parcel

Sign
Types

Height

Ground-mounted and Ground- oor Signs
Awning

Below roof

Single tenant site or building:

Interior parcel: 1 sf for each linear ft of primary

(1)

3 of any combination of allowed sign types per

building frontage (for buildings with multiple

primary building frontage.

frontages such as within a shopping center, 1 sf for

1 of any allowed sign type per secondary frontage.

each linear foot of primary frontage plus 0.5 sf for

Freestanding

6 ft

Projecting, Wall

Below roof
(1)

Suspended

each foot of secondary frontage)
The total area of all signs on a single building
Site or building with 4 or more tenants: 1 of any

frontage shall not exceed the total linear feet in

allowed sign type per business frontage.

that frontage.

Below
eave/canopy;
at least 8 ft
above a
walking
surface

At least 25 sf, and no more than 200 sf, are allowed
for each use.
Corner parcel: 0.5 additional sf for each linear foot
of secondary frontage.
Site with 4 or more tenants: allowed an additional
freestanding identi cation sign of 0.25 sf for each
linear ft of total primary bldg. frontage, to 200 sf
maximum.

Temporary/Portable

See Sections 4-38-070.A and 4-38-070.H

Window

See Section 4-38-070.J

Second Floor Signs

70/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Awning,

Below roof

Projecting,

(1)

1 per tenant space

12 sf is also allowed to identify upper oor

Wall
Window

12 sf for each tenant. 1 directory sign not to exceed
occupants.

See Section 4-38-070.J

Indoor Signs, and Outdoor Signs Not Visible from a Street
Awning,

Below roof

Freestanding,

(1)

See Section 4-38-070, as applicable

Projecting,
Suspended,
Wall,
Window
Note:
(1) At least one foot below the top of a parapet, the sill of a second oor window, and/or the lowest point of any cornice or roof overhang.

71/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-38-070. - Standards for speci c types of signs.
Proposed signs shall comply with the following standards where applicable, in addition to the sign area, height, and other requirements of Section 438.060 (Zoning District Sign Standards), and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter.
A.

A-frame and other portable sidewalk signs. Each business may display one A-frame or other portable sidewalk sign in compliance with the
following standards.
1.

Limitation on location. An A-frame or other portable sidewalk sign shall be approved only within the C-D zoning district.

2.

Encroachment Permit. In addition to the Sign Permit required by this Chapter, an encroachment permit shall be obtained from the Public
Works Department before any sign is placed in the public right-of-way. A public liability insurance policy, approved by the City Attorney and
naming the City of Gustine and its officers and employees as insured, shall be provided the City prior to issuance of an encroachment
permit.

3.

Sign size. Each sign shall not exceed a width of 2'-6". Sign height shall be limited to four feet. Sign height shall be measured perpendicular

72/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
from the sidewalk surface to the highest point of the sign.
4.

Sign placement. A portable sidewalk sign shall be placed only within the boundaries of the applicable business' street frontage where
specifically allowed by the Sign Permit or Encroachment Permit, and shall be positioned so that it will not:

B.

a.

Obstruct the sidewalk clearance required in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);

b.

Impede any line of sight for motorists at vehicular public right-of-way intersections, as recommended by the Public Works Director; or

c.

Interfere with people exiting and entering parked cars.

5.

Stabilization. The sign shall be stabilized to withstand wind gusts or shall be removed during windy conditions.

6.

Daily removal. The sign shall be removed from the sidewalk at the close of business each day.

7.

Maintenance. The sign shall be continuously maintained in good condition with no peeling paint or other deterioration.

Awning signs. The following standards apply to awning signs in all zoning districts where allowed by Section 4-38-060 (Zoning District Sign
Standards).
1.

Signs on awnings are limited to ground level and second story occupancies only.

2.

Awnings shall not be internally illuminated, except that lettering on the awning valence may be backlit. Direct exterior lighting may be
allowed. Translucent awning materials are prohibited.

C.

Banners and pennants. Temporary banners and pennants may be allowed as part of an approved Master Sign Plan for a site (Section 4-38030.C). Temporary banners and pennants shall be in place for no longer than 30 days, and shall be limited to the height of the building, or
mounted upon on-site outdoor lighting fixtures, as specifically authorized by the review authority.

D.

Freestanding signs. The following standards apply to freestanding signs in all zoning districts where allowed by Section 4-38-060 (Zoning District
Sign Standards).
1.

Each freestanding sign shall be a monument sign, with sign height not to exceed six feet. (See Section 4-38-050.B for measurement).

2.

Multiple signs shall be separated by a minimum of 75 feet to ensure adequate visibility for all signs. The Director may waive this
requirement where the locations of existing signs on adjacent properties would make the 75-foot separation impractical.

3.

A sign shall not project over public property, vehicular easements, or rights-of-way, and shall not obstruct a traffic safety sight area, as
determined by the Director.

4.

To assist emergency response personnel in locating the site, freestanding signs should contain an illuminated street address plate.
Numbers should be a minimum of six inches in height. An address plate shall not be included in calculations of allowed sign area.

5.

An institutional use (e.g., school, religious facility), and a theater or auditorium may have a reader board as a freestanding sign, with a
maximum area of 16 square feet. A reader board with more area shall require Use Permit approval.

E.

Murals. A mural placed on the wall of a building may be permitted in any commercial or PI zoning district subject to Architectural Review, and as
follows.
1.

A mural is in addition to (not counted as part of) the sign area allowed by Section 4-38-060

2.

Murals that illustrate the local setting and history as sources of inspiration are encouraged.

3.

The approval of a mural shall require that the review authority first find that the size, colors, and placement of the mural are visually
compatible with the building architecture, and that the mural will serve to enhance the aesthetics of the City.

F.

Projecting signs. The following standards apply to projecting signs in the C-1 zoning district.
1.

The maximum projection of a sign from a building wall over a public right-of-way shall not exceed 36 inches over a sidewalk. Larger
projections from the building wall over private property may be approved by the review authority for a theater marquee sign. A marquee
sign may project more than 36 inches over a sidewalk with Use Permit approval and an Encroachment Permit.

2.

The maximum height of a projecting sign shall not exceed 14 feet, eave height, parapet height, or sill height of a second floor window,
whichever is less. No portion of the sign shall project above the eave line of a sloped roof or the top of the parapet on a flat roof.

3.

A projecting sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet from the bottom of the sign to the finished grade below.

73/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
4.

Icon signs using shapes or symbols uniquely suited to the business, creative shapes, and three-dimensional signs are encouraged. See Figure
5.

Each sign shall be graphically designed for pedestrians, with a maximum area of nine square feet on each sign
face, regardless of the length of the building frontage.

G.

6.

Sign supports shall be well-designed and compatible with the design of the sign.

7.

Cabinet or "can" signs (interior illuminated boxed display signs) are prohibited.

Temporary signs. Temporary signs are allowed subject to the following requirements.
1.

Construction signs. Construction identification signs may be allowed in all zoning districts with Sign Permit approval, in compliance with
the following standards:

2.

a.

Only one sign, located on-site, shall be allowed;

b.

The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet;

c.

Sign height shall not exceed six feet; and

d.

The sign shall not be illuminated.

Off-site directional signs. Because of the City's interest in ensuring traffic safety, and the City's interest in improving public convenience,
off-site directional signs may be allowed in compliance with the requirements of this Subsection, and subject to the approval of a Sign
Permit.
a.

Signs within commercial zones. Off-site directional signs may be approved within the commercial zoning districts, only where:
(1)

The review authority determines that a property owner has taken advantage of all permanent signs allowed by this Chapter, and
site visibility remains seriously impaired; and

(2)

The structure to which directions are being provided is on a lot that is located more than 150 feet from a predominant public
street frontage, the site is developed with all other signs allowed by this Chapter, and the business entry and the other exterior
signs allowed for the site by this Chapter are not visible from the predominant public street. The "predominant public street"
shall mean the major vehicular route that provides access to the site and surrounding area.

b.

Signs within residential zones. Directional signs may be approved within the residential zoning districts only where the review
authority first determines that:
(1)

The site to which directions are provided is of a quasi-public, public assembly, or public recreational use;

(2)

The facility needing the sign has taken advantage of all permanent signs allowed by this Chapter, and site visibility remains
seriously impaired, or motorists will otherwise have substantial difficulty locating the site; and

(3)

The sign will not have significant impact on the residential character of the area where the sign is to be placed; and

(4)

The sign will be located no closer to 1,000 feet from any other off-site directional sign in a residential zone, as measured along
roadway frontages between the signs.

c.

Sign standards. An approved directional sign shall comply with all the following requirements.
(1)

Number, size, and height limitations. Only one off-site directional sign shall be allowed for any single land use. The sign shall
not exceed an area of four square feet, and the height shall not exceed six feet.

(2)

Design and construction standards. The appearance of the sign, including any graphics and/or text, will reflect attractive,
professional design, and that the sign will be durable and stable when in place.

(3)
3.

Placement requirements. The sign shall be placed only on private property, at the location specified by the Sign Permit.

Political signs. Temporary political signs shall comply with the following requirements.
a.

Maximum size. No political sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area; and if freestanding, no more than six feet in height.

b.

Prohibited locations for posting. No political sign shall be a roof sign, and no political sign shall be posted on, under, above, or
across any public property, or within or above a public right-of-way.

c.

Property owner approval required. No political sign shall be posted without the approval of the property owner; provided that no
property owner shall approve or allow more than an aggregate of 80 square feet of political signs per lot of record.

d.

Time limits. No political signs shall be posted earlier than 45 days prior to the election at which the candidates or measures will be
voted upon, and each sign shall be removed within seven days after the election.

e.

Enforcement of removal requirements. If a sign is not removed, notice shall be issued and the responsible party shall remove the
sign within seven days of the notice to remove the sign. If not removed within that time, violations are punishable in compliance with
Municipal Code Title 1, Chapter 1.16.

4.

Real estate signs. Real estate signs are allowed without a Sign Permit in compliance with California Civil Code Section 723, and subject to
the following requirements.
a.

Commercial, industrial, and other non-residential zoning districts. Properties within commercial, industrial, and other nonresidential zoning districts shall be allowed one real estate sign of no more than 32 square feet, with a maximum height for
freestanding signs of six feet, for each parcel frontage.

b.

Residential zoning districts.

74/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
(1)

On-site signs. One residential real estate sign not more than six square feet in area, advertising the sale or lease of a parcel or stru
property it advertises.

(2)

Off-site directional signs. Up to two off-site real estate directional signs not more than six square feet in area may be located
on private property, provided that they do not obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular and are not secured to prevent
removal. No real estate sign shall be permitted within the public right-of-way.

5.

Subdivision directional signs, off-site. Off-site signs providing directions to a new subdivision may be allowed with Sign Permit approval,
and shall comply with the following standards:
a.

A maximum of two off-site signs may be located on private property (not within any public right-of-way).

b.

The total area of each sign shall not exceed 24 square feet;

c.

The height of each sign shall not exceed six feet;

d.

The signs shall not be illuminated;

e.

The signs may be displayed only during the two years following date of recordation of the final map, or until all of the units have been
sold, whichever occurs first; and

f.
6.

The signs shall not affect pedestrian or vehicular safety.

Subdivision signs, on-site. On-site subdivision identification signs may be allowed with Sign Permit approval, in compliance with the
following standards:
a.

A maximum of two on-site signs may be located within the project boundaries, provided that no more than one sign per street
frontage is allowed, and multiple signs shall be separated by a minimum of 75 feet.

b.

The area of each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet;

c.

Sign height shall not exceed six feet;

d.

The signs shall not be illuminated; and

e.

The signs may be displayed only during the two years following the date of recordation of the final map, or until all of the units have
been sold, whichever occurs first.

7.

Temporary signs within commercial zoning districts. Temporary on-site, wall-mounted signs are allowed within commercial zoning
districts without a Sign Permit for a maximum of 30 days after the opening of a new business, provided that the area of the temporary
signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign area allowed on the site by Section 4-38-060 (Zoning District Sign Standards).

I.

Wall signs. The following standards apply to wall signs in all zoning districts where allowed by Section 4-38.060 (Zoning District Sign Standards).
1.

A wall sign may be located on any primary or secondary building frontage.

2.

The area of the largest wall sign shall not exceed seven percent of the area of the building facade on which the sign is mounted or painted,
including the area of windows, doors, and recesses.

3.

No sign shall project from the surface to which it is attached more than required for construction purposes, and in no case more than 12
inches.

4.
J.

No sign shall be placed so as to interfere with the operation of a door or window.

Window signs. Window signs are allowed only within the commercial zoning districts established by Section 4-20-020 (Zoning Map and Zoning
Districts) as follows.
1.

Maximum sign area. Permanent and temporary window signs shall not occupy more than 20 percent of the total ground floor window
area.

2.

Permanent window signs.
a.

Signs shall be allowed only on windows located on the ground level and second story of a building frontage.

b.

Signage shall consist of individual letters, logos, or symbols applied to the glass surface; however, neon signs with transparent
backgrounds may be hung inside the window glass line.

3.

Temporary window signs. Temporary window signs may be allowed provided that the signs:
a.

May be displayed inside a window for a maximum of 10 days within any 30-day time period.

b.

Shall only be located within the ground-floor windows of the structure.

Sec. 4-38-080. - Exceptions to sign area limitations.
The review authority may grant an exception to increase the maximum allowed sign area by up to 25 percent if the review authority first determines
that:
A.

The position or setback of the building on the site requires additional area for effective signing;

B.

The exceptional size of the structures, uses, or site requires additional sign area for effective identification from major approaches to the site; or

C.

The name of the business or use to be identified is exceptionally long, so that sign readability would be impaired by crowding words into the
allowable sign area.

75/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-38-090. - Nonconforming signs.
A nonconforming sign is any permanent or temporary sign that was legally established and maintained in compliance with the provisions of all
applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation but that does not now comply with the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
A.

General requirements. A nonconforming sign shall not be:
1.

Changed to another nonconforming sign;

2.

Structurally altered to extend its useful life;

3.

Enlarged;

4.

Re-established after a business is discontinued for 30 days; or

5.

Re-established after damage or destruction to 50 percent or more of the value of the sign, or its components, as determined by the
Building Official.

B.

Maintenance and changes. Sign copy and face changes, nonstructural modifications and nonstructural maintenance (i.e., painting, rust
removal) are allowed without a Sign Permit up to a maximum of 25 percent of the existing total area of the sign. Face changes not including
copy, and any nonstructural modifications exceeding 25 percent of the existing total area of the sign, and any structural changes shall comply
with all applicable standards of this Chapter.

Sec. 4-38-100. - Violations and abatement.
A.

Public nuisance declared by Director. Any sign erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter may be declared to be a public
nuisance by the Director and proceedings for its removal may take place in compliance with the Municipal Code

B.

C.

Public nuisance declared by Council. The Director may ask the Council to declare a sign a public nuisance under the following conditions:
1.

The sign is significantly damaged either in support structure or sign face, as determined by the Building Official.

2.

The sign is illegible either through fading, rusting, or erosion of the sign face or through faulty or missing illumination; or

3.

The sign is unsafe for vehicles or pedestrians.

Removal of abandoned sign. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business that
it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the Director shall give the owner 30 days written
notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the Director may have the sign removed at the owner's expense.

Sec. 4-38-110. - Appeal.
After denial of an application for a Sign Permit, the applicant may appeal that action in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals). The Review authority
shall act to grant or deny the appeal within 60 days of receipt of the request for review/appeal.
Sec. 4-38-120. - Judicial review.
Any permit issued or denied in compliance with this Chapter shall be subject to expedited judicial review to the extent provided by the time limits set
forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 et seq.
ARTICLE 4. - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
CHAPTER 4-40. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Sections:

Sec. 4-40-010. - Purpose.
A.

It is the intent of this Chapter to prevent community wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the
deterioration of neighborhoods that can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other, or in
proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, religious facilities, and residential zoning districts or uses.

B.

The Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in
the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and
residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this Chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult-oriented businesses
in certain areas.

C.

It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the City. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by

76/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.

Sec. 4-40-020. - Applicability.
A.

Regulatory permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or
carried on, in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain
in full force and effect an Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit from the City. The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City
permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit for each
site/location.

B.

Performer permit required. It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical
areas or involving specified sexual activities in an Adult-Oriented Business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect an
Adult-Oriented Business Performer Permit from the City.

Sec. 4-40-030. - Location Requirements.
An adult-oriented business establishment shall be located only in a zoning district where allowed by Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses,
and Permit Requirements), and only on a site that also complies with the following requirements.
A.

Separation from incompatible uses. An adult-oriented business establishment shall not be located within:
1.

300 feet from any other adult-oriented business establishment;

2.

500 feet from any religious facility;

3.

500 feet from any school or other land use (for example, video game arcades, skating rinks, pizza parlors, etc.) accommodating or oriented
to minors;

B.

4.

500 feet from any public park; or

5.

300 feet from any residential zoning district or conforming residential use (i.e., mixed use project).

Measurement of distance between uses. The required separation distance between an adult-oriented business establishment and any of the
uses or areas listed in Subsection A. shall be measured in a straight line, from the closest points on the property lines of each site.

CHAPTER 4-42. - AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION - RIGHT-TO-FARM
Sections:

Sec. 4-42-010. - Purpose.
A.

It is the policy of the City to conserve agricultural land to the maximum practical extent that is commensurate with the orderly growth and
development of the City. It is the further intent of the City to provide to its residents proper notification of the City's recognition and support through
the provisions of this Chapter of those persons right to farm.

B.

Where non-agricultural land uses extend into agricultural areas or exist side by side, agricultural operations frequently become the subjects of
nuisance complaints because of a lack of information about the agricultural operations. Agricultural operators can be forced to cease or curtail their
operations as a result. These actions discourage investment in farm improvements to the detriment of adjacent agricultural uses and the economic
viability of the County's agricultural industry. It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to reduce the loss to the County of Merced of its agricultural
resources by clarifying the circumstances under which agricultural operations may be considered a nuisance.

C.

An additional purpose of this Section is to promote a good neighbor policy by advising purchasers and users of property adjacent to or near
agricultural operations of the inherent potential problems associated with the purchase or residence. These problems may include the noises, odors,
dust, chemicals, smoke, and hours of operation that may be associated with agricultural operations. It is intended that, through mandatory
disclosures, purchasers and users will better understand the impact of living near agricultural operations, and be prepared to accept attendant
conditions as the natural result of living in or near a rural area.

Sec. 4-42-020. - Relationship to Nuisance.
A.

No agricultural activity, operation, or facility or appurtenances thereof, conducted or maintained for commercial purposes, and in a manner
consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards, as established and followed by similar agricultural operations, shall be considered or
become a nuisance, public or private, if it was not a nuisance when it began.

B.

This Chapter shall not be construed as in any way modifying or abridging applicable provisions State law in the Civil Code, Health and Safety Code,
Fish and Game Code, Food and Agriculture Code, Division 7 of the Water Code, or any other applicable provision of State law relative to nuisances;
rather it is only to be used in the interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code and other applicable City
regulations.

77/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-42-030. - Disclosure Statement Required.
A.

When required. A disclosure statement in the form provided by Subsection B. shall be required as follows.
1.

Property transfer. Upon any transfer of real property, located anywhere within the City limits, by sale, exchange, installment land sale contract,
lease with an option to purchase, any other option to purchase, or ground improved with dwelling units, the tranferor shall require that a
statement containing the language set forth in Subsection B. shall be signed by the purchaser or lessee, and recorded with the County Recorder
in conjunction with the deed or lease conveying the interest in real property.

2.

Planning permit approval. Upon the issuance of a planning permit or subdivision approval in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code
at any location in the City, the City will require the subject property owner, as a condition of approval, to sign a statement of acknowledgment
containing the disclosure set out in Subsection B.2, on forms provided by the City, which shall then be recorded with the County Recorder.

3.

Subdivision approval. The Final Map or Parcel Map, and covenants, conditions, and restrictions of the subdivision, shall include a notation that
the present and future owners of the property understand that pre-existing agricultural operations are present in an around the city and that
those agricultural operations may emit noise, dust, odor, and occasionally use fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides in the normal pursuit of
agricultural operations. Property owners or residents of this subdivision shall not have the right to lodge complaints for dust, noise, odor, or
other descriptions associated with traditional agricultural operations.

4.

Building Permit issuance. The City will not issue any Building Permit on property where a disclosure form required under Subsection B.2 has
not been recorded with the County Recorder.

B.

Form of disclosure. The disclosure required by Subsection A. shall be in the following form:
1.

Real estate transfer.
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT CONCERNS THE REAL PROPERTY SITUATED IN THE CITY OF GUSTINE, COUNTY OF MERCED, STATE OF
CALIFORNIA, DESCRIBED AS ____________. THIS STATEMENT IS A DISCLOSURE OF THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PROPERTY IN
COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION NO. 4-42-030 OF THE GUSTINE MUNICIPAL CODE OF ____________, 1991. IT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND
BY THE SELLER(S) OR ANY AGENT(S) REPRESENTING ANY PRINCIPAL(S) IN THIS TRANSACTION, AND IT IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR ANY
INSPECTIONS OR WARRANTIES THE PRINCIPAL(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN.

2.

Sellers information.
SELLERS INFORMATION
The Seller discloses the following information with the knowledge that even though this is not a warranty, prospective Buyers may rely on
this information in deciding whether and on what terms to purchase the subject property. Seller hereby authorizes any agent(s)
representing any principal(s) in this transaction to provide a copy of this statement to any person or entity in connection with any actual or
anticipated sale of the property. THE FOLLOWING ARE REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY THE SELLER(S) AS REQUIRED BY THE CITY OF GUSTINE
AND ARE NOT REPRESENTATIONS OF THE AGENT(S), IF ANY. THIS INFORMATION IS A DISCLOSURE AND IS NOT INTENDED TO BE PART OF
ANY CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BUYER AND SELLER.
The City of Gustine encourages the operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the County and City. The property you
are purchasing is located near agricultural lands and you may be subject to inconveniences or discomfort arising from agricultural
operations. Such discomfort or inconveniences may include, but are not limited to: noise, odors, fumes, dust, smoke, insects, operation of
machinery (including aircraft) during any 24 hour period, storage and disposal of manure, and the application by spraying or otherwise of
chemical fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides and pesticides. One or more of the inconveniences described may occur as a result of any
agricultural operation which is in conformance with existing laws and regulations and accepted customs and standards. You should be
prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in a county and city with a strong rural
character and an active agricultural sector.
Seller certifies that the information herein is true and correct to the best of Seller's knowledge as of date signed by the Seller.
Seller ____________ Date ____________
Seller ____________ Date ____________

3.

Option of professional advice.
BUYER(S) AND SELLER(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN PROFESSIONAL ADVICE AND/OR INSPECTIONS OF THE PROPERTY AND TO PROVIDE FOR
APPROPRIATE PROVISIONS IN A CONTRACT BETWEEN BUYER AND SELLER(S) WITH RESPECT TO ANY ADVICE/INSPECTIONS/DEFECTS.
I/WE ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF A COPY OF THIS STATEMENT.

Seller _____

Date _____

Buyer _____

Date _____

Seller _____

Date _____

Buyer _____

Date _____
78/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Agent (Broker Representing Seller) ____________ By ____________ Date ____________
(Associate Licensee or Broker-Signature)
Agent (Broker Representing Seller) ____________ By ____________ Date ____________
(Associate Licensee or Broker-Signature)
State of ____________ On this the ____________ day of ____________
) SS. before me, the undersigned Notary
County of ____________ Public, personally appeared
____________
____________
____________ Personally known to me. ____________ Provided to me on the basis of satisfactory evidence to be the person(s) whose name(s)
____________ subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged that ____________ executed the same for the purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
Notary Public ____________
Present A.P. No. ____________
A REAL ESTATE BROKER IS QUALIFIED TO ADVISE ON REAL ESTATE. IF YOU DESIRE LEGAL ADVICE, CONSULT YOUR ATTORNEY.
D.

Refusal to sign disclosure statement. If a buyer refuses to sign the disclosure statement set forth in Subsection C., the transferor may comply with
the requirements of this chapter by delivering the statement to the buyer as provided in this section and affixing and signing the following
declaration to the statement:
I,

(name) , have delivered a copy of the foregoing disclosure statement as required by law to

(Buyer's name)

who has refused to sign.

I declare the foregoing to be true.
Date: ____________ (Sign) ____________
Print Name: ____________
Sec. 4-42-040. - Con icting Requirements.
The provisions of this Chapter shall take precedence over all ordinances or parts of ordinances or resolutions or parts of resolutions in conflict
herewith and to the extent they do conflict with this Section they are hereby repealed with respect to the conflict and no more.
CHAPTER 4-44. - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
Sections:

Sec. 4-44-010. - Purpose and Applicability.
A.

Purpose. This Chapter provides site planning, development, and/or operating standards for certain land uses that are allowed by Article 2 (Allowable
Land Uses Zoning District Standards) within individual or multiple zoning districts, and for activities that require special standards to mitigate their
potential adverse impacts.

B.

Applicability. The land uses and activities covered by this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of the Sections applicable to the specific use, in
addition to all other applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
1.

Where allowed. The uses that are subject to the standards in this Chapter shall be located in compliance with the requirements of Article 2
(Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards).

2.

Planning permit requirements. The uses that are subject to the standards in this Chapter shall be authorized by the planning permit required
by Article 2, except where a planning permit requirement is established by this Chapter for a specific use.

3.

Development standards. The standards for specific uses in this Chapter supplement and are required in addition to those in Articles 2
(Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards) and 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards).
a.

The applicability of the standards in this Chapter to the specific land uses listed is determined by Sections 4-24-030 (Residential District
Land Uses and Permit Requirements), 4-26-030 (Commercial District Land Uses and Permit Requirements), and 4-28-030 (Industrial and

79/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Public District Land Uses and Permit Requirements).
b.

In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this Chapter and those of Articles 2 or 3, the requirements of this Chapter shall
control.

Sec. 4-44-020. - Accessory Structures and Uses.
This Section provides standards for accessory structures and uses, where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards).
A.

Timing of construction. An accessory structure shall be constructed at the same time as, or subsequent to, the primary structure.

B.

Attached accessory structures. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, the accessory building shall be made structurally
a part of, and have a common roof with, the main building, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to
the main building.

C.

Location of detached structure in R zoning district. A detached accessory structure in a residential zoning district shall be located on the rear
half of the lot, and at least 10 feet from any dwelling existing or under construction on the same lot or any adjacent lot. The accessory structure
shall not be located closer than three feet to a side lot line, or in the case of a corner lot, shall not project beyond the front yard required or
existing on the adjacent lot, nor be within five feet of the rear lot line.

D.

Garage standards.
1.

An attached or detached garage shall not be located within five feet of any alley.

2.

The entrance opening of a residential garage that faces any front or street side property line shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
the property line.

Sec. 4-44-030. - Residential Accessory Uses and Structures.
This Section provide standards for residential accessory uses and structures, where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District
Standards). These requirements do not apply to residential second units, which are instead regulated by Section 4-44-130 (Second Dwelling Units).
A.

Limitation on number. Only one residential accessory structure shall be allowed on any parcel in addition to a detached garage.

B.

Relationship to primary use. An accessory use and/or structure shall be incidental to the primary residential use of the site, and shall not alter
the character of the primary use.

C.

Attached structures. An accessory structure attached to the primary structure shall comply with all zoning district requirements applicable to
the primary structure, including setbacks, height limits, and site coverage; and shall also comply with any applicable requirements of Subsection
E.

D.

Detached structures. An accessory structure that is detached from the primary structure shall comply with the following standards, except
where Subsection E. establishes a different requirement for a specific type of accessory structure.
1.

Setbacks.
a.

Front setback. An accessory structure shall not be located within a required front setback.

b.

Side and rear setbacks. An accessory structure with a height of 10 feet or less shall maintain side and rear setbacks of at least five
feet. An accessory structure with a height greater than 10 feet shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district.

c.

Separation between structures. An accessory structure shall maintain at least a ten-foot separation from other accessory structures
and the primary dwelling unit.

d.

Double-frontage lot. An accessory structure shall not occupy the front half of a parcel, or either front quarter of a double-frontage
lot, unless it is setback at least 75 feet from any street lot line.

e.

Reverse corner lot. On a reverse corner lot that abuts a key lot, no accessory structure shall be nearer the street than a distance
equal to the depth of the front setback required for the key lot. See Figure 4-1.

2.

Height limit. The height of an accessory structure other than a detached garage shall not exceed 12 feet, except where a greater height is
authorized through Variance approval. The height of a detached garage shall comply with the height limit established by the applicable
zoning district.

3.

Coverage and size limitations. Where permitted, the aggregate coverage of accessory structures in required side and rear setbacks shall
not exceed 500 square feet. The maximum site coverage for all structures on a parcel shall comply with the requirements of the applicable
zoning district.

E.

Standards for specific accessory uses and structures. The following requirements apply to the specific types of accessory structures listed, in
addition to the requirements of Subsection A., as applicable.
1.

Antennas. Antennas shall comply with the requirements of Table 2-3.

2.

Garages. A garage for a single-family dwelling shall comply with the following requirements. A garage for a multi-family project shall
comply with the requirements of Section 4-44-100 (Multi-Family Projects).
a.

Limitation on number. A single parcel shall have only one attached or detached garage.

80/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
b.

Setback requirements.
(1)

Front setback. A garage shall comply with the front setback requirements of the applicable zoning district.

(2)

Side setbacks. A garage shall be set back a minimum of five feet from side property lines.

(3)

Rear setback. An attached garage shall comply with the rear setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. A detached
garage shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the rear property line where vehicles access the garage from the front of
the lot, and shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from the opposite side of the alley where accessed from an alley.

c.

Facade width, parking orientation. The facade of any garage-door facing a street shall not exceed a width of 25 feet.

3.

Greenhouses. An accessory greenhouse may occupy up to 400 square feet for each dwelling unit.

4.

Guest houses. A guest house shall comply with the requirements for second units in Section 4-44-120

5.

Patio covers. A patio cover that is attached to or detached from the primary dwelling, and open on at least three sides, may be located
within the required rear setback subject to the following:
a.

No part of the patio cover shall be closer than ten feet to a property line.

b.

The five-foot separation from the primary dwelling unit required by Subparagraph E.1.c (Separation between structures), above does
not apply; and

c.
6.

The structure shall comply with the coverage and size limitations of Subparagraph E.3 (Coverage and size limitations), above.

Swimming pools. Non-commercial swimming pools are an allowed accessory use in any zoning district subject to the following
requirements:

7.

a.

Setbacks. No swimming pool shall be located within a required front or side setback, or within five feet of a property line; and

b.

Fence or wall. No swimming pool shall be located closer than five feet to a fence or wall.

Tennis and other recreational courts. A non-commercial outdoor tennis court, or a court for another sport, including basketball and
racquetball, that is accessory to a residential use shall comply with the following requirements:
a.

Setbacks. No court shall be located within a required setback, or within ten feet of a any property line; and

b.

Fencing. Court fencing shall comply with Section 4-30-030 (Fences, Walls, and Screening); and

c.

Lighting. Court lighting shall require Use Permit approval, and shall not exceed a maximum height of 20 feet, measured from the
court surface. The lighting shall be directed downward, shall only illuminate the court, and shall comply with Section 4-30-060
(Outdoor Lighting).

8.

Workshops or studios. An accessory structure intended as a workshop or studio for artwork, crafts, light hand manufacturing, or hobbies,
is subject to the following standards when located in a residential zoning district:
a.

Limitation on use. The use of an accessory structure as a studio shall be limited to: non-commercial hobbies or amusements;
maintenance of the primary structure or setbacks; artistic endeavors, including painting, photography, or sculpture; or for other
similar purposes. Any use of an accessory workshop for any commercial activity shall comply with Section 4-44-050 (Home
Occupations); and

b.

Floor area. A workshop shall not occupy an area larger than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the primary structure; except that
where a workshop is combined with a garage, see Subparagraph E.2 (Garages), above.

Sec. 4-44-040. - Child Day Care Facilities.
A.

Applicability. Where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), child day care facilities shall comply with the standards
of this Section. These standards apply in addition to the other provisions of this Land Use Code and requirements imposed by the California
Department of Social Services (DSS). DSS Licensing is required for all facilities.

B.

Definitions. Definitions of the child day care facilities regulated by this Section are in Article 8 (Glossary) under "Day Care, Child."

C.

Standards for large family day care homes. As required by Health and Safety Code Sections 1597.46 et seq., a large family day care home shall be
approved if it complies with the following standards.
1.

Location requirements. In order to avoid the concentration of intensive, non-residential land uses in residential neighborhoods, maintain
residential character, and compatibility with adjacent residential uses, no large family day care home shall be located within 300 feet of an
existing large family day care home, or child day care center. In no case shall a residential property be directly abutted by a large family day care
center on two or more sides.

2.

Parking. A large family day care home shall be provided parking and drop-off areas as follows.
a.

A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to those required by Section 4-36-040 (Number of Parking Spaces
Required) for the single-family dwelling. The driveway may be used to provide these spaces, if the driveway is of sufficient length to
accommodate the parking of two vehicles without either blocking any sidewalk or other pedestrian access.

b.

A home located on a site with no on-street parking immediately in front of the site shall provide two off-street parking spaces for drop-offs
in addition to the spaces required by Subsection C.2.a.

c.

A home located on a street with a speed limit of 30 miles per hour or greater shall provide two off-street parking spaces for drop-offs in

81/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
addition to the spaces required by Subsection C.2.a, that are designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto the street (e.g., circular
driveway).
3.

Outdoor activity areas.
a.

Any side or rear setback areas intended for day care use shall be enclosed with a fence or wall to separate the children from neighboring
properties.

b.

Outdoor recreation equipment over eight feet in height shall not be located within a required side setback, and shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from a rear property line.

4.

Noise. Noise generated from the large family day care home shall not exceed the standards in Section 4-30-050 (Noise Standards).

5.

Additional standards. Each large family day care home shall comply with applicable building and fire codes, and standards adopted by the
State, and Social Services Department licensing requirements (California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 2).

D.

Standards for child day care centers.
1.

Fencing. Architectural Review shall be required for any proposed fencing.

2.

Parking and loading.
a.

Off-street parking shall be provided as required through the Use Permit process, but shall be a minimum of one space per employee on
the largest shift.

b.

Picking up and dropping off of children shall not create unsafe conditions. Loading and unloading of children from vehicles shall only be
allowed in the driveway or in an approved parking area.

3.

Noise. Potential noise sources shall be identified during the Use Permit process, and noise attenuation and sound dampening shall be
addressed.

Sec. 4-44-050. - Home Occupations.
The following standards for home occupations are intended to provide reasonable opportunities for employment within the home, while avoiding
changes to the residential character of a dwelling that accommodates a home occupation, or the surrounding neighborhood, where allowed by Article 2
(Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards).
A.

Business License required. A home occupation shall require a City Business License and a Home Occupation Permit. A permit to conduct a
home occupation shall be obtained from the Director, or designee, prior to issuance of a business license.

B.

Limitations on use. The following are examples of business activities that may be approved as home occupations, and uses that are prohibited
as home occupations.
1.

Uses allowed as home occupations. The following and other uses determined by the Director to be similar may be approved by the
Director in compliance with this Section.
a.

Art and craft work (ceramics, painting, photography, sculpture, etc.);

b.

Office-only uses, including an office for an architect, attorney, consultant, counselor, doctor, insurance agent, planner, tutor, writer,
and electronic commerce; and

c.
2.

Tailors, sewing.

Uses prohibited as home occupations. The following are examples of business activities that are not incidental to or compatible with
residential activities, and are, therefore, prohibited as home occupations:
a.

Adult entertainment activities/businesses;

b.

Animal hospitals and boarding facilities;

c.

Automotive and other vehicle repair and service (body or mechanical), painting, storage, or upholstery, or the repair, reconditioning,
servicing, or manufacture of any vehicle engine, or of any motor vehicle, including automobiles, boats, motorcycles, or trucks;

d.

Commercial cabinet or furniture making, and similar uses;

e.

Contractor's and other storage yards;

f.

Fitness/health facilities, except those allowed under Subsection B.1;

g.

Medical clinics and laboratories;

h.

On-site sales, except that mail order businesses may be allowed where there is no stock-in-trade on the site;

i.

Personal services as defined in Article 8 (Glossary), except those allowed under Subsection B.1;

j.

Transportation services, including ambulance, taxi, limousine, tow truck, etc where the vehicles are parked on the property.;

k.

Uses which require explosives or highly combustible or toxic materials;

l.

Welding and machine shop operations;

m.
n.
C.

Wood cutting businesses; or
Other uses the Director determines to be similar to those listed above.

Operating standards. Home occupations shall comply with all of the following operating standards.

82/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
1.

Accessory use. The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the full-time use of the property as a residence.

2.

Location of home occupation activities.
a.

R-E zoning district. Allowed home occupation activities may be conducted within an approved accessory structure in the R-E zoning
district, provided that at least two covered parking spaces are continually maintained.

3.

Visibility. The use shall not require any exterior modification to the structure not customarily found in a dwelling, nor shall the home
occupation activity be visible from a public right-of-way, or from neighboring residential properties.

4.

Signs. There shall be no signs, other than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, and only if attached flush to a wall of the
structure.

5.

Safety. Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises.
The use shall not employ the storage of explosive, flammable, or hazardous materials beyond those normally associated with a residential
use.

6.

Off-site effects. No home occupation activity shall create dust, electrical interference, fumes, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke,
toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, or other hazards or nuisances as determined by the Director.

7.

Outdoor display or storage. There shall be no window display or outdoor storage or display of equipment, materials, or supplies
associated with the home occupation.

8.

Employees. A home occupation shall have no on-site employees other than full-time residents of the dwelling.

9.

Client/customer visits. The home occupation shall be operated so as to not require more than 6 vehicle trips per day of clients,
customers, and/or visitors to the residence. On-site presence of clients or customers shall be limited to one client or family at a time, and
only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

10.

Deliveries. The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises in a
manner different from normal residential usage, except for FedEx, UPS, or USPS-type home pick-ups and deliveries.

11.

Utility service modifications. No utility service to the dwelling shall be modified solely to accommodate a home occupation, other than as
required for normal residential use.

Sec. 4-44-060. - Mixed-Use Projects.
This Section provides standards for the design of mixed use projects, where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards). A
mixed use project combines residential and nonresidential uses on the same site, with the residential units typically located above the nonresidential
uses (vertical mixed use). Residential units may be allowed at ground level behind street-fronting nonresidential uses (horizontal mixed use) only under
the limited circumstances specified by this Section.
A.

Design considerations. A mixed use project shall be designed to achieve the following objectives.
1.

The design shall provide for internal compatibility between the residential and non-residential uses on the site.

2.

Potential glare, noise, odors, traffic, and other potentially significant impacts on residents shall be minimized to allow a compatible mix of
residential and nonresidential uses on the same site.

3.

The design shall take into consideration potential impacts on adjacent properties and shall include specific design features to minimize
potential impacts.

4.

The design shall ensure that the residential units are of a residential character, and that appropriate privacy between residential units and
other uses on the site is provided.

5.

Site planning and building design shall provide for convenient pedestrian access from the public street into the nonresidential portions of
the project, through such means as courtyards, plazas, and walkways.

6.

Site planning and building design shall be compatible with and enhance the adjacent and surrounding residential neighborhood in terms
of building design, color, exterior materials and amenities, landscaping, street furniture, lighting, roof styles, scale, and signage.

B.

Mix of uses. A mixed use project may combine residential uses with any other use allowed in the applicable zoning district by Article 2
(Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), subject to the planning permit requirements of Article 2 for each use.

C.

Maximum density. The residential component of a mixed use project shall comply with the density requirements of the applicable General Plan
designation.

D.

Site layout and project design standards. Each mixed use project shall comply with the property development standards of the applicable
zoning district, and the following requirements.
1.

Location of units. Residential units shall not occupy ground floor space within the first 50 feet of floor area measured from each building
face adjacent to a public or private street.

2.

Parking. In order to encourage the development of residential uses in existing and new commercial areas, the use of shared parking
provisions shall be incorporated into mixed use projects in compliance with Section 4-36-080 (Reduction of Parking Requirements).

3.

Loading areas. Commercial loading areas shall be located away from residential units and shall be screened from view from the
residential portion of the project to the maximum extent feasible.

83/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
4.

Refuse and recycling areas. Areas for the collection and storage of refuse and recyclable materials shall be located on the site in locations th
both the residential and nonresidential uses.

E.

Performance standards.
1.

Lighting. Lighting for commercial uses shall be appropriately shielded to limit impacts on the residential units.

2.

Noise. Each residential unit shall be designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts from nonresidential project noise, in
compliance with Section 4-30-050 (Noise Standards).

3.

Hours of operation. A mixed use project proposing a commercial component that will operate outside of the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. shall require Use Permit approval to ensure that the commercial uses will not negatively impact the residential uses within the
project, or any adjacent residential uses.

Sec. 4-44-070. - Mobile Homes.
Where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), a mobile home outside of a mobile home park shall comply with the
standards of this Section.
A.

Site requirements. The site, and the placement of the mobile home on the site shall comply with all zoning, subdivision, and development
standards applicable to a conventional single-family dwelling on the same parcel.

B.

Mobile home design and construction standards. A mobile home outside of a mobile home park shall comply with the following design and
construction standards. A mobile home that does not comply with these standards shall be allowed only within a mobile home park.
1.

The exterior siding, trim, and roof shall be of the same materials and treatment found in conventionally built residential structures in the
surrounding area, and shall appear the same as the exterior materials on any garage or other accessory structure on the same site.

2.

The roof shall have eave and gable overhangs of not less than 12 inches measured from the vertical side of the mobile home, and the roof
pitch shall be no less than 5:12.

3.

The mobile home shall be placed on a foundation system, subject to the approval of the Building Official; and

4.

The mobile home shall be certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 4401
et seq.), and has been constructed after January 1, 1989.

Sec. 4-44-080. - Mobile Home Parks.
Where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), a mobile home park shall comply with the standards of this Section.
A.

Minimum site area. A mobile home park shall only be established on a site of four acres or larger.

B.

Setback requirements for park perimeter and mobile home spaces. No mobile home space shall be located closer than:
1.

Ten feet from a front or street side property line of the mobile home park. "Street", as used in this section, shall not include alley. The
setback shall be landscaped as required by the review authority.

C.

2.

Five feet from any other property line of the mobile home park.

3.

Five feet from any side lot or mobile home space boundary line.

Storage areas. A large storage areas shall by provided for the storage of boats, campers, camping trailers, utility trailers, and extra vehicles at a
ratio of 100 square feet of vehicle storage area for each mobile home space. Each vehicle storage area shall be completely enclosed with a fence
six feet in height and shall be screened from exterior view.

D.

Landscaping. Each setback area abutting a public street shall be planted in grass, shrubs, trees, or other appropriate decorative materials and
shall be kept landscaped and maintained in a clean and orderly manner.

E.

Fences. A solid fence not less than six feet in height shall be placed and maintained around the interior perimeter of a mobile home park or
subdivision.

F.

Access. Each mobile home space shall be provided access from an internal, private street within the mobile home park, with no direct access
from a mobile home space to a public street or alley.

G.

Internal streets. All private, internal streets within mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall be paved with surfacing and
improvements to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The pavement width shall not:

H.

1.

Be less than 28 feet in width if parking is prohibited on either side of the paved surface and adequate guest parking is provided;

2.

Be less than 32 feet if parking is permitted on one side of the paved surface; or

3.

Be less than 40 feet if parking is permitted on both sides of the paved surface.

Parking requirements. In each mobile home park, two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space. One off-street
guest parking space shall also be provided for every four mobile home spaces if internal on-street parking is not provided. Each off-street guest
parking space shall be accessible to each of the four mobile home spaces and shall be within a reasonable distance of the four mobile homes.

I.

Signs. A mobile home park may be allowed a maximum of one sign for each entrance to a public street from the mobile home park. The sign
shall not exceed 20 square feet in area or six feet in height from the ground and shall be parallel to the property line. If illuminated, the

84/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
illumination shall be by indirect lighting. Each sign shall be adjacent to the entrance from the public street to the mobile home park or
subdivision and not closer than 300 feet to any other such sign. No flashing or intermittent lighting shall be permitted.

Sec. 4-44-090. - Multi-Family Projects.
A.

[Compliance; definition.] A new or remodeled multi-family project shall comply with the standards of this Section, where allowed by Article 2
(Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards). For the purposes of this Section, the term "remodeled" means the reconstruction or remodeling
of at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the original structure.

B.

Accessory structure design. Accessory structures and uses (e.g., bicycle storage, garages, laundry rooms, recreation facilities, etc.) shall be designed
and constructed with an architectural style, exterior colors and materials similar to the structures in the project containing dwelling units.

C.

Building facades adjacent to streets. A multi-family project of three or more dwellings shall be designed so that at least 75 percent of the length of
the facade of each building adjacent to a public street is occupied by habitable space with windows. Each facade adjacent to a street shall have at
least one pedestrian entry into the structure.

D.

Front setback pavement. No more than 40 percent of the front setback area shall be paved for walkways, driveways, and/or other hardcover
pavement.

E.

Parking location. Off-street parking for a multi-family structure of three or more units shall be located so that garage doors, carports, and open
parking spaces are not visible from the street fronting the parcel. A garage providing parking for a duplex or small-lot detached unit may be located
in compliance with the following standards, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 4-36-040 (Parking and Loading).
1.

Front setback. A garage shall be set back from the front property line at least 10 feet further than the front facade of the dwelling, to reduce
visual impact from the street.

2.

Side setback. A garage shall be set back a minimum of five feet from side property lines.

3.

Rear setback. A garage shall be set back a minimum of five feet from a rear property line.

4.

Facade width, parking orientation. The front facade of a garage shall not exceed a width of 25 feet. If more than 25 feet is proposed
architectural relief and site plan review will be required.

F.

Open space. Each multi-family residential project shall provide permanently maintained outdoor open space for each dwelling unit (private space),
and for all residents (common space), in addition to required setback areas, except where the review authority determines that existing public park
or other usable public open space is within convenient walking distance, or that the residential units are part of a vertical mixed use project and
located within a commercial zoning district.
1.

Area required. Private and common open space shall be provided as required by Table 4-3, in addition to the setback areas required by the
applicable zoning district.
Table 4-3—MULTI-FAMILY PROJECT OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS

Project Size

Minimum Common Open Space Required

2 units

None, other than required setbacks

3 or 4 units

200 sf

5 to 10 units

500 sf

11 to 30 units

1,000 sf

31 and more units

2,000 sf, plus an additional 65 sf for each unit

Minimum Private Open Space Required

150 sf for each unit

over 31

2.

Configuration of open space. Required open space areas shall be designed and located as follows. Landscaping shall comply with the
requirements of Section 4-34 (Landscaping Standards).
a.

Common open space. Required common open space shall be: easily accessible; continuous; usable; separated from parking areas;
landscaped; safe and secure. Each common open space area shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet.

b.

Private open space. Private open space shall be at the same elevation as, and immediately accessible from within the unit. All dimensions
of each private open space area shall be a minimum of 10 feet.

The review authority may allow required open space to be in different locations and/or with different dimensions where it determines that the
alternative approach will provide open space of equivalent utility and aesthetic quality.
3.

Maintenance and control of common open space. Required common open space shall be controlled and permanently maintained by a Home

85/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Owners Association (HOA). Provisions for control and maintenance shall be included in property covenants of all common interest
developments.
G.

Indoor recreation area. An indoor recreation area of at least 1,000 square feet is required for all multi-family projects of 30 units or more. Area
occupied by other common indoor facilities, such as saunas and swimming pools, may count toward compliance with the outdoor common open
space area requirements of Subsection F.

H.

Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be installed and maintained along all vehicular access ways and major walkways, in compliance with Section
4-30-060 (Outdoor Lighting). The lighting shall be directed onto the driveways and walkways within the development and away from adjacent
properties. Lighting of at least one foot candle shall also be installed and maintained within all covered and enclosed parking areas and shall be
screened to minimize glare onto public sidewalks. Lighting fixtures/lamps shall be the most energy efficient available, including flourescent, compact
flourescent, low pressure sodium, high pressure sodium, or other lighting technology that is of equal or greater energy efficiency. All proposed
lighting shall be shown on the required landscape plan.

I.

Laundry facilities. Each multi-family and small lot single-family dwelling shall provide an individual laundry area within the unit or its garage, of
sufficient size to accommodate a clothes washer and dryer, except that a multi-family project of five or more units may be designed to provide
common laundry facilities as approved by the review authority. If located in the garage for an individual unit, the laundry area shall not encroach into
the required parking area.

J.

Window orientation. Where one or more windows are proposed 10 feet or less from a side lot line, or 10 feet from another residential structure on
the same site, the windows shall located and/or screened to provide privacy for the residents of both structures to the maximum extent feasible.

Sec. 4-44-100. - Outdoor Display and Sales.
Where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), outdoor display and sales shall comply with the standards of this
Section.
A.

Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to temporary and permanent facilities for outdoor display and sales (e.g., garden nurseries,
lumber yards, and similar uses where merchandise is displayed for sale).

B.

Sidewalk displays and sales. The display of merchandise, newsracks and sidewalk dining and seating may be permitted on a City of Gustine
public right-of-way where allowed by Article 2, subject to compliance with the following criteria, in addition to the requirements of Subsection C.
(Outdoor Eating Areas).
1.

Location requirements, and sidewalk clear zone. A paved pedestrian walkway at least six feet wide shall be maintained between property
line and edge of curb, free and clear of and obstructions.
a.

The display of merchandise, newsracks and sidewalk dining shall not obstruct sidewalk pedestrian traffic; accessibility to vehicles
parked adjacent to the curb, or create health or safety hazards.

b.

The placement of merchandise, newsracks or tables and/or chairs shall be limited to the sidewalk area frontage immediately adjacent
to the use.

c.

All merchandise, newsrack, and/or outdoor dining and seating areas must be level with sidewalk, and accessible to the disabled, and
shall be located as close to the back of the sidewalk (the sidewalk edge opposite the street) as possible.

2.

Encroachment permit required. The applicant shall obtain a revocable encroachment permit.
a.

An encroachment permit will not be approved for portable or other signs within the public right-of-way, with the exception of
banners advertising City-wide functions.

b.
3.

Upon approval of the encroachment permit the applicant shall obtain all required building/electrical permits.

Sidewalk cafes. Sidewalk cafes shall be used only as seating areas.
a.

Storage, kitchen, any permanent facilities or restroom uses are not allowed.

b.

Tables and/or chairs must be movable unless otherwise approved by the Director upon concurrence with other City departments.

c.

Outdoor speakers or amplified music shall require Use Permit approval to ensure that sound levels do not cause problems for other
land uses in the vicinity.

d.

Outdoor speakers or amplified music shall require Use Permit approval to ensure that sound levels do not cause problems for others
in the vicinity.

e.

The service of alcoholic beverages is not allowed.

f.

The roofing material covering an outdoor café may be temporary, fixed, or retractable and can extend into the public right-of-way
from the face of the building a distance up to the minimum six-foot clear zone dimension, or a maximum distance of 10 feet from the
face of building, whichever is less. The width and height of awnings and canopies shall comply with the Uniform Building Code.
Awnings, canopies, or similar protective shelter shall be fire-treated or non-flammable.

g.
4.

Decorative/accent lighting may be incorporated into the outdoor café awning, canopy, etc. and must meet all City code requirements.

Insurance. Applicant shall obtain, maintain and provide proof of a comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1 million or
more (for each occurrence), naming the City as additionally insured. Proof of the insurance shall be submitted prior to issuance of the
encroachment permit and shall be provided annually thereafter. The applicant's insurance shall be primary.

86/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
5.
C.

Removal of display. Each approved sidewalk display shall be removed at the end of each business day, except for newsracks in compliance w

Outdoor dining area on private property. An outdoor eating area may be allowed accessory and incidental to a restaurant with indoor eating
area on the same site, provided that the outdoor eating area shall also comply with the parking requirements of Section 4-36-040 for
restaurants.

D.

Permanent outdoor displays and sales. The permanent outdoor display and sale of merchandise may be allowed subject to the following
standards.
1.

The outdoor display of merchandise shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above finished grade, unless a greater height is allowed through
the approval of a Use Permit.

2.

Outdoor sales areas shall not encroach into required setback areas. In a zoning district where no setback is required, the outdoor sales
area shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from adjoining property lines unless otherwise allowed through the approval of a Use Permit.

3.

Displayed merchandise shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its
circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, parking spaces, or pedestrian walkways. A display shall not obstruct
intersection visibility or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

4.

The outdoor display and sales area shall be directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the subject parcel.

5.

Outdoor sales and activity areas other than vehicle sales lots, produce stands, and nursery product sales shall be screened from the view
of adjoining public rights-of-way by decorative walls, fences, or landscaping.

6.

Additional signs, beyond those normally allowed for the subject use, shall not be provided as a result of the outdoor display and sales
area.

Sec. 4-44-110. - Outdoor Storage.
Where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards), outdoor storage and work areas shall comply with the following
requirements.
A.

Enclosure and screening required. Outdoor storage areas shall be entirely enclosed by a solid wall or fence as approved by the Director with a
minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet.

B.

Maximum height of stored materials. Materials within the storage area shall not be higher than the fence, except with Use Permit approval.

C.

Landscaped setback. In any case where an outdoor storage area abuts a street right-of-way, the required screening wall or fence shall be set
back from the right-of-way as required by the applicable zoning district, and the set back area shall be landscaped to the approval of the
Director, and in compliance with Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards).

D.

Cargo containers. The use of a cargo container for storage outside of a building shall be allowed only within the IL zoning district, when entirely
screened from the view of streets and residential areas. The Director may authorize the use of a cargo container for storage on the site of a
construction project while work in compliance with a valid Building Permit is occurring on the site.

Sec. 4-44-120. - Recreational Vehicle and Boat Storage.
A recreational vehicle shall be parked/maintained in a mobile home park or may be parked/maintained on the site of a dwelling within a residential
zoning district under the following conditions:
A.

Storage in side or rear setback. A recreational vehicle or boat shall be stored in an interior side or rear yard setback, unless it can not comply
with the other requirements of this Section, in which case it shall comply with the requirements of Subsection B. A fence or other personal
improvement is not deemed to prevent reasonable access. The condition under which a recreational vehicle or boat shall be parked/stored is as
follows:
1.

Shall not be situated closer than five feet to any main building or parked within two feet of the main building if there are no doors or
windows being blocked and there is access to the rear yard.

2.

Parking shall be permitted inside any enclosed structure or carport that otherwise complies with the requirements of the applicable zoning
district.

B.

Storage in front setback. A recreational vehicle or boat shall not be stored in the front yard setback area.

C.

Temporary parking in front setback. A resident who can not meet the conditions of parking/storage of their recreational vehicle or boat as
indicated are permitted to park in the front yard under the following conditions:
1.

The vehicle shall be permitted to park for the expressed purpose of loading, unloading or minor maintenance. The time period for which a
resident may park their recreational vehicle or boat shall not exceed 72 hours for these specific tasks;

2.

The vehicle shall not overhang the sidewalk, or five feet from the curb face if no sidewalk exists.

3.

The City Council may authorize a temporary parking in front yard setbacks and on-street parking when special events are hosted by the
City.

D.

Use for sleeping quarters. No recreational vehicle or boat shall be used for sleeping quarters, unless a valid Temporary Use Permit is issued by
the City, nor shall any sanitary or cooking facilities contained therein be used, except under the following conditions:

87/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
1.

Emergency use. A resident who experiences a calamity to their home shall contact the City Manager or designated person for permission to s
recreational vehicle for temporary housing. The City Manager's permission be discretionary and conditions such as a time limit can be impose

2.

Temporary parking to accommodate visitors: The City Manager or authorized representative may approve a Temporary Use Permit to
residents who have relatives/guests visiting may utilize a recreational vehicle for temporary housing when utilized for more than a 72 hour
period. The time period authorized shall be determined by the City Manager or authorized representative.

3.

The City Council may authorize temporary use of RV's and Trailers for sleeping quarters in front yard setbacks and on-street parking when
special events are hosted by the City.

E.

Travel trailers and RVs. Travel trailers and other types of recreational vehicles may be parked and used in the City when the use is authorized
and sanctioned by the Council. The City Council or designated person may issue a Temporary Use Permit for use of Travel Trailers and RV's for a
specified period of time after consultation with the appropriate City Departments. Fees for processing a Temporary Use Permit may be adopted
and amended from time tot time as authorized by state law.

F.

Violation and penalties. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction with a fine as adopted by the Council. Each day that
the violation is not corrected shall be deemed a separate violation of this section. The City may use other enforcement processes as may be
adopted.

Sec. 4-44-130. - Recycling Facilities.
This Section establishes standards and procedures for siting and operating various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities, where allowed by
Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards).
A.

Reverse vending machines. Reverse vending machines shall comply with the following standards.
1.

Accessory use only. Each machine shall be installed only as an accessory use to an allowed primary use.

2.

Location requirements. If located outside of a structure, a machine shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use.

3.

Signs. Sign area shall not exceed four square feet for each machine, exclusive of operating instructions. The sign area shall be subject to
the overall site sign area limitations in Section 4-38 (Sign Standards).

4.

Lighting. Each machine shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if the machine is accessible between dusk and
dawn. The light source shall be shielded so that glare and reflections are confined within the boundaries of the site.

B.

Small and medium collection facilities. A small or medium collection facility shall comply with the following standards.
1.

2.

Location requirements. A small collection facility shall:
a.

Not be located within 50 feet of any parcel zoned or occupied for residential use; and

b.

Be set back at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way, and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

Maximum size. A small collection facility shall not occupy more than 600 square feet nor three parking spaces, not including space that
would be periodically needed for the removal of materials or exchange of containers.

3.

Appearance of facility. Collection containers and site fencing shall be of a color and design that is compatible and harmonious with the
surrounding uses and neighborhoods.

4.

Operating standards for small collection facilities. Small collection facilities shall:
a.

Not use power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines;

b.

Accept only glass, metal, or plastic containers, paper, and reusable items;

c.

Use containers that are constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof materials, secured from unauthorized removal of
material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule; and

d.
5.

Be screened where determined by the review authority to be necessary because of excessive visibility.

Signs. Non-illuminated signs may be provided as follows:
a.

Identification signs are allowed with a maximum area of 15 percent for each side of the structure or 12 square feet, whichever is
greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side shall be measured from the ground to the top of the container;

b.

Additional directional signs, consistent with Chapter 4-38 (Signs), may be approved by the Director if found necessary to facilitate
traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.

6.

Parking requirements.
a.

No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking lot of the
primary use. One additional space shall be provided for the attendant, if needed.

b.

Use of parking spaces by the patrons and the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number
required for the primary use unless a parking study, determined to be acceptable by the Director, shows that existing capacity is not
fully utilized during the time the recycling facility would be on the site.

C.

Large collection facilities. A collection facility that is larger than 350 square feet, or on a separate parcel not accessory to a primary use, shall
comply with the following standards.
1.

Location requirements. The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned for residential use.

88/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
2.

Container location. Any containers provided for "after hours" donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least 100 feet
zoning district, constructed of sturdy, rustproof material(s), have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and be secured from
or removal of materials; and

3.

Screening. The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure.

4.

Setbacks, landscaping. Structure setbacks and landscaping shall be provided as required for the applicable zoning district.

5.

Outdoor storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage
shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls.

6.

Operating standards.
a.

The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary, and free of litter and any other trash or rubbish, shall be cleaned of loose debris on a
daily basis, and shall be maintained free from rodents and other disease vectors.

b.
D.

Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels.

Processing facilities. Processing facilities shall comply with the following standards.
1.

Location requirements. The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned or occupied for residential use.

2.

Limitation on activities. Allowed activities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding, and sorting of
source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. The facility shall not bale, compact, or shred ferrous metals,
other than beverage and food containers. Outbound truck shipments from the site shall not exceed an average of two each day.

3.

Maximum size. The facility shall not exceed 45,000 square feet of floor or ground area.

4.

Container location. Containers provided for "after hours" donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least 100 feet
from any residential zoning district, constructed of sturdy, rustproof materials, have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials
collected, and be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of the materials; and

5.

Screening. The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure;

6.

Operating standards. Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels.

Sec. 4-44-140. - Second Units and Carriage Houses.
This Section establishes standards for residential second units and carriage houses, where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District
Standards).
A.

Limitation on number of units. No more than one second unit or carriage house shall be approved on a single parcel.

B.

Minimum site area. A parcel proposed for a second unit or carriage house shall be a minimum of 7,500 square feet; provided that a carriage
house may be allowed above a garage on a parcel of at least 5,000 square feet where the garage is accessed from an alley.

C.

Relationship to primary use.
1.

Size, style. A second unit or carriage house shall be incidental and subordinate to the primary single-family residential use of the site in
terms of size, location, and appearance, and shall not alter the character of the primary structure. The architectural style, exterior
materials, and colors of the second unit or carriage house shall be compatible with the primary dwelling unit.

2.

Timing of construction. A second unit or carriage house may be constructed simultaneously with or after the primary dwelling. In
addition, an existing dwelling that complies with the design standards for second units in Subsection E. may be considered a second unit,
and a new primary unit may be constructed which would then be considered the primary dwelling unit.

D.

Second unit design standards. A second unit shall be designed to comply with the following standards.
1.

Location of second unit. A second unit shall be located to the rear of the rear facade line of the primary dwelling; except that a second
unit on a parcel of 20,000 square feet or more, or on a parcel with its street frontage width exceeding the parcel depth, may be located so
that its front facade is a minimum of 20 feet to the rear of the front facade of the primary dwelling.

2.

Height limit. A second unit shall be limited to 20 feet; except that in an R-E zoning district, where the second unit is set back a minimum of
25 feet from all property lines, the second unit shall comply with the height limits of the applicable zoning district.

3.

Maximum floor area.
a.

The floor area of a second unit shall not exceed 40 percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling or the following, whichever is
less:
Table 4-4

Lot Size

Maximum 2nd Unit Floor Area

5,000 sf, but less than 8,000 sf

500 sf

8,000 sf, but less than 10,000 sf

650 sf

89/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

10,000 sf, but less than 15,000 sf

750 sf

15,000 sf or larger

900 sf

b.

For purposes of computing the floor area of a second unit that is detached from the primary dwelling unit, all enclosed areas
accessed from within the second unit shall be included.

c.

An enclosed storage area, or garage of up to 400 square feet, shall not be included when calculating the floor area of the second unit
provided that there is no internal doorway or passage between the storage or garage and the second unit.

4.

Number of bedrooms. A second unit shall have a maximum of two bedrooms.

5.

Separate entrance required. An attached second unit shall have an entrance separate from the entrance to the primary dwelling.

6.

Window placement. A second unit that is placed 15 feet or less from a residential unit on the same parcel or an adjacent parcel shall not
have windows that directly face windows in the other unit.

E.

Carriage house design standards. The design of a carriage house shall comply with the following standards, in addition to the other applicable
provisions of this Section.
1.

Maximum floor area. The total habitable floor area of a carriage house shall not exceed 640 square feet.

2.

Setbacks. A carriage house shall be located to the rear of the primary dwelling on the parcel, and shall comply with the following setback
requirements.
a.

Rear setback. A carriage house shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a rear property line, except that the minimum setback
shall be five feet adjacent to an alley.

b.

Allowed projections into setbacks. Balconies and bay windows may extend up to five feet into the rear setback or separation from
the primary dwelling.

F.

Off-street parking requirements. At least one off-street paved parking space shall be provided for a second unit or carriage house in addition
to the parking required by Chapter 4-36 (Parking and Loading). The parking space shall comply with the location and design requirements of
Chapter 4-36

G.

Rental of unit. The rental of a second unit is allowed, but not required.

Sec. 4-44-150. - Service Stations.
A.

Location. A service station shall be allowed only on a corner parcel at the intersection of either two major streets, or a major and a minor street. No
more than two service stations shall be allowed at any intersection.

B.

Site requirements. A service station may be approved only on a site with a minimum area of 15,000 square feet, and a minimum frontage of 100 feet
on each street.

C.

D.

Site access/driveway standards.
1.

A service station shall be provided no more than two vehicular access points to/from the public right-of-way.

2.

The width of a driveway shall not exceed 25 feet, measured at the sidewalk.

3.

Each pump island shall be provided a stacking area that can accommodate a minimum of three waiting vehicles.

Setbacks. Pump islands shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any property line to the nearest edge of the pump island; however, a canopy or
roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to 10 feet within this distance. When the property line is a street right-of-way line, at least ten
feet in width along the line shall be landscaped.

E.

Landscaping. Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of 10 percent of the service station site area, inclusive of required setbacks, and shall be
provided and permanently maintained in compliance with those in Chapter 4-34 (Landscaping Standards).

F.

Lighting. Exterior light sources, including canopy, perimeter, and flood shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed within the roof
canopy to ensure that all light is directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting shall not be of a high intensity so as to
cause a traffic hazard, be used as an advertising element, or adversely affect adjacent properties, in compliance with Section 4-30-060 (Outdoor
Lighting).

G.

Service bays. The entrance to any service bay shall be located and designed to minimize visibility from adjacent properties.

H.

Screening. A service station site that adjoins a residential zoning district shall be provided an eight-foot high decorative masonry wall along the
common property line, compatible with on-site development and adjacent properties. Restroom entrances otherwise visible from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way shall be concealed from view by planters or decorative screening.

I.

Indoor activities only. Activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, except for:
1.

The dispensing of petroleum products, water and air from pump islands;

2.

The provision of emergency service of a minor nature; and

90/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
3.

The sale of items via vending machines, which shall be placed next to the main structure in a designated area not to exceed 32 square feet, and wh
screened from public view.

J.

Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 4-36 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards). Vehicles shall not be
parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways or alleys, and shall not be parked on the premises for the purpose of sale.

K.

Scrap and other materials. Used or discarded vehicle parts or equipment, junked or wrecked vehicles shall not be stored in any open area outside of
the main structure.

L.

Restrooms. Each service station shall maintain one or more restrooms available for use by the general public without charge.

Sec. 4-44-160. - Telecommunications Antennas.
This Section establishes standards for telecommunications antennas, where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land Uses and Zoning District Standards).
A.

Antenna standards. No exterior satellite or dish antenna having a dimension greater than one meter (39.4 inches) shall be allowed in any
residential district unless the antenna complies with the following requirements:
1.

Location on any roof shall be prohibited;

2.

Location in any area between the street and building shall be prohibited;

3.

An antenna may be located in any area permitted for the main building and not prohibited elsewhere in this Code, however no more than
50 percent of any one side of the antenna may be visible from any street;

4.

The maximum height to the highest point of the antenna shall be 12 feet.

5.

A satellite television receiving antenna permit must be obtained from the City prior to any installation of an antenna that is greater than
one meter in diameter.

B.

Installation in a non-residential zone. The installation of any exterior satellite or dish antenna having a dimension greater than one meter in
any non-residential zoning district shall require Use Permit approval.

Sec. 4-44-170. - Animal Keeping.
Animal keeping within the City shall comply with requirements of this Section, and shall occur only where allowed by Article 2 (Allowable Land uses and
Zoning District Standards), and this Section. The provisions of this Section are intended to assist in maintaining the City's semi-rural character while
ensuring that animal keeping does not create adverse impacts on adjacent properties by reason of bright lights, dust, insect infestations, noise, odor, or
visual blight.
A.

Pre-existing uses. Any legally established animal keeping use that became nonconforming upon adoption of this Land Use Code shall be
permitted to continue subject to Chapter 4-72 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcel).

B.

Allowable animal keeping activities and permit requirements.
1.

Activities and permit requirements. Animal keeping, including related animal husbandry (breeding, judging, etc.) is allowed only in
compliance with the limitations on use and permit requirements in Table 4-1, and the animal keeping standards in Subsection C. The
keeping of imported animals may require approval by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of
Public Health, California Department of Fish and Game, and/or the California Department of Food and Agriculture, in addition to any City
approval required by this Section.
Table 4-1—ALLOWABLE ANIMAL-KEEPING AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

Type of
Animal

Permit Requirements by Zoning District
R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

Other

A-C

Zone
Allowing
Residential
Use
Aviary

P

P

UP

UP

-

P

-

-

-

-

-

P

(Keeping of
birds other
than fowl
or poultry)
Beekeeping

91/170

7/11/2019

Dogs and

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

-

-

-

-

P

UP

-

-

-

-

P

UP

-

-

-

-

P

Roosters

UP

-

-

-

-

P

Other small

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

-

-

-

-

P

cats
Fowl and
poultry,
except
roosters
Hogs and
swine
Horses and
cows

animals
(de ned in
Table 4-2)
Other large
animals
(de ned in
Table 4-2)

Key to permit requirements:

P

Permitted animal keeping, no City approval required for the animal keeping activity, provided that it complies with the standards in
Subsection C. through F.

UP

Use Permit approval required in compliance with Section 4-62-050

-

Type of animal or activity not allowed.

2.

Use Permit review. Where Table 4-1 requires a Use Permit for keeping a specified animal type, the purpose of the discretionary review
shall include evaluation of how the proposed animals will be housed and/or confined, and whether the location, size, and design of the
area on the site for animal keeping will be adequate to allow compliance with the other standards of this Section without unreasonable
effort on the part of the animal manager. In approving a Use Permit in compliance with this Section, the review authority may limit the
maximum number of animals allowed on the site as appropriate to the characteristics of the site, the surrounding land uses, and the
species of animals proposed.

C.

Animal keeping standards. All animal keeping shall comply with the standards in Table 4-2, where allowed by Subsection B., Table 4-1, except
that more animals may be allowed by Use Permit.
Table 4-2—ANIMAL-KEEPING STANDARDS

*Type of

Minimum

Minimum Setbacks

Animal or

Maximum Number of Animals per Site (1)(4)

Lot Area

(3)

Facility

(2)

92/170

7/11/2019

Aviary

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

From

From

Side/Rear

Streets

Property

and

Lines

Dwellings

20 per acre

½ acre

25ft

50ft

Beekeeping

N.A.

5 acres

25 ft

50ft

Boarding

Requirements establishing by Use Permit approval, and

or breeding

Subsection F.

None

None

None

required

required

required

12 per acre

½ acre

25 ft

50 ft

1 per acre

2 acres

50 ft

100 ft

2 per acre

1 acre

25 ft

50 ft

Roosters

1 per acre

1 acre

25 ft

50ft

Other small

4 animals total on a site less than 1 acre; 4 of each species on a site of 1 acre or more, where

None for

None on

None on

animals -

allowed by Table 4-1.

4 or

a site of

a site of

Including

fewer

less than

less than

chinchillas,

animals;

1 acre;

1 acre; 25

rabbits,

1 acre for

10 ft. on

ft on a

non-

5 or

a site of 1

site of 1

poisonous

more

acre or

acre or

reptiles,

animals.

more.

more.

(keeping of
birds other
than fowl
or poultry)

kennel
Dogs and

5 animals total on a site less than 1 acre; 5 of each species on a site of 1 acre or more

cats
Fowl and
poultry,
except
roosters
Hogs and
swine
Horses and
cows

rodents'
and other
nonpoisonous
animals of
similar size.

93/170

7/11/2019

Other large

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

4 per acre

½ acre

25 ft

50 feet

animals -

for

Emus,

accessory

goats,

structure,

llamas,

none for

miniature

pasture.

horses, and
donkeys,
ostriches,
pot belly
pigs, sheep,
and similar
sized
animals.

Notes:
(1)

Offspring allowed in addition to maximum number until weaned; greater numbers of animals than allowed by Table 4-2 may be
authorized by Use Permit.

(2)

Minimum lot area required for the keeping of animals.

(3)

Minimum setbacks from all property lines for barns, shelters, pens, coops, cages, and other areas and structures where animals are kept in
concentrated confinement; but not including areas continuously maintained as pasture. Animals shall not be kept in any required front
yard setback except in pasture areas.

(4)
D.

In A-C Zone, additional animals allowed by UP.

Maintenance and operational standards. All animal keeping shall comply with all of the following maintenance and operational standards.
1.

Odor and vector control. All animal enclosures, including but not limited to pens, coops, cages and feed areas shall be maintained free
from litter, garbage and the accumulation of manure, so as to discourage the proliferation of flies, other disease vectors and offensive
odors. Manure shall also not be allowed to accumulate within setback areas. Each site shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary manner.

2.

Containment. All animals shall be effectively contained on the site, and shall not be allowed to run free on any parcel in a separate
ownership or in a public right-of-way.

3.

Waterway protection. The keeping of horses or cattle within 50 feet of any waterway shall require Use Permit approval. In addition to the
other materials required for a Use Permit application, the applicant shall submit a plan for the protection of the waterway from the
polluting effects of runoff from the animal keeping area. The plan shall provide for regular manure removal, the maintenance of pasture
vegetation to minimize the exposure and potential erosion of bare soil, site grading to direct runoff to detention and settling areas rather
than the waterway, and/or other measures approved by the review authority.

4.

Erosion and sedimentation control. In no case shall an animal keeping operation be managed or maintained so as to produce
sedimentation on any public road, adjoining property, or in any drainage channel or other waterway. In the event sedimentation occurs,
the keeping of animals outdoors on the site shall be deemed a nuisance and may be subject to abatement.

5.
E.

Noise control. Animal keeping shall comply with the noise standards established by Section 4-30-050 (Noise Standards).

Animal husbandry projects. The keeping or raising of the other small animals listed in Table 4-2 as a 4-H or Future Farmers of America (FFA)
project may be allowed with up to 25 animals in the R-E and R-1 zones subject to Use Permit
1.

Application requirements. The Use permit application shall include a written agreement of supervision by 4-H or FFA officials that
provides a detailed description of the method to be utilized to control odors and insects.

2.

Setback requirements. Any structure, cage, or shelter required for animal keeping shall not be located within a required front or street
side setback, and be set back a minimum of five feet from side or rear property lines.

3.
F.

Maintenance. The animal keeping shall comply with all standards in Subsection D.

Kennels and animal boarding. Each kennel and other small animal boarding facility shall comply with the following standards.
1.

Minimum site area. An animal boarding facility may be approved only on a parcel of two acres or larger.

2.

Enclosure within building. All animal boarding (sleeping and night-time confinement) shall occur within an entirely enclosed building.

3.

Noise control. The building used for animal boarding shall be insulated, or otherwise constructed and maintained so that no noise from
animals within the building is audible to an average person at the property line of the site.

94/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
4.

Management. A manager of the facility shall be present on the site at all times.

Sec. 4-44-180. - Alternative Energy Requirements.
Alternative Energy Requirements shall be incorporated into the design and construction of new residential developments consisting of 20 units or
more, non-residential developments of 20,000 square feet or more. Where 20 residential units or more are proposed, 50% shall be designed for
alternative energy source and the remaining 50% shall be designed to incorporate alternative energy source after construction.
CHAPTER 4-46. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sec. 4-46-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes development standards consistent with Federal law to: regulate the placement and design of communication facilities so as to
preserve the unique visual character of the City, promote the aesthetic appearance of the City, and to ensure public safety and welfare; pursue
additional benefits from the facilities to the public by encouraging the leasing of publicly owned properties where feasible for the development of
communication facilities; and to acknowledge and provide the community benefit associated with the provision of advanced communication services
within the City.
Sec. 4-46-020. - De nitions.
The technical terms and phrases used in this Chapter are defined in Article 8 (Glossary) under "Communications Facilities."
Sec. 4-46-030. - Applicability.
The location, permit requirements, and other provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all communications facilities within the City, except the following,
which are exempt from this Chapter. All communication facilities shall also comply with all applicable requirements of State and Federal law.
A.

Replacement or modification of previously permitted facilities or equipment determined by the Director to be of a minor nature that does not
increase the number or height of antennas or significantly change or enlarge the ancillary related equipment at the site.

B.

An antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement, that is designed:
1.

To receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service, as defined by Section 207 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, Code of Federal Regulations Title 47, and any interpretive decisions thereof issued by the Federal
Communications Commission; or

2.
C.

For subscribing to a multipoint distribution service.

A satellite earth station (SES) antenna of two meters (78.74 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement, located in a commercial or
industrial zoning district, that is designed to transmit or receive radio communications by satellite or terrestrial communications antenna. These
antennas may require a building permit and approval of the placement by the Director to ensure maximum safety is maintained. In order to
avoid tripping hazards and the creation of an attractive nuisance, these antennas shall be placed whenever possible, on the top of buildings as
far from the edge of rooftops as possible.

Sec. 4-46-040. - Permit Requirements.
A.

Use Permit. Use Permit approval is required for all communication facilities subject to this Chapter, except for the following, which do not require
Use Permit approval:
1.

An antenna that is installed, placed, and maintained under the roofline of an existing structure, or above, behind, and below an existing
approved roof screen and does not extend above the highest point of the structure, or is camouflaged within an existing structure so as not to
be visible from a public right-of-way or other property.

2.

A communication facility in which the antenna is mounted on a mast less than 10 feet high, is not located on an historic structure, and is not
visible from a public right-of-way.

3.

An amateur and/or citizens band antenna operated by a person holding a license issued by the FCC in compliance with 47 C.F.R. Part 97, and
used solely in connection with that license, and which shall be subject to the "minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the local
authority's legitimate purpose," in keeping with the order of the FCC known as "PRB-1," FCC 85-506, released September 19, 1985; provided that
there shall be no more than one antenna support structure on a single parcel and that the antenna structure complies with the height limits of
the applicable zoning district.

B.

Application requirements. In addition to the information required for Use Permit by Chapter 4-60 (Permit Application Filing and Initial Processing)
the application for a communication facility shall include:
1.

Certification acceptable to the Director that the proposed facility will at all times comply with all applicable health requirements and standards
pertaining to electromagnetic and/or radio frequency radiation; and

2.

A report, as required by the Police Department, to evaluate the potential for interference (e.g., HF, UHF, VHF, 800 mHz). The applicant shall be

95/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
responsible for paying any costs incurred by the City, including the costs of retaining consultants, to review and analyze the report.
C.

Master Use Permit. A service provider who intends to establish multiple wireless Telecommunications Facilities within the City is encouraged to apply
for the approval of all facilities under a Master Use Permit. Under this approach, all proposed facilities may be acted upon by the City as a single
application, ensuring feasibility of long range company projections.

D.

Communications consultant may be required. In the event that the City needs assistance in understanding the technical aspects of a particular
proposal, the services of a communications consultant may be requested to determine the engineering or screening requirements of establishing a
specific wireless communications facility. This service will be provided at the applicant's expense.

E.

Required findings for approval. The approval of a Use Permit for a communication facility shall require that the review authority first make the
following findings, in addition to those required for Use Permit approval by Section 4-62.050 (Use Permits):
1.

The communication facility complies with all applicable requirements of this Chapter; and

2.

The communication facility will not adversely impact the character and aesthetics of any public right-of-way.

Sec. 4-46-050. - Limitations on Location.
A.

Zoning district priorities. A communication facility shall be not be approved or located within other than the P-I (Public/Institutional) zoning district;
except that the review authority may approve a facility within an industrial district if it first determines that the applicant has demonstrated that all PI zoning district options are infeasible, and that there is no site within a P-I district where the communication facility would provide adequate
coverage.

B.

Co-location required. A new communication facility shall be co-located with existing facilities and with other planned new facilities whenever
feasible, and whenever determined by the review authority to be aesthetically desirable. A service provider shall co-locate a new communication
facility with non-communications facilities (e.g., light standards, water tanks, and other utility structures) where the review authority determines that
this collocation will minimize the overall visual impact.
1.

A service provider shall exhaust all reasonable measures to co-locate their communications facilities on existing towers or with or within
existing ancillary support equipment facilities before applying for a new communication facility site.

2.

Each service provider shall provide the City with evidence that they have contacted all other potential providers who have, or who are
reasonably likely to be installing facilities within the vicinity of the proposed facility and have offered to participate in a joint installation project
on reasonable terms.

3.

In order to facilitate collocation, Use Permit conditions of approval for a new facility shall require each service provider to cooperate in the siting
of equipment and antennas to accommodate the maximum number of operators at a given site where determined by the review authority to
be feasible and aesthetically desirable.

C.

Siting on historically significant structures prohibited. No communication facility shall be sited on a structure that is listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the California Register, identified as an historic structure in a local historic survey or registry or as determined by a qualified
architectural historian as having significant historic contribution to the area.

D.

City-owned property. A communication facility shall not adversely affect the public health, peace, safety or welfare. In order to best benefit the
citizens of Gustine from this necessary community impact, the Commission shall always consider City-owned sites as the highest priority for the
location of communication facilities.

Sec. 4-46-060. - Facility Design and Development Standards.
Each proposed communication facility shall comply with all of the following standards.
A.

Facility placement.
1.

Standards for all facilities.
a.

A communication facility located on the roof of a structure that complies with applicable height limits shall be set back from the
nearest roof edge the equivalent of the height of the tower or a minimum of 10 feet, whichever is greater.

b.

A ground-mounted communication facility (including towers and antennas) shall be setback from the property line at a ratio of two
horizontal feet for every one foot in height, unless otherwise approved through the Use Permit process.

c.

A tower or antenna shall be set back from any site boundary or public right-of-way by a minimum of 25 feet, and shall be located so
as to not be readily visible from the nearest residentially zoned property. (The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating that
all measures have been incorporated so as not to be visible from the nearest residentially zoned property.) No part of any tower shall
extend into a required front setback or beyond a property line of the site.

d.

Communication facilities other than towers and antennas shall be located either within a structure, underground, in a rear yard (not
visible from a public right-of-way) or on a screened roof top area. A ground-mounted facility that is located within a front or side
setback or within a public right-of-way shall be underground so that the facility will not detract from the image or appearance of the
City.

2.

Facilities within industrial districts. Communications facilities, including towers, located within an industrial zoning district shall also
comply with the following standards.
a.

A minimum distance of 500 feet shall be provided between towers, and there shall be no more than two towers on a single assessor's

96/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
parcel or developed site, unless the towers are located on a public facility as described in A.1, above.
b.

A service provider shall not locate more than one antenna in any one location unless additional antennas are approved by the
Commission.

B.

Height limitations.
1.

All ground mounted communication equipment, antennas, poles, or towers shall be of a minimum functional height.

2.

The height of tower located on the ground shall not exceed 75 feet in the P-I and all industrial zoning districts. Heights may be approved
up to 125 feet in any industrial zoning district upon securing Use Permit approval and the applicant demonstrating the additional height is
necessary.

3.

The height of a communications facility located on a structure other than a dedicated support tower shall not exceed 15 feet above the
highest point of the structure and shall at no time exceed the height allowed by the subject zoning district.

4.

An antenna mounted on the side of a structure shall not extend above the structure's parapet so that it is visible from below against the
sky.

C.

Colors and materials. All antennas, poles, towers, or equipment, including ancillary support equipment, shall have a non-reflective finish and
shall be painted or otherwise treated to match or blend with the primary background and minimize visual impacts. Antennas attached to a
structure shall be painted or otherwise treated to match the exterior of the structure or the antenna's background color. All ground-mounted
equipment shall be covered with a clear anti-graffiti type material of a type approved by the Director or shall be adequately secured to prevent
graffiti.

D.

Screening, landscaping. All ground mounted equipment, antennas, poles, or towers shall be sited to be screened by existing development,
topography, or vegetation. Ground mounted facilities shall be located within structures, underground, or in areas where substantial screening
by existing structures or vegetation can be achieved. Additional new vegetation or other screening may be required by the Director or by the
Commission. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas possible to accomplish the owner/operator's coverage objectives.

E.

Additional screening and landscaping. As part of project review, the Director, the Commission, or the Council (on appeal) may require
additional screening and/or landscaping, undergrounding, an alternative color scheme, or relocation of a tower or ancillary equipment to a less
obtrusive area of the site where it would have a less prominent visual presence due to slope, topography, size, or relationship to public right-ofways.

F.

Power lines. All power lines to and within a communication facility site shall be underground.

G.

Backup power supplies. A backup power supply (i.e., generator) located in an industrial zoning district shall be enclosed within a structure and
operated in compliance with Section 4-46-060.D (Screening). In any zoning district, ancillary power supplies and fuel storage tanks to support
backup power supplies shall require Use Permit approval.

Sec. 4-46-070. - Operation and Maintenance Standards.
A.

Contact and site information. The owner or operator of any facility shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information.
The applicant shall notify the City of any changes to the information submitted within 30 days of any change, including change of the name or legal
status of the owner or operator. This information shall include the following:
1.

Identity, including name, address, and telephone number, and legal status of the owner of the facility including official identification numbers
and FCC certification, and if different from the owner, the identity and legal status of the person or entity responsible for operating the facility;

B.

2.

Name, address, and telephone number of a local contact person for emergencies;

3.

Type of service provided; and

4.

Identification signs, including emergency phone numbers of the utility provider, shall be posted at all communication facility sites.

Facility maintenance. All communication facilities and related equipment, including lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, and poles shall be maintained
in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as
reasonably possible so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight. Graffiti shall be removed by the service provider from
any facility or equipment as soon as practicable, and in no instances more than 48 hours from the time of notification by the City.

C.

Landscaping maintenance. All trees, foliage, and other landscaping elements on a communication facility site, whether or not used as screening,
shall be maintained in good condition at all times in compliance with the approved landscape plan. The facility owner or operator shall be
responsible for replacing any damaged, dead, or decayed landscaping as promptly as reasonably possible. Amendments or modifications to the
landscape plan shall be submitted for approval to the Director or to the Architectural Review Board. The Commission may also require a landscape
maintenance agreement.

D.

Noise. Each communication facility shall be operated so as to minimize the generation of noise that is audible from off the site. Backup generators
shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. on weekday nights. At no time shall equipment noise from any source exceed an exterior noise level of 60 dB at the property line.

E.

Site inspection required. Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards
identified in this Chapter.

F.

Exterior lighting. Any exterior lighting shall be manually operated and used only during night maintenance or emergencies, unless otherwise

97/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
required by applicable Federal law or FCC rules. The lighting shall be constructed or located so that only the intended area is illuminated and off-site
glare is fully controlled. Light fixtures shall be low wattage, hooded, and downward directed.

Sec. 4-46-080. - Discontinuance and Site Restoration.
All equipment associated with a communication facility shall be removed within 30 days of the discontinuance of the use and the site shall be restored
to its original pre-construction condition, to the approval of the Director. The service provider shall provide the City with a notice of intent to vacate a
site a minimum of 30 days before site vacation. This removal requirement, and appropriate bonding requirements, shall be included in the terms of a
lease for a facility on public property. A private lease for a facility located on private property is encouraged to include terms for equipment removal,
since the property owner shall be ultimately responsible for removal of the equipment.
ARTICLE 5 - PLANNING PERMIT PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 4-50. - PERMIT APPLICATION FILING AND PROCESSING
Sections:

Sec. 4-50-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing, and initial processing of the planning permit applications required by
this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Sec. 4-50-020. - Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions.
Table 5-1 (Review Authority) identifies the review authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application required by this
Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Sec. 4-50-030. - Application Preparation and Filing.
A.

Pre-application conference. A prospective applicant is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the Director before
completing and filing a planning permit application. The purpose of this conference is to generally:
1.

Inform the applicant in general of City requirements as they apply to the proposed project;

2.

Review the City's approval process, possible project alternatives or modifications; and

3.

Identify the information and materials the City will require with the application, and any necessary technical studies and information relating to
the environmental review of the project.

Neither the pre-application review nor the provision of information and/or pertinent policies shall be construed as either a recommendation for
approval or disapproval of the application or project by any City staff. Any failure by City staff to identify all required studies or all applicable
requirements does not constitute a waiver of those requirements.
B.

Application contents. Each application for an amendment, entitlement, or permit, or other matter pertaining to this Zoning and Subdivision Code
shall be filed with the Department on a City application form, together with required fees and/or deposits, and all other information and materials
identified in the Department handout for the specified application. Applicants are encouraged to contact the Department before submitting an
application to verify which materials are necessary for application filing.

C.

Eligibility for filing. An application may only be filed by the owner of the subject property, lessee, purchaser in escrow, optionee with the written
consent of the property owner, or by a public utility company or other agency with the powers of eminent domain.
TABLE 5-1 - REVIEW AUTHORITY

Type of Decision

Procedure
is in
Section:

Role of Review Authority (1)
Director

Planning

City

Commission

Council

Administrative and Legislative
Development Agreement

4-56

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

General Plan Amendment

4-76

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

Interpretation

4-10.050

Decision (2)

Appeal

Appeal
98/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Zoning Map Amendment

4-76

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

Zoning & Subdivision Code Amendment

4-76

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

Architectural Review - Permitted

4-52-020

Decision (2)

Appeal

Appeal

Architectural Review - UP use

4-52-020

Recommend

Decision

Appeal

Home Occupation Permit

4-44-050

Decision (2)

Appeal

Appeal

Limited Term Permit

4-52-030

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Master Sign Plan

4-38

Decision (2)

Appeal

Appeal

Planned Development Permit

4-52-040

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

Sign Permit

4-38-030

Decision (2)

Appeal

Appeal

Use Permit (UP)

4-52-050

Recommend

Decision

Appeal

Planning permit or other development approval

(3)
Variance

4-52-060

Recommend

Decision

Appeal

Zoning Clearance

4-52-070

Decision (2)

Appeal

Appeal

Notes:
(1)

"Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review
authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the
decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

D.

(2)

The Director may defer action and refer the request to the Commission, so that the Commission may instead make the decision.

(3)

Director may approve UP for minor uses or defer to Commission.

Director's determination. If the Director determines that the application does not support a prima facie right to the granting of the application (e.g.,
a request for a Zoning Map amendment or Tentative Map that could not be granted in absence of a required General Plan amendment application,
or a request for an Use Permit allowing a use that is not allowable in the subject zoning district, etc.), the City shall not accept the application.

E.

Filing date. The filing date of an application shall be the date on which the Department receives the last submittal, map, plan, or other material
required as a part of that application in compliance with Section 4-50-050 (Initial Application Review), below.

Sec. 4-50-040. - Application Fees.
A.

Fee schedule. The Council shall establish a schedule of fees for the processing of the applications required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code,
hereafter referred to as the City's Fee Schedule.

B.

Multiple applications. The City's processing fees are cumulative. For example, if a proposed project requires the approval of both a Use Permit and a
Variance, both fees will be charged. Unusually large or complex projects may be subject to a deposit in addition to the basic application fees, at the
discretion of the Director.

C.

Timing of payment. No application shall be deemed complete, and processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees/deposits
have been paid.

D.

Refunds and withdrawals. The required application fees cover City costs for public hearings, mailings, staff time, and the other activities involved in
processing applications. Therefore, no refund due to a disapproval shall be allowed. In the case of a withdrawal, the Director shall have the discretion
to authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to-date and the status of the application at the time of withdrawal.

Sec. 4-50-050. - Initial Application Review.
A.

Review for completeness. The Director shall review each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being complete and

99/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
officially filed. The Director's determination of completeness shall be based on the City's list of required application contents (see Section 4-50-030.B Application contents), and any additional instructions provided the applicant in any pre-application conference.
1.

Notification of applicant. As required by State law (Government Code Section 65943), within 30 calendar days of application filing, the applicant
shall be informed in writing, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete
and that additional information, specified in the Director's letter, shall be provided.

2.

Appeal of determination. Where the Director has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application
is complete and/or that the information requested by the Director is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance
with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

3.

Time for submittal of additional information. When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required
additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness shall occur. The time available
to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by following Subsection (A.4.)

4.

Expiration of application. If an applicant fails to provide the additional information specified in the Director's letter within 180 days after the
first filing with the Department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn. The Director may grant one extension. After the
expiration of an application, project approval shall require the submittal of a new, complete application.

5.

Environmental information. After an application has been accepted as complete, the Director may require the applicant to submit additional
information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Section 4-50-060 (Environmental Review).

6.

If violation exists. An application shall not be deemed complete, and/or shall not be processed or approved, in the event that a condition(s)
exists on the subject property in violation of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or any permit or approval granted in compliance with this Code,
other than an application for the permit or approval, if any, needed to correct the violation(s).

B.

Referral. At the discretion of the Director, or where otherwise required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code or State or Federal law, an application
may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed project.

Sec. 4-50-060. - Environmental Review.
After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the City's
CEQA guidelines, to determine whether the project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA or is not a project as defined by CEQA, whether a
Negative Declaration (ND) may be issued, or whether an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) shall be required.
Sec. 4-50-070. - Sta Evaluation and Report.
A.

Staff evaluation. The Director shall review all discretionary applications filed in compliance with this Article to determine whether they comply and
are consistent with the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, the General Plan, and any
applicable specific plan.

B.

Staff report. The Director shall provide a written recommendation to the Commission and/or Council (as applicable) on whether the application
should be approved, approved subject to conditions, or disapproved.

C.

Report distribution. Each staff report shall be furnished to the applicant at the same time as it is provided to the review authority before a hearing
on the application.

CHAPTER 4-52. - PERMIT REVIEW AND DECISIONS
Sections:

Sec. 4-52-010. - Purpose.
A.

Permit review procedures. This Chapter provides procedures for the review and approval or disapproval of the planning permit applications
established by this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

B.

Subdivision review procedures. Procedures and standards for the review and approval or disapproval of subdivision maps are found in Article 6
(Subdivision Regulations and Procedures).

C.

Application filing and initial processing. Where applicable, the procedures of this Chapter are conducted after those described in Chapter 4-50
(Permit Application Filing and Processing), for each application.

Sec. 4-52-020. - Architectural Review.
A.

Purpose. Architectural Review is intended to ensure that the design (e.g., architectural elevations and site plan) of proposed development and new
land uses assists in maintaining and enhancing the small-City historic, and rural character of the community. Therefore, the purposes of these
procedures and requirements are to:
1.

Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of development within
the community;

2.

Ensure that new uses and structures enhance their sites and are compatible with the highest standards of improvement in the surrounding

100/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
neighborhoods;
3.

Retain and strengthen the visual quality and attractive character of the community;

4.

Assist project developers in understanding the City's concerns for the aesthetics of development, and

5.

Ensure that development complies with all applicable City standards and guidelines, and does not adversely affect community health, safety,
aesthetics, or natural resources.

B.

Applicability. Architectural Review approval shall be required for all proposed single-family and multi-family projects, nonresidential development
and new land uses within the City. Architectural Review shall also be required for any exterior additions and facade changes to these projects.
Architectural Review shall be required in addition to all other planning permit or approval requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, and the
Municipal Code.

C.

D.

Review authority. Architectural Review of permitted uses by Director - see note 2 on page 5-4.
1.

UP Architectural Review shall be conducted by the Commission.

2.

The Commission may appoint an Architectural Committee consisting of at least three of its members to conduct the required review.

Application filing and processing. An application shall be prepared, filed, and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50 (Permit Application Filing
and Processing). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for Architectural Review
applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the finding required by Subsection F.

E.

Project review. The review authority shall evaluate each proposed project to ensure that the project:
1.

Complies with this Section;

2.

Provides architectural design, building massing and scale appropriate to and compatible with the orderly and harmonious development of the
community;

3.

Provides attractive and desirable site layout and design, including, but not limited to, building arrangement, exterior appearance and setbacks,
drainage, fences and walls, grading, landscaping, lighting, and signs;

F.

4.

Provides efficient and safe public access, circulation, and parking;

5.

Provides appropriate open space and landscaping, including the use of water efficient landscaping;

6.

Is consistent with the General Plan; and

7.

Complies with any applicable design guidelines and/or adopted Architectural Review policies.

Finding and decision.
1.

The review authority shall approve or disapprove an application for an Architectural Review concurrently with the approval or disapproval of
any other planning permit (e.g., Planned Development Permit, Use Permit, Variance, or Zoning Clearance) required for the project.

2.

Architectural Review approval shall require that the review authority first find that the project, as proposed or with changes resulting from the
review process and/or conditions of approval, will comply with all project review criteria in Subsection E.

G.

3.

No permit shall be issued for any project requiring Architectural Review until the project has been approved by the review authority.

4.

All structures and site improvements shall be in compliance with the approved plans.

Conditions of approval. The review authority may require any reasonable conditions of approval to ensure that the project will comply with the
finding required by Subsection F.

H.

Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 4-54 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), and those
related to appeals and revocation in Article 7 (Zoning and Subdivision Code Administration), shall apply following the decision on an application for
Architectural Review.

Sec. 4-52-030. - Limited Term Permit.
A.

Purpose. This Section establishes procedures for Limited Term Permits for short-term activities.

B.

Applicability. A Limited Term Permit allows the short-term activities listed in Subsection E. (Allowed Temporary Uses) that may not comply with the
normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature.

C.

Review authority. Limited Term Permits may be approved or disapproved by the Director, in compliance with this Section.

D.

Exempt temporary activities. The following temporary activities are allowed without the necessity of obtaining a Limited Term Permit. Temporary
activities that do not fall within the following categories shall comply with Subsection E. (Allowed temporary uses).
1.

Construction yards—On-site. On-site contractors' construction yards, for an approved construction project. The construction yard shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the Building Permit authorizing the construction project,
whichever first occurs.

2.

Emergency facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/activities, as determined by the Council.

3.

Garage sales. Garage sales not exceed two per year, and two consecutive days.

4.

Public property or public right-of-way. Activities conducted on public property or within the public right-of-way that are approved by the
Council/City Manager or as otherwise required by the Municipal Code.

5.

Use of an RV or travel trailer for temporary lodging. The overnight occupancy of a recreational vehicle or travel trailer in a residential zoning

101/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
district by houseguests, not to exceed two weeks in any 12-month period.
6.

Fund-raising car washes. Fund-raising car washes conducted on property located within a nonresidential zoning district.

7.

Events on sites approved for public assembly. An event on the site or within a religious facility, school, theater, or other similar facility
designed, and approved by the City for public assembly.

E.

Allowed temporary uses. A Limited Term Permit may authorize the following temporary activities within the specified time limits, but in no event for
more than 12 months. Other temporary or short-term activities that do not fall within the categories defined below shall instead comply with the
planning permit requirements and development standards that otherwise apply to the subject property.
1.

Events. Arts and crafts exhibits, carnivals, circuses, concerts, fairs, farmer's markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, outdoor
entertainment/sporting events, rodeos, rummage sales, second hand sales, and swap meets for up to seven consecutive days, or six three-day
weekends, within a 12-month period, only when conducted on property located within a nonresidential zoning district.

2.

Location filming. The temporary use of a specific site for the location filming of commercials, movies, videos, etc., for the time specified by the
Director, but not to exceed 12 months.

3.

Model homes. A model home or model home complex may be authorized before the completion of subdivision improvements in compliance
with the following standards.
a.

A paved, off-street parking lot with two space for each model home unit, handicapped parking, and landscaping shall be provided. The
Director may allow the use of on-street parking in lieu of a parking lot where it is demonstrated that two spaces for each model home can
be accommodated immediately in front of the model home complex. No parking spaces shall be located in front of an occupied residence
and handicapped accessibility to the sales office shall be maintained.

b.

Individual utility connections shall be provided to each model home.

c.

The sales office, any arbor not in compliance with applicable setback requirements, and any off-street parking shall be converted back to
residential use and/or removed before the issuance of the Occupancy Permit or within 14 days from the sale of the last lot in the
subdivision, whichever first occurs.

d.

Landscape and irrigation plans shall be reviewed as part of the Limited Term Permit, and all model home complex landscaping shall
comply with the City's Water Efficient Landscape Requirements. No irrigation shall cross a property line.

e.

The model home complex shall be used to sell only units within the subdivision within which the complex is located.

f.

If a temporary sales trailer is used, the trailer shall be:
(1)

Accessible to the handicapped;

(2)

Equipped with a screening skirt around the base;

(3)

In compliance with applicable Building Code requirements for restroom facilities for a workplace with employees; and

(4)

Removed within seven days of the issuance of the temporary Occupancy Permit for the model homes.

g.

The subdivision developer and the home builder shall be the same, unless approved by City Council within a Development Agreement.

h.

The subdivision's Final Map shall be recorded.

i.

The installation of underground improvements in front of the model homes shall be completed.

j.

The subdivision grading shall be completed.

k.

The water system shall be completed, and in service so that fire hydrants are accessible, and a fire response plan shall be completed and
submitted to the Fire Department.

l.
m.
n.

All weather access for fire equipment shall be provided and maintained to the satisfaction of the Fire Department.
Model home Sign Permits will be issued only after all subdivision improvements are completed and accepted by the City.
Model home permits will be finaled and the model homes will be allowed to be open to the public only after all subdivision improvements
are completed and accepted by the City.

o.

The Director may require other conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood.

4.

Seasonal sales lots. Seasonal sales activities (e.g., Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc.) including temporary residence/security trailers, on
nonresidential properties, for up to 35 days.

5.

Temporary real estate sales offices. A temporary real estate sales office may be established in lieu of model homes. This office may be in place
for a maximum of twelve months or until the model homes are complete, whichever occurs first.

6.

Temporary residence. A mobile home as a temporary residence of the property owner when a valid Building Permit for a new single-family
dwelling is in force. The permit may be approved for up to 12 months, or upon expiration of the Building Permit, whichever first occurs.

7.

Temporary work trailers. A trailer or mobile home used as a temporary work site for employees of a business in compliance with the following
standards.
a.

The use is authorized by a Building Permit for the trailer, and the Building Permit for the permanent structure;

b.

The use is appropriate because:
(1)

The trailer or mobile home will be in place during construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or manufacturing structure

102/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
for a maximum of 12 months, or upon expiration of the Building Permit for the permanent structure, whichever first occurs; or
(2)

The applicant has demonstrated that the temporary work site is a short-term necessity for a maximum of 12 months, while a
permanent work site is being obtained; and

c.
8.

The trailer is removed before final building inspection or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the permanent structure.

Temporary structures. A temporary classroom, office, or similar structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved for a
maximum of 12 months from the date of approval, as an accessory use or as the first phase of a development project.

9.

Similar temporary activities. A temporary activity that the Director determines is similar to the other activities listed in this Subsection, and
compatible with the applicable zoning district and surrounding land uses.

F.

Development standards. The Director shall establish the following standards based on the type of temporary use, using the requirements of the
applicable zoning district for guidance:
1.

Access, floor areas, heights, landscaping, off-street parking, setbacks, signs, utilities, and other structure and property development
improvements and features;

2.

Measures for removal of the activity and site restoration, to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land
uses otherwise allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code; and

3.

Limitation on the duration of approved "temporary structures," to a maximum of 12 months, so that they shall not become permanent or longterm structures.

G.

Application filing and processing. An application for a Limited Term Permit shall be completed, filed, and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50
(Permit Application Filing and Processing). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for Limited
Term Permit applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection I.

H.

Project review, notice, and hearing. Each application shall be reviewed by the Director to ensure that the proposal complies with all applicable
requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
1.

Public notice. A public notice for a Limited Term Permit is not a requirement unless the use, in the opinion of the Community Development
Director, has the potential to create a particular interest, concern or significant impact to the surrounding community and property owners. In
these cases, prior to a decision on a Limited Term Permit, the City shall provide notice in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings). The
notice shall state that the Director will decide whether to approve or disapprove the Limited Term Permit application on a date specified in the
notice, and that a public hearing will be held only if requested in writing by any interested person before the specified date for the decision. In
addition, the Community Development Director may also refer a Limited Term Permit application to the Planning Commission for review and
decision.

2.

If hearing is requested. If a public hearing is requested, the Director shall refer the application to the Commission for a hearing and decision to
be conducted in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

3.

If no hearing is requested. If no public hearing is requested, the Director shall render a decision on the date specified in the notice referred to
in Subparagraph 1., above.

I.

Findings and decision. A Limited Term Permit may be approved by the Director only after the Director first finds that the requested activity complies
with applicable standards, and therefore the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the temporary activity would not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed activity. The Director may impose such
conditions on a Limited Term Permit as are necessary to ensure the standards and guidelines of this chapter are met in addition to protecting the
public health safety and welfare of the community.

J.

Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 4-54 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), and those
related to appeals and revocation (Limited Term Permits only require a 24-hour notice for revocation) in Article 7 (Zoning and Subdivision Code
Administration), shall apply following the decision on a Limited Term Permit application.
1.

Condition of the site following temporary activity. Each site occupied by a temporary activity shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or other
evidence of the temporary activity on completion or removal of the activity, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of
this Zoning and Subdivision Code. A bond may be required before initiation of the activity to ensure cleanup after the activity is finished.

2.

Performance security for temporary structures. Before issuance of a Limited Term Permit the applicant shall provide performance security in
a form and amount acceptable to the Director to guarantee removal of all temporary structures within 30 days following the expiration of the
Limited Term Permit.

(Ord. No. 458, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), 3-15-11)

Sec. 4-52-040. - Planned Development Permit.
A.

Purpose. Planned Development Permits provide for flexibility in the application of Zoning and Subdivision Code standards to proposed development.
The purpose is to allow the City to consider:
1.

Innovative proposals for site planning and other aspects of project design that enhance the liveability and walkability of Gustine, which could
not otherwise be accommodated through the rigid application of the standards of this Zoning and Subdivision Code; and

2.

More effective design responses to site features, uses on adjoining properties, resource conservation, and environmental impacts than the
Zoning and Subdivision Code standards would produce without adjustment.

103/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
The City expects each project for which Planned Development Permit approval is proposed, to be of obvious and significantly higher design quality
than would be achieved through conventional design practices and standards.
B.

Applicability.
1.

General Plan compliance. The preparation, review, and approval of a Planned Development Permit shall comply with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan.

2.

Scope of approval.
a.

Planned Development Permit approval may adjust or modify, where necessary and justifiable, any applicable development standard of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code (e.g., floor area ratio, building height, setbacks, parking, street layout, etc.), provided that the approval shall
not authorize a land use that is not allowed in the primary zoning district by Article 2

b.

A project proposing increased residential density may only be approved by the Council in compliance with Chapter 4-32 (Affordable
Housing Incentives).

C.

Application filing and processing. A Planned Development Permit application shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50-030
(Application Filing and Processing), and the following requirements.
1.

Application contents. The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for Planned Development
Permit applications.

2.

Department review. Each Planned Development Permit application shall be analyzed by the Director to ensure that the proposed project is
consistent with the intent of this Section. The Director shall prepare a report and recommendation on the project to the Commission for their
consideration.

3.
D.

Public hearing. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

Review authority. The Commission may recommend to the Council approval or disapproval of Planned Development Permits in compliance with this
Section.

E.

Commission action. Following a public hearing, the Commission may recommend approve or disapprove of the Planned Development Permit and
shall forward the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based to the City Council.
1.

Required findings. The Commission may recommend approval of a Planned Development Permit only after first finding that:
a.

The project is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, and allowed within the applicable zoning district;

b.

The project complies with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code other than those modified by the Planned
Development Permit;

c.

The approved modifications to the development standards of this Zoning and Subdivision Code are necessary and appropriate to
accommodate the superior design of the proposed project, its compatibility with adjacent land uses, and its successful mitigation of
environmental impacts;

d.

The project complies with any applicable City Design Guidelines;

e.

The project can be adequately, conveniently, and reasonably served by public facilities, services, and utilities;

f.

The planning concepts and design features of the project are reasonably suited to the characteristics of the site and the surrounding
neighborhood;

g.

The location, size, planning concepts, design features, and operating characteristics of the project are and will be compatible with the
character of the site, and the land uses and development intended for the surrounding neighborhood by the General Plan;

h.

The site is adequate for the project in terms of size, shape, topography, and circumstances and has sufficient access to streets and
highways which are adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic expected to be generated by the use;
and

i.

The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use would not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the
health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use, or detrimental or injurious to
property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the City.

2.

Conditions of approval. In recommending approval of a Planned Development Permit, the Commission may impose any conditions deemed
reasonable and necessary to ensure that the project will comply with the findings required by Subsection E.1.

F.

Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 4-54 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), and those
related to appeals and revocation in Article 7 (Zoning and Subdivision Code Administration), shall apply following a decision on an application for a
Variance.

Sec. 4-52-050. - Use Permit.
A.

Purpose. A Use Permit provides a process for reviewing uses and activities that may be appropriate in the applicable zoning district, but whose
effects on site and surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a specific site.

B.

Applicability. A Use Permit is required to authorize proposed land uses identified by Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Permit
Requirements) as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of a Use Permit.

C.

Review authority.

104/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
1.
D.

Use Permits. Use Permits shall be approved or disapproved by the Commission.

Application filing and processing. An application for a Use Permit shall be completed, filed, and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50 (Permit
Application Filing and Processing). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for Use Permit
applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection F.

E.

Project review, notice, and hearing. Each application shall be reviewed by the Director to ensure that the proposal complies with all applicable
requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
1.

Use Permit. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a Use Permit before a decision on the application. Notice of
the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

F.

Findings and decision. The review authority may approve or disapprove an application for a Use Permit. The review authority shall record the
decision and the findings on which the decision is based. The review authority may approve a Use Permit only after first finding all of the following:
1.

The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zoning district and complies with all other applicable provisions of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code and the Municipal Code;

2.

The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

3.

The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the
vicinity;

4.

The site is physically suitable for the type, density, and intensity of use being proposed, including access, utilities, and the absence of physical
constraints; and

5.

Granting the permit would not be detrimental to the public comfort, convenience, health, interest, morals, safety, or welfare of the persons
residing or working in the subject neighborhood, or materially detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning
district in which the property is located.

G.

Conditions of approval. In approving a Use Permit, the review authority may impose conditions (e.g., the placement, height, nature and extent of the
use; buffers, landscaping and maintenance, off-site improvements, performance guarantees, screening, surfacing, time limits, etc.), including
conditions which establish standards for development that are more restrictive than the applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision
Code, deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will comply with the findings required by Subsection F. (Findings and decision).

H.

Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 4-54 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), and those
related to appeals and revocation in Article 7 (Zoning and Subdivision Code Administration), shall apply following the decision on an application for
Use Permit approval.

Sec. 4-52-060. - Variance.
A.

Purpose. This Section allows Variances from the development standards of this Zoning and Subdivision Code only when, because of special
circumstances applicable to the subject property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other physical conditions, the strict
application of the standards denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and in the same zoning district.

B.

Applicability.
1.

Waive or modify development standards. A Variance may be granted to waive or modify any development standard of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code except for those requirements identified in Subparagraphs 2., 3., and 4., immediately below.

2.

No special privileges. A Variance shall not be granted that would have the effect of granting a special privilege(s) not shared by other property
owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts.

3.

Does not extend to uses.
a.

The power to grant Variances does not extend to allowable land uses. In no case shall a Variance be granted to allow a use of land or
structure not otherwise allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.

b.

The use of land or structure not in conformity with the regulations of the subject zoning district shall not be allowed by the granting of a
Variance.

c.
4.

Flexibility in allowable land uses is provided in Section 4-52-050 (Use Permits).

Does not extend to procedures. A Variance shall not be granted to allow an adjustment to the procedural requirements of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code.

C.

Review authority.

D.

Application filing and processing. An application for a Variance shall be completed, filed, and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50 (Permit

1.

Commission—Variances. A Variance application shall be reviewed, and approved or disapproved by the Commission.

Application Filing and Processing). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for Variance
applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings, as required by Subsection F.
E.

Project review, notice, and hearing. Each application shall be reviewed by the Director to ensure that the proposal complies with all applicable
requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
1.

Variance. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a Variance before a decision on the application. Notice of the
public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

105/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
F.

Findings and decision. The review authority may approve or disapprove an application for a Variance. The review authority shall record the decision and
findings on which the decision is based. The review authority may approve a Variance only after first making all of the following findings, as applicable to
application.
1.

General findings.
a.

There are special circumstances applicable to the subject property (e.g., location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other
conditions), so that the strict application of this Zoning and Subdivision Code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other
property owners in the vicinity and within the same zoning district;

b.

Granting the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights enjoyed by other property owners
in the same vicinity and zoning district and denied to the property owner for which the application is sought; and

c.
2.

The application is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

Findings for off-street parking Variances. For a nonresidential development project proposing to locate a portion of the required parking at an
off-site location, or provide in-lieu fees or facilities instead of the required on-site parking spaces, the review authority shall first make both of
the following findings, as required by State law (Government Code Section 65906.5), instead of those required by Subparagraph F.1., above.

3.

a.

The Variance would be an incentive to, and a benefit for, the subject nonresidential development; and

b.

The Variance would facilitate access to the subject nonresidential development by patrons of public transit facilities.

Finding for reasonable accommodations. The review authority may also grant a Variance to the site planning or development standards of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code in compliance with this Section, based on the finding that the Variance or is necessary to accomplish a reasonable
accommodation of the needs of a disabled person in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

G.

Conditions of approval. In approving a Variance, the review authority:
1.

Shall impose conditions to ensure that the Variance does not grant special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the
vicinity and zoning district in which the subject property is located; and

2.

May impose conditions (e.g., the placement, height, nature and extent of the use; buffers, landscaping and maintenance, off-site improvements,
performance guarantees, screening, surfacing, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval complies with the findings
required by Subsection F. (Findings and decision), above.

H.

Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements in Chapter 4-54 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), and those
related to appeals and revocation in Article 7 (Zoning and Subdivision Code Administration), shall apply following the decision on an application for a
Variance or.

Sec. 4-52-070. - Zoning Clearance.
A.

Purpose. Zoning Clearance is the procedure used by the City to verify that a proposed structure or land use complies with the permitted list of
activities allowed in the applicable zoning district, and the development standards applicable to the use.

B.

Applicability.
1.

Where Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Permit Requirements) or other provision of this Zoning and Subdivision Code
requires a Zoning Clearance as a prerequisite to establishing a land use, the Zoning Clearance shall be required at the time of Department
review of any building, grading, or other construction permit, or other authorization required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code for the
proposed use.

2.

Zoning Clearance shall be required before any structure may be altered, constructed, erected, moved, or repaired or before any vacant land
may be used or changed in use.

3.

The Zoning Clearance shall be issued before a Building Permit or any other required City approval may be issued or granted.

C.

Applicable authority. The Director shall be the applicable authority for issuing Zoning Clearances.

D.

Review and form of approval.
1.

Director's review. The Director shall issue the Zoning Clearance only after first determining that the request complies with all Zoning and
Subdivision Code provisions applicable to the proposed use or structure.

2.

Form of approval. An approval may be in the form of a stamp, City staff signature, or other official notation on approved plans, a letter to the
applicant, or other certification, at the discretion of the Director.

Sec. 4-52-080. - Master Plans and Precise Development Plans.
A.

Purpose. Master Plans and Precise Development Plans are intended to promote and encourage innovation and flexibility in the design of proposed
development within the P-D zoning district, for more effective environmental resource preservation, and to ensure that proposed development
within the P-D zoning district achieves the objectives in Section 4-22-050.B (P-D District Development Standards).
1.

Proposed Master Plans and Precise Development Plans are encouraged and expected to produce a comprehensive development of greater
quality than that normally resulting from conventional development.

2.

The Review Authority shall determine whether a Master Plan or Precise Development Plan should be approved by weighing the public need for,
and the benefits to be derived from, the proposed project against the potential negative effects it may cause.

106/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
B.

Applicability.
1.

When required. Master Plans and Precise Development Plans are required prerequisite to development in the P-D (Planned Development)
zoning district, except where a specific plan is instead proposed and approved, in compliance with Section 4-22-050 (PD District Development
Standards).

2.
C.

Scope of proposal. A Master Plan shall include all contiguous property under the same P-D zoning district and ownership.

Scope of approval. The approval of a Master Plan or Precise Development Plan shall include establishing the following specific requirements for the
development and use of the proposed site, consistent with the General Plan. The following provisions to be included may either be in the form of
specific standards unique to the particular project site, or may be in the form of references to specific provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
1.

Master Plans. Master plans shall establish for the site:
a.

Allowable land uses and any subsequent planning permit requirements that shall apply after Precise Development Plan approval, in
compliance with the limitations in Table 2-1, Section 4-22-030 (Residential Zoning District Land Uses and Permit Requirements); and

b.

The allowable density and intensity of development, including: the total number of dwelling units that may be allowed, and the housing
types that may be allowed (i.e., attached or detached units and product types); and building massing requirements.

2.

D.

Precise Development Plans. Precise Development Plans shall establish the following, consistent with the approved Master Plan:
a.

Minimum lot size, and site coverage requirements;

b.

Minimum setback requirements and structure height limits;

c.

Off-street parking requirements;

d.

Landscaping requirements;

e.

Requirements for accessory uses and structures; and

f.

Other site planning, development standards, and special provisions and requirements as deemed necessary by the review authority.

Effect of approval, and administration of approved plans. After the Master Plan and Precise Development Plan approval, the land uses allowed on
the site and the proposed development shall comply with:
1.

The standards of the Master Plan and Precise Development Plan to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive or specific than the
standards of this Zoning and Subdivision Code; and

2.

The provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code where the Master Plan or Precise Development Plan are silent on any aspect of land use or
development that is otherwise regulated by this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

In any case where a Master Plan or Precise Development Plan is silent on an aspect of land use or development otherwise regulated by this Zoning and
Subdivision Code, the allowable land use requirements and development standards of the most comparable zoning district and land use shall apply, as
determined by the Director.
E.

Master Plan procedures. Master Plans shall be prepared, filed, processed, and approved or disapproved as follows.
1.

Application filing and processing. An application for Master Plan approval shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50 (Permit
Application Filing and Processing), and as an amendment to the Zoning Map in compliance with Chapter 4-76 (General Plan, Zoning Ordinance,
and Zoning and Subdivision Code Amendments). The Master Plan application shall include the following information and materials.
a.

One or more maps or drawings accurately drawn and sufficiently detailed to show:
(1)

Boundaries and area of the site;

(2)

Areas of the site to be developed and the basic street pattern, with each separate proposed land use identified;

(3)

Topography, with existing and proposed contours shown at a minimum interval of 10 feet;

(4)

All existing structures and improvements on the site;

(5)

Existing tree coverage and areas of tree removal;

(6)

All water areas (ponds, lakes, streams, and drainage ways);

(7)

Contiguous properties, their zoning and existing structures and other improvements;

(8)

Surrounding street pattern, with design capacities and current traffic counts;

(9)

Designation of projected intensity of development. Density in gross and net figures for residential uses and coverage, and floor area
for nonresidential uses; and

b.

Written statements describing the development concepts as they apply to the following subjects:
(1)

Type, intensity, form and function of the project;

(2)

Utilities (gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer, telephone);

(3)

Public services (police, fire, schools, mail);

(4)

Public facilities (streets, library, public transportation, parks, etc.);

(5)

Historic or archaeological resources;

(6)

Noise sources;

(7)

Traffic (auto, bike, pedestrian, equestrian);

107/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

c.

(8)

Soils, flooding and other hazards;

(9)

Storm drainage;

(10)

Shopping and service uses;

(11)

Wildlife and vegetation; and

(12)

Disposition or management of nondeveloped areas.

Information provided as required by the Director to allow a determination on environmental review in compliance with the California
Environmental Quality Act.

2.

Architectural Review required. The project shall be subject to Architectural Review in compliance with Section 4-52-040 prior to review by the
Commission.

3.

Commission action on Master Plan. Following a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 4-78, the Commission may recommend that the
Council approve or disapprove the Master Plan. The Commission may recommend approval of a Master Plan only after first making all of the
following findings:
a.

The proposed Master Plan is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

b.

The proposed Master Plan complies with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, specifically including the design objectives in
Section 4-22-050.B (PD District Development Standards).

c.

The proposed development can be adequately, conveniently, and reasonably served by public conveniences, public facilities, public
services, and public utilities;

d.

The proposed Master Plan concepts are reasonably suited to the specific characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood,
and are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the surrounding neighborhood.

4.

Council action on Master Plans.
a.

After a Commission recommendation for the approval of a Master Plan, or an appeal of a Commission disapproval of a Master Plan,
Council shall review the Master Plan in a noticed public hearing in compliance with Division 4-78 (Public Hearings).

b.

Following the public hearing, the Council may approve or disapprove the Master Plan. The Council may approve the Master Plan only after
first making all of the findings required by Subsection E.3 above.

c.

Disapproval shall be by motion. Approval or conditional approval shall be by the adoption of an ordinance in compliance with Chapter 4-78
(Public Hearings).

F.

Precise Development Plan procedures. Precise Development Plans shall be prepared, filed, processed, and approved or disapproved as follows. A
Precise Development Plan for a proposed development may be submitted and processed concurrently with a proposed Master Plan for the same
site, or after Master Plan approval.
1.

Application filing and processing. An application for Precise Development Plan approval shall be filed and processed in compliance with
Chapter 4-50 (Permit Application Filing and Processing), and the following requirements.

2.

Design Review required. The project shall be subject to Architectural Review prior to review by the Commission.

3.

Commission action on Precise Development Plans. Following a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 4-58, the Commission may
recommend that the Council approve or disapprove a Precise Development Plan. The Commission may recommend approval of a Precise
Development Plan only after first making all of the following findings:
a.

The proposed Precise Development Plan is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the approved Master Plan;

b.

The proposed Precise Development Plan will produce a complete, pedestrian oriented neighborhood of superior quality (e.g., appropriate
variety of structure placement and orientation opportunities, appropriate mix of land uses and structure sizes, high quality architectural
design, increased amounts of landscaping and open space, improved solutions to the design and placement of parking facilities, etc.);

c.

The design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services
and utilities (e.g., drainage, fire protection, sewers, water, etc.), would ensure that the proposed development would not endanger,
jeopardize, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements
in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located;

d.

The proposed Precise Development Plan standards are reasonably suited to the specific characteristics of the site, and are compatible with
the existing and future land uses in the surrounding neighborhood;

e.

The subject site is:
(1)

Physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed;

(2)

Adequate in shape and size to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, parking, yards, and other
features required by this Zoning Ordinance; and

(3)

Served by streets adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic expected to be generated by the
proposed development.

4.

Council action on Precise Development Plans.
a.

After a Commission recommendation for the approval of a Precise Development Plan, or an appeal of a Commission disapproval of a
Precise Development Plan, Council shall review the Precise Development Plan in a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 4-58

108/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
(Public Hearings).
b.

Following the public hearing, the Council may approve or disapprove the Precise Development Plan. The Council may approve the Precise
Development Plan only after first making all of the findings required by Subsection F.3 above.

c.

Disapproval shall be by motion. Approval or conditional approval shall be by the adoption of a resolution in compliance with Chapter 4-58
(Public Hearings).

G.

Post approval procedures. The procedures and requirements relating to appeals, changes, expiration, performance guarantees, and revocation, as
identified in Article 5 (Zoning Ordinance Administration), in addition to those in Chapter 4-54 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions),
shall apply following the approval of a Master Plan and/or Precise Development Plan.

CHAPTER 4-54. - PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS
Sections:

Sec. 4-54-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter provides requirements for the implementation or "exercising" of the permits required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code, including time
limits and procedures for granting extensions of time.
Sec. 4-54-020. - E ective Date of Permits.
A Planned Development Permit, Use Permit, or Variance shall become effective on the 6th day following the date of application approval by the review
authority; provided, no appeal has been filed in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).
Sec. 4-54-030. - Applications Deemed Approved.
A planning permit application deemed approved in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65956) shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, which shall be satisfied by the applicant before a Building Permit is issued or a land use not requiring a
Building Permit is established.
Sec. 4-54-040. - Permits to Run with the Land.
A Planned Development Permit, Use Permit, or Variance approval that is granted in compliance with Chapter 4-52 (Permit Review and Decisions) shall
be deemed to run with the land through any change of ownership of the subject site, from the effective date of the permit, except in any case where a
permit expires and becomes void in compliance with Section 4-54-070 (Permit Time Limits, Extensions, and Expiration). All applicable conditions of
approval shall continue to apply after a change in property ownership.
Sec. 4-54-050. - Acceptance of Conditions.
A Limited Term Permit, Planned Development Permit, Use Permit, or Variance shall have no effect until the permittee acknowledges, in writing, receipt
and full acceptance of any condition imposed on the Limited Term Permit, Planned Development Permit, Use Permit, or Variance.
Sec. 4-54-060. - Performance Guarantees.
A.

Security deposit. As a condition of approval of a Limited Term Permit, Planned Development Permit, Use Permit, or Variance upon a finding that the
City's health, safety and welfare warrant, the review authority may require the execution of a covenant to deposit security, and the deposit of security
in a reasonable amount to ensure the faithful performance of one or more of the conditions of approval of the Limited Term Permit, Planned
Development Permit, Use Permit, or Variance in the event that the obligor fails to perform. The security shall, as required by law or otherwise at the
option of the City, be in the form of cash, a certified or cashier's check, or a faithful performance bond executed by the applicant and a corporate
surety authorized to do business in California. The security shall remain in effect until all of the secured conditions have been performed to the
satisfaction of the Director.

B.

Payable to the City. Any security required in compliance with this Section shall be payable to the City.

C.

Release of deposit. Upon satisfaction of all applicable provisions of this Section, the security deposit will be released. However, upon failure to
perform any secured condition, the City may perform the condition, or cause it to be done, and may collect from the obligor, and surety in case of a
bond, all cost incurred thereto, including administrative, engineering, legal, and inspection costs. Any unused portion of the security shall be
refunded to the obligor after deduction of the cost of the work, except that, to the extent that the Director can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City Manager that the obligor willfully breached an obligation in a manner that he or she knew or should have known would create irreparable harm
to the City, the entire amount of the bond or deposit may be withheld. The City Manager's determination may be appealed to the Council by the
obligor by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within five days after the decision.

Sec. 4-54-070. - Permit Time Limits, Extensions, and Expiration.

109/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
A.

Time limits.
1.

Unless a condition of approval or other provision of this Zoning and Subdivision Code establishes a different time limit, any permit or approval
not exercised within 12 months of the date of approval shall, without further action by the City, expire and become void, except where an
extension of time is approved in compliance with Subsection B.

2.

The permit shall not be deemed "exercised" until the permittee has actually commenced the allowed use on the site in compliance with the
conditions of approval.

3.

After it has been exercised, a planning permit shall remain valid and run with the land in compliance with Section 4-54-040, as long as a Building
Permit is active for the project, and after a final building inspection or certificate of occupancy has been granted.

4.

If a project is to be developed in approved phases, each subsequent phase shall be exercised within 12 months from the date that the previous
phase was exercised, unless otherwise specified in the permit, or the permit shall expire and be void in compliance with Subsection D., except
where an extension of time is approved in compliance with Subsection B. If the project also involves the approval of a Tentative Map, the
phasing shall be consistent with the Tentative Map and the permit shall be exercised before the expiration of the Tentative Map, or the permit
shall expire and be void.

B.

Extensions of time. Upon written request by the applicant, the review authority may extend the time for an approved planning permit to be
exercised.
1.

Filing and review of request.
a.

Time for filing. The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the Director at least seven days before the expiration
of the permit, together with the filing fee required by the City's Fee Schedule.

b.

Evidence to be provided. The review authority shall determine whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to exercise the permit.
The burden of proof is on the applicant to establish, with substantial evidence, that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant
(e.g., demonstrated financial hardship, problems with completing the acquisition of the parcel, poor weather during periods of planned
construction, etc.) have prevented exercising the permit.

c.

Public hearing. If the original approval required a public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing on a proposed extension
of time, after providing notice of the public hearing in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

2.

Action on extension request. A permit may be extended as follows for no more than one additional 12-month periods beyond the expiration of
the original approval; provided, the review authority first finds that there have been no changes in the conditions or circumstances of the site or
project that would have been grounds for disapproval of the original project.
a.

Commission's action. One extension may be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved by the Commission, whose decisions
may be appealed to the Council in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

C.

Effect of expiration. After the expiration of a planning permit in compliance with Subparagraph A.1., no further work shall be done on the site until a
new planning permit and any required Building Permit or other City permits are first obtained.

Sec. 4-54-080. - Change to an Approved Project.
Development or a new land use authorized through a planning permit granted in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be
established only as approved by the review authority, and in compliance with any conditions of approval, except where a change to the project is
approved as follows.
A.

Application. An applicant shall request a desired change in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation
of the reasons for the request. A change may be requested either before or after construction, or establishment and operation of the approved
land use.

B.

Public hearing. If the original project approval required public notice and a hearing, public notice shall be provided, and the review authority
shall conduct a public hearing on the requested changes in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

C.

Changes approved by Director. The Director may authorize one or more changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the
approved land use where the Director first finds that the changes:
1.

Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code;

2.

Do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for findings in a Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report for the
project;

3.

Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was
a specific consideration by the review authority (e.g., the Director, Commission, or Council) in the project approval; and

4.

Do not result in an expansion of the land use.

The Director may choose to refer any requested change to the original review authority for review and final action.
D.

Changes approved by original review authority. A proposed change that does not comply with the criteria in Subsection C., above shall only be
approved by the original review authority for the project through a new permit application processed in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision
Code.

110/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-54-090. - Permit Revocation or Modi cation.
A.

Purpose. Discretionary permits or approvals issued in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code may be revoked or modified in compliance
with this Section.

B.

Procedures. This Section provides procedures for securing revocation or punitive modification of previously approved permits or approvals.

C.

Revocations. The City's action to revoke a permit or approval shall have the effect of terminating the permit and denying the privileges granted by
the original approval.

D.

Modifications.
1.

The City's action to modify a permit or approval, rather then to revoke it, shall have the effect of changing the operational aspects of the permit.

2.

The changes may include the operational aspects related to buffers, duration of the permit or entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping and
maintenance, lighting, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, or any other
aspect/condition determined to be reasonable and necessary to ensure that the permit is operated in a manner consistent with the original
findings for approval.

E.

Immediate action by the Director.
1.

The Director (may, upon making any one of the findings identified in Subsection G. (Commission's action), below, immediately suspend the
permit or approval and shall notify the permittee or property owner and the Commission.

2.

When deemed necessary, in order to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare, the Director may order all operations, or any portion
thereof, authorized by the permit or approval, to cease during the time it is suspended, and the order shall remain in effect unless and until
modified, revoked, or suspended by the Commission or Council.

F.

Hearings and notice.
1.

The review authority shall hold a public hearing to revoke or modify a permit or approval granted in compliance with the provisions of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code.

2.

At least 10 days before the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the owner of the property for which the permit was granted and
the applicant for the subject permit or approval, if not the owner of the subject property. The only exception to the 10-day notice provision shall
be for Limited Term Permits which, because of their short term nature, shall only require a 24-hour notice.

3.

Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, certified and first class, through the United States Postal Service, postage paid, to
the property owner as shown on the latest adopted property tax roll and to the applicant, if not the owner of the subject property.

G.

Commission's action. A permit or approval may be revoked or modified by the review authority that originally granted the permit or approval), if the
review authority first makes any one or more of the following findings:
1.

Circumstances under which the permit or approval was granted have been changed by the applicant to an extent that one or more of the
findings that justified the original approval can no longer be made and the public health, safety, and welfare require the revocation;

2.

The permit or other approval was granted, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the
application, or in the applicant's testimony presented during the public hearing, for the permit or approval;

H.

3.

One or more of the conditions of the original permit or approval have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated; and

4.

The improvement/use allowed by the permit or approval:
a.

Has ceased to exist or has been suspended for at least 12 months;

b.

Is in violation of any applicable code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute; or

c.

Has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a nuisance.

Appeal of Commission's action.
1.

Any person dissatisfied with the action of the review authority regarding the revocation or modification of a permit or approval, may file an
appeal in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

2.

The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within five days of the review authority's action on the revocation or modification.

3.

The City Clerk shall set a date for the public hearing and provide notice in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings). Notice shall also be
provided to the Commission.

4.

The review authority shall submit a written report to the Council, outlining the reasons for its action, together with the evidence in support of
the findings for the action being appealed.

5.

The Council shall render its decision on the appeal within 30 days after the close of the public hearing.

Sec. 4-54-100. - Resubmittals.
A.

Resubmittals prohibited within 12 months.
1.

An application for a discretionary amendment, entitlement, or permit may be disapproved with prejudice.

2.

An application may be disapproved with prejudice on the grounds that two or more similar applications for the same parcel have been
disapproved in the past two years, or that another cause exists for limiting the refiling of the application.

3.

For a period of 12 months following the date of disapproval of a discretionary amendment, entitlement, or permit, no application for the same

111/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
or substantially similar discretionary amendment, entitlement, or permit for the same site shall be filed, except if the disapproval was without
prejudice, or on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed circumstances to an extent that further consideration is deemed
warranted.
B.

Disapproval without prejudice. There shall be no limitation on subsequent applications for a site on which a project was disapproved without
prejudice.

C.

Director's determination. The Director shall determine whether the new application is for a discretionary amendment, entitlement, or permit which
is the same or substantially similar to the previously disapproved amendment, entitlement, or permit.

D.

Appeal. The determination of the Director may be appealed to the Commission, in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

Sec. 4-54-110. - Covenants of Easements.
A.

Applicability. When necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City, the City may require a property owner holding property in common
ownership to execute and record a Covenant of Easement in favor of the City, in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65870 et seq.)
1.

Required provisions. A Covenant of Easement may be required to provide for emergency access, ingress and egress, landscaping, light and air
access, open space, parking, or for solar access.

2.
B.

Condition of approval. The review authority may require a Covenant of Easement as a condition of approval.

Form of covenant. The form of the Covenant shall be approved by the City Attorney, and the Covenant of Easement shall:
1.

Describe property. Describe the real property subject to the easement;

2.

Describe property to be benefited. Describe the real property to be benefited by the easement;

3.

Planning permit. Identify the City approval or permit granted which relied on or required the Covenant; and

4.

Purpose of easement. Identify the purposes of the easement.

C.

Recordation. The Covenant of Easement shall be recorded in the County Recorder's Office.

D.

Effect of covenant. From and after the time of its recordation, the Covenant of Easement shall:
1.

Act as an easement. Act as an easement in compliance with State law (Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2
of the Civil Code), except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. Civil Code Section 1104 shall be applicable to the
conveyance of the affected real property; and

2.

Impart notice. Impart notice to all persons to the extent afforded by the recording laws of the State. Upon recordation, the burdens of the
Covenant shall be binding on, and the Covenant shall benefit, all successors-in-interest to the real property.

E.

Enforceability of covenant. The Covenant of Easement shall be enforceable by the successors-in-interest to the real property benefited by the
Covenant and the City. Nothing in this Section creates standing in any person, other than the City, and any owner of the real property burdened or
benefited by the Covenant, to enforce or to challenge the Covenant or any requested amendment or release.

F.

Release of covenant. The release of the Covenant of Easement may be affected by the Director, or under an appeal, following a noticed public
hearing in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).
1.

May be released by City. The Covenant of Easement may be released by the City, at the request of any person, including the City or an affected
property owner, upon a finding that the Covenant, on the subject property, is no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City.

2.
G.

Recordation of notice. A notice of the release of the Covenant of Easement shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office.

Fees. The City shall impose fees to recover the City's reasonable cost of processing a request for a release. Fees for the processing shall be
established by the City's Fee Schedule.

CHAPTER 4-56. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-56-010. - Purpose.
A.

Procedures. This Chapter provides procedures and requirements for the review, approval, and amendment of development agreements.

B.

State law. The provisions of this Chapter are consistent with the provisions of State law governing development agreements (Article 2.5 of Section 4
of Division 1 of Title 7, commencing with Government Code Section 65864).

Sec. 4-56-020. - Applicability.
A.

Initiation. Consideration of a development agreement may be initiated by:
1.

Property owners or other persons having a legal or equitable interest in the property proposed to be subject to the agreement or an authorized
agent of the owner(s); or

2.
B.

A resolution of intention by the Council.

Fully effectuate. In construing the provisions of any development agreement executed in compliance with this Chapter, those provisions shall be
read to fully effectuate, and to be consistent with, the language of this Article, State law (Article 2.5 of the Government Code, cited above), and the

112/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
agreement itself.
C.

Discrepancies. If an apparent discrepancy between the meaning of these documents arises, reference shall be made to the following documents,
and in the following order:
1.

The terms of the development agreement itself;

2.

The provisions of this Chapter; and

3.

The provisions of State law (Article 2.5 of the Government Code, cited above).

Sec. 4-56-030. - Review Authority.
An application for a development agreement shall be considered by the Commission and decided by the Council in compliance with Section 4-56-040.G
(Notice and public hearings), below.
Sec. 4-56-040. - Application Filing, Processing, and Review.
A.

Application requirements. An owner of real property may request and apply through the Director to enter into a development agreement; provided,
the following:
1.

The development agreement, if approved, would be in the best interests of the City;

2.

The status of the applicant as the owner of the subject property is established to the satisfaction of the Director.
a.

Only a qualified applicant or authorized agent may file an application in compliance with this Chapter.

b.

A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development
agreement.

c.

The Director may require an applicant to submit proof of the applicant's interest in the real property and/or of the authority of the agent
to act for the applicant.

d.

The Director may obtain the opinion of the City Attorney as to the sufficiency of the applicant's interest in the real property to enter into
the agreement.

e.

The Director or City Attorney may require the submittal of a title report or other evidence to verify the applicant's legal or equitable
interests in the subject property.

3.

The application is made on forms approved by the Director and shall be accompanied by the information and materials identified in the
Department handout for development agreement applications;

B.

4.

The application is accompanied by the applicable fees, in compliance with Subsection C., (Processing and review fees) below; and

5.

The applicant shall be responsible for providing the evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection G.8. (Findings) below.

Director's action.
1.

The Director shall review the application and determine its completeness.

2.

Upon determining the application complete, the Director shall forward a copy of an agreement form proposed by an applicant to the City
Attorney for review.

3.
C.

The Director, in conjunction with the City Attorney, shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the Commission.

Processing and review fees.
1.

Processing fees. Processing fees, as established by the City's Fee Schedule, shall be collected for any application for a development agreement
made in compliance with this Chapter.

2.

Periodic reviews. Appropriate fees shall be established and collected for periodic reviews conducted by the Commission or review authority in
compliance with Section 4-56-070 (Periodic Review), below.

D.

Withdrawal of application. An applicant may withdraw an application filed in compliance with this Chapter. Any fee(s) required for processing the
application shall not be refunded.

E.

Form of agreement.
1.

Standard form. The Director may propose a form of development agreement which may be adopted by resolution of the Council as a standard
form for development agreements.

2.

Applicant's form. An applicant may submit a proposed form of agreement.

3.

Form of development agreement. Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the applicant.
This requirement may be met by designating the standard form of development agreement identified in Subparagraph 1., above and including
specific proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard form.

F.

Content of development agreement.
1.

Mandatory provisions. A development agreement entered into in compliance with this Chapter shall contain the mandatory provisions
specified by State law (Government Code Section 65865.2 [Agreement contents]).

2.

Permissive provisions. A development agreement entered into in compliance with this Chapter may contain the permissive provisions specified
by State law (Government Code Section 65865.2 [Agreement contents]).

113/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
G.

Notice and public hearings.
1.

Notice. Notice of the hearings, identified in Subparagraphs 3. and 4., below, shall be given in the form of a notice of intention to consider
approval of a development agreement in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65854, 65856, and 65867), Chapter 4-78 (Public
Hearings), and any other notice required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement.

2.

Planning agency. The Commission shall serve as the planning agency on development agreement applications in compliance with State law
(Government Code Section 65867).

3.

Commission's action. The Director, upon finding the application for a development agreement complete, shall set the application, together with
recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall forward a
written recommendation to the Council that it approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application. The Commission's
recommendation shall be supported by the findings identified in Subparagraph 8, below.

4.

Council's action. Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the City Clerk shall set the application and written recommendation of the
Commission for a public hearing before the Council. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the application in compliance with findings identified in Subparagraph 8, below. Matters not previously considered by
the Commission during its hearing may be referred back to the Commission for report and recommendation. The Commission need not hold a
public hearing when considering the Council's referral.

5.

Variances or exceptions. Nothing in a development agreement shall act as the grant of a Variance or exception to any requirement of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code, or limit the discretion of any review authority in approving or disapproving a Variance or exception.

6.

Ordinance. Approval of a development agreement shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall be in compliance with State law (Government
Code Section 65867.5) and shall contain the findings identified in Subparagraph 8, below, and the facts supporting them.

7.

Evidence. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the evidence in support of the findings.

8.

Findings. The development agreement shall be approved only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner. The
development agreement:
a.

Would be in the best interests of the City;

b.

Is in conformance with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan and the purpose and intent of any applicable specific plan,
and this Zoning and Subdivision Code;

c.

Would not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area, nor be detrimental or
injurious to property or persons in the general neighborhood or to the general welfare of the residents of the City; and

d.
9.

Is consistent with the provisions of State law (Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5.)

Irregularity in proceedings. No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding a proposed development agreement shall be void, invalid, or set
aside by a court by reason of any error or irregularity in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65801.)

10.

Referendum. The ordinance may be subjected to referendum in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65867.5).

Sec. 4-56-050. - Execution and Recordation.
A.

Effective date. The City shall not execute a development agreement until on or after the date on which the ordinance approving the agreement,
enacted in compliance with Subsection G.6., above, becomes effective.

B.

Mutual consent. A development agreement may be executed only on the mutual written consent of each party to the agreement.

C.

Conditioning approval. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the Director, Commission, or Council from conditioning
approval of a discretionary permit or entitlement on the execution of a development agreement where the condition is otherwise authorized by law.

D.

Recordation. Within 10 days after the effective date of a development agreement, or any modification or cancellation thereof, the City Clerk shall
have the agreement, the modification, or cancellation notice recorded with the County Recorder.

Sec. 4-56-060. - Environmental Review.
The approval or conditional approval of a development agreement in compliance with this Chapter shall be deemed a discretionary act for purposes of
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the City's CEQA guidelines.
Sec. 4-56-070. - Periodic Review.
A.

Periodic review required.
1.

Every development agreement, approved and executed, shall be subject to periodic reviews during the full term of the agreement.

2.

The development agreement shall be reviewed by the City, at least every 12 months, from the date the agreement is entered into.

3.

The review authority to conduct the periodic review may be designated in the agreement. If no review authority is designated, the review shall
be conducted by the Commission.

4.

Appropriate fees to cover the City's cost(s) to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant/contracting party in compliance
with Subsection 4-56-040.C., (Processing and review fees), above.

B.

The review hearing.

114/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
1.

The review authority shall conduct a public review hearing.

2.

The purpose of the review shall be to determine whether the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest has complied in good
faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement.

3.

The burden of proof shall be on the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest to demonstrate compliance, to the full
satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the review authority.

C.

Compliance assessment.
1.

If the review authority finds, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest has
complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement during the period under review, no further action is required.

2.

However, if the review authority finds, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest
has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review authority may
recommend to the Council that it order the agreement to be terminated or modified.

D.

Notice of hearing to terminate or modify. If the City determines to proceed with termination or modification of the agreement, the City shall give
notice to the property owner of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain the following:

E.

1.

The date, time, and place of the hearing;

2.

A statement as to whether or not the City proposes to terminate or modify the development agreement; and

3.

Other information which the City considers relevant to the nature of the proceeding.

Council's hearing on termination or modification.
1.

At the public hearing on termination or modification of the agreement, the applicant/ contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. The Council may refer the matter back to the review authority for further proceedings or for a report and
recommendation before making a final decision.

2.

At the conclusion of the hearing, or upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the review authority, the Council shall take final action
on the termination or modification. As part of that final decision, the Council may impose conditions.

3.

The decision of the Council shall be final.

Sec. 4-56-080. - Amendment or Cancellation of Development Agreement.
A.

Amendments or cancellations.
1.

Either party may propose an amendment to, or cancellation in whole or in part of, any development agreement.

2.

A development agreement may only be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual agreement of all parties to the agreement, or their
successor(s)-in-interest.

B.

Processing procedures.
1.

The requested amendment or cancellation shall be processed in the same manner identified by this Chapter for the adoption of a development
agreement.

2.

If the City initiates a proposed amendment to, or a cancellation in whole or in part of, the agreement, the City shall first give written notice to
the party executing the agreement of its intention to initiate the proceedings not less than 30 days in advance of the giving of public notice of
the hearing to consider the amendment or cancellation.

3.

Any amendment to the development agreement which does not relate to the duration of the agreement, allowed uses of the property, density
or intensity of use, height or size of proposed structures, provisions for reservation or dedication of land, or to any conditions, terms,
restrictions, and requirements relating to subsequent discretionary actions related to design, specifications, improvement, and construction, or
any other condition or covenant relating to the use of the property, shall not require a noticed public hearing before the parties execute an
amendment to the agreement.

Sec. 4-56-090. - E ect of Development Agreement.
A.

Policies, regulations, and rules. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the policies, regulations, and rules governing allowed
uses of the land, density, design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a
development agreement, are the policies, regulations, and rules in force at the time of execution of the agreement.

B.

State law. In compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65866), a development agreement shall not prevent the City, in subsequent
actions applicable to the property, from applying new policies, regulations, and rules which do not conflict with those policies, regulations, and rules
applicable to the property, nor shall a development agreement prevent the City from conditionally approving or disapproving any subsequent
development project application on the basis of existing or new policies, regulations, and rules.

ARTICLE 6 - SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 4-60. - APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Sections:

115/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-60-010. - Purpose.
The provisions of this Article constitute the City of Gustine Subdivision Ordinance. These provisions are intended to supplement, implement, and work
with the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410 et seq. of the California Government Code (hereafter referred to as the "Map Act"). This Article is not
intended to replace the Map Act, and must be used in conjunction with the Map Act in the preparation of subdivision applications, and the review,
approval, and improvement of proposed subdivisions.
Sec. 4-60-020. - Authority.
This Article is adopted in compliance with the Map Act as a "local ordinance," as the term is used in the Map Act. All provisions of the Map Act and
future amendments to the Map Act not incorporated into this Article shall, nevertheless, apply to all subdivision maps and proceedings under this
Article.
Sec. 4-60-030. - Applicability.
A.

Subdivision approval required. Each subdivision of land within the City shall be authorized through the approval of a map or other entitlement in
compliance with this Chapter.

B.

Conflicts with Map Act. In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of this Chapter and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.

C.

Compliance with other regulations required. The approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not authorize an exception or
deviation from any zoning regulation in this Zoning and Subdivision Code, or as an approval to proceed with any development in violation of other
applicable provisions of the Municipal Code or other applicable ordinances or regulations of the City.

Sec. 4-60-040. - Responsibility for Administration.
The Director and City Engineer are authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article and applicable provisions of the Map
Act for subdivisions within the City, except as otherwise provided by this Article.
Sec. 4-60-050. - Advisory Agency.
A.

Advisory agency established. The advisory agency for subdivision review shall be the Planning Commission.

B.

Authority and duties. The advisory agency shall perform the following duties, and as further detailed in Section 4-60-060 (Authority for Subdivision
Decisions).
1.

Recommend to the Council the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of Tentative Maps;

2.

Recommend to the Council the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of requests for exceptions to of the City's design and
improvement standards, in compliance with Section 4-60.090 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards);

3.

Recommend modifications of the requirements of this Article;

4.

Review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in adjacent cities, and in the unincorporated areas of Merced County in
compliance with the provisions of the Map Act when the advisory agency has elected to do so;

5.

Perform additional duties and exercise additional authorities as prescribed by law and by this Article.

Sec. 4-60-060. - Authority for Subdivision Decisions.
Table 6-1 (Subdivision Review Authority) identifies the City official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of
subdivision application and other decision required by this Article.
TABLE 6-1. SUBDIVISION REVIEW AUTHORITY

Applicable

Role of Review Authority (1)

Zoning and
Type of
Decision

Subdivision

Director

City Engineer

Planning

City Council

Commission

Code Section

Subdivisions
Tentative Map

4-61

Recommend

Recommend

Decision

Parcel Map

4-62

Recommend

Decision

Final Map

4-62

Recommend

Decision
116/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Certi cate of

4-64.020

Decision (2)

Appeal

Lot Line Adjustment

4-64.040

Decision (2)

Appeal

Parcel Merger

4-64.050

Decision (2)

Appeal

Reversion to Acreage

4-64.060

Recommend

Compliance

Decision

Appeal

Notes:
(1)

"Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review
authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the
decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 4-64 (Appeals).

(2)

The Director may defer action and refer the request to the Commission, so that the Commission may instead make the decision.

Sec. 4-60-070. - Type of Subdivision Approval Required.
Any subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more parcels shall require approval by the City in compliance with this Article. In general, the
procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a Tentative Map, and then the approval of a Parcel Map (for four or fewer parcels) or a Final
Map (for five or more parcels) to complete the subdivision process. The Tentative Map review process is used to evaluate the compliance of the
proposed subdivision with the adopted City standards, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Parcel and Final Maps are precise
engineering documents that detail the location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries in an approved subdivision and, after approval, are recorded in
the office of the County Recorder.
A.

B.

Tentative Map requirements. The filing and approval of a Tentative Map is required for a subdivision or resubdivision of:
1.

Four or fewer parcels, as authorized by Map Act Section 66428; and

2.

Five or more parcels, and all other types of subdivisions required to have Tentative Map approval by Map Act Section 66426.

Parcel and Final Map requirements. A Parcel or Final Map shall be required as follows:
1.

Parcel Map. The filing and approval of a Parcel Map (Chapter 4-62) shall be required for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels, with
or without a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Article 2, Chapter 1, except for the following subdivisions:
a.

Public agency or utility conveyances. Any conveyance of land, including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to a governmental
agency, public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way, unless the Director determines based on
substantial evidence that public policy necessitates a Parcel Map in an individual case;

b.

Rail right-of-way leases. Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by Section 230 of
the California Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days'
notice in writing); or

c.

Waived Parcel Map. A subdivision that has been granted a waiver of Parcel Map requirements in compliance with Section 4-62-030
(Waiver of Parcel Map).

2.
C.

Final Map. The filing and approval of a Final Map (Chapter 4-62) shall be required for a subdivision of five or more parcels.

Exemptions from subdivision approval requirements. The types of subdivisions identified by Map Act Sections 66411, 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2,
and 66426.5, or other applicable Map Act provision as not being subject to the requirements of the Map Act, and/or not being considered to be
divisions of land for the purposes of the Map Act, shall be exempt from the subdivision approval requirements of this Article.

Sec. 4-60-080. - Applications Deemed Approved.
Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956 or Map Act Article 2, Chapter 3 (Government Code
Sections 66452 et seq.), shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, and any conditions imposed by the review
authority, which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any zoning approval or Building Permit is issued. Parcel or Final Maps filed for record after
their Tentative Map is deemed approved shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this Article and the Map Act, including Map Act
Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474.
Sec. 4-60-090. - Exceptions to Subdivision Standards.

117/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
An exception to a provision of Chapter 4-68 (Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements) may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with
this Section. An exception shall not be used to waive or modify provisions of the Map Act, or any provision of this Article that is duplicated or
paraphrased from the Map Act.
A.

Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on forms provided by the Department together with the required filing fee. The
application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why
the subdivider believes the exception is justified.

B.

Filing and processing. A request for an exception shall be filed and processed as follows.
1.

An exception shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the Tentative Map, concurrently with the Tentative Map if the
exception request was filed at the same time.

2.

The approval of an exception shall not constitute approval of the Tentative Map and the approval or denial of an exception shall not
extend the time limits for the expiration of the map established by Section 4-61-140 (Expiration of Approved Tentative Map).

3.

An exception request may be filed after the approval of a Tentative Map, but shall be considered by the Tentative Map review authority in
the same manner (e.g., after a public hearing) as the original Tentative Map.

C.

Approval of exception. The Council shall have the authority to approve or deny exception requests in compliance with this Section. The Council
shall not grant an exception unless all the following findings are first made:
1.

For exceptions granting relief of a specified requirement or standard:
a.

Due to special circumstances or conditions affecting this property, the strict application of Chapter 4-68 would create an unnecessary
hardship;

b.

The exception is consistent with the intent of the requirements of Chapter 4-68 and does not constitute a grant of special privilege;

c.

The exception would not result in significant increased adverse environmental impacts compared to the strict application of the
requirements of Chapter 4-68; and

d.

The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare or injurious to
other property in the territory in which said property is situated.

e.
D.

The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed subdivision with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan.

Conditions of approval. In granting an exception, the Council shall secure substantially the same objectives of the regulations for which the
exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and
convenience, and to mitigate any environmental impacts in compliance with CEQA.

Sec. 4-60-100. - Appeals.
Any interested person may appeal any decision of the Director to the Commission, and may appeal any decision of the Commission to the Council, in
compliance with Chapter 4-64 (Appeals).
Sec. 4-60-110. - Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations.
A.

Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties specified by Map Act Division 2, Chapter 7, Article 1
and/or, where applicable, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as specified in Chapter 4-69 of this Zoning and Subdivision Code
(Enforcement and Penalties).

B.

Remedies. If construction activity on property subject to a Final Map or Parcel Map is occurring contrary to the Map Act, a requirement of the Map, or
any other Federal, State, or local law, rule, or ordinance, the City Engineer may order the activity stopped by written notice served on any person
responsible for the activity, in addition to the remedies outlined in Map Act Division 2, Chapter 7, Article 2. The responsible person shall immediately
stop the activity until authorized by the City Engineer to proceed. For the purposes of this Section, construction activities include, but are not limited
to, grading, earth moving, and/or tree removal.

CHAPTER 4-61. - TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
Sections:

Sec. 4-61-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval or disapproval of Tentative Maps, consistent with the requirements of the
Map Act.
Sec. 4-61-020. - Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents.
Tentative Map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the Department and the
City Engineer.

118/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-61-030. - Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing.
A.

B.

General filing and processing requirements. A Tentative Map application shall be submitted to the Department for processing, and shall be:
1.

Reviewed for completeness and accuracy;

2.

Referred to affected agencies;

3.

Reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) where applicable; and

4.

Evaluated in a staff report in compliance with Chapter 4-50 (Permit Application Filing and Processing).

Referral to affected agencies. The procedure provided by this Subsection is in addition to the procedures in Chapter 4-50 (Permit Application Filing
and Processing).
1.

Required referrals. The Director shall refer a Tentative Map application for review and comment to agencies that will be expected to provide
service to the proposed subdivision, including, as appropriate, City departments, County agencies, other cities, special districts, and local
agencies, public utilities, and state agencies.

2.

Time limits for referrals. As required by Map Act Sections 66453 through 66455.7, referral shall occur within five days of the Tentative Map
application being determined to be complete in compliance with Section 4-50-070 (Initial Application Review). An agency wishing to respond to a
referral shall provide the Department with its recommendations within 15 days after receiving the Tentative Map application.

Sec. 4-61-040. - Evaluation of Application.
After completion of the initial processing and the application being deemed complete in compliance with Section 4-50.070, the Director shall:
A.

Review and evaluate each Tentative Map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code,
the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Map Act, in compliance with Map Act Section 66474.2;

B.

Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with the findings in Section 4-61-070 (Tentative Map Approval or
Disapproval); and

C.

Prepare a staff report to the review authority describing the conclusions of the evaluations of the map, and recommending to the review
authority the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the Tentative Map. The staff report shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant
of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion (Section 4-64-030) at least three days before any hearing or action on the
Tentative Map by the review authority in compliance with Section 4-61-050 or 4-61-060

Sec. 4-61-050. - Planning Commission Review and Recommendation.
A.

The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed Tentative Map in compliance with Chapter 4-68 (Public Hearings), and consider the
recommendations of the Director, any agency comments on the map, and any public testimony; and

B.

The Commission shall review and evaluate each Tentative Map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code, the General Plan, any Specific Plan, and the Map Act. The evaluation shall be based on the staff report, information provided by an
initial study or environmental impact report (EIR), where applicable, and any public testimony received; and

C.

As required by Map Act Chapter 3, Article 2 (Tentative Maps), within 30 days after the filing of the report and recommendation of the Director with
the Commission, but no later than 50 days after the Tentative Map application was deemed complete in compliance with Section 4-50-070 (Initial
Application Review) recommend to the Council the approval, conditional approval, or denial the Tentative Map.

D.

A recommendation for the approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map shall be given only after the Commission first makes all findings
required by Section 4-61-070 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval). The Commission may recommend conditions of approval in compliance with
Section 4-61-080 (Conditions of Approval).

Sec. 4-61-060. - Council Review and Decision.
A.

As required by Map Act Chapter 3, Article 2 (Tentative Maps), at its next regular meeting following the filing of the Commission's report with the
Council in compliance with Section 4-61-050, the Council shall set the meeting date for its consideration of the Tentative Map and the Commission
recommendation, which shall be within 30 days thereafter. The Council shall then conduct the hearing, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the Tentative Map on the date it has set.

B.

The approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map shall be granted only after the Council first makes all findings required by Section 4-61-070
(Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval). The Council may adopt conditions of approval in compliance with Section 4-61-080 (Conditions of Approval).

Sec. 4-61-070. - Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval.
In order to approve or recommend the approval of a Tentative Map and conditions of approval, or to disapprove a Tentative Map, the review authority
shall first make the findings required by this Section.
A.

Required findings for approval. The review authority may approve a Tentative Map only after first finding that the proposed subdivision,
together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan, and that none
of the findings for denial in Subsection C. can be made. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision,

119/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6.
B.

Supplemental findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a Tentative Map by Subsection A. above, the review authority shall
not approve a Tentative Map unless it can also make the following findings, when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal.
1.

Construction of improvements. In the case of a Tentative Map for a subdivision that will require a subsequent Parcel Map, it is in the
interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to
require the construction of road improvements within a specified time after recordation of the Parcel Map.

2.

Condominiums. Any applicable findings required by Section 4-64-030 for condominium conversions.

3.

Waiver of Parcel Map. The findings required by Section 4-62-030 (Waiver of Parcel Map), if waiver of a Parcel Map has been requested with
the Tentative Map application.

C.

Findings requiring denial. A Tentative Map shall be denied if the review authority makes any of the following findings (from Map Act 66474,
except as noted):
1.

The proposed subdivision including design and improvements is not consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan;

2.

The site is not physically suitable for the type or proposed density of development;

3.

The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

4.

The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health or safety problems;

5.

The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through
or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may not be made if the review authority finds that alternate easements
for access or use will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This finding shall
apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is
hereby granted to the review authority to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property
within the proposed subdivision;

6.

The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system would result in violation of existing
requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board;

7.

A preliminary soils report or geological hazard report indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to
provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or other applicable review authority that the conditions can be
corrected in the plan for the development; or

8.

The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, any other applicable
provisions of the Municipal Code, and the Subdivision Map Act.

Sec. 4-61-080. - Conditions of Approval.
Along with the approval of a Tentative Map, the Council may adopt any conditions of approval deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code, provided that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.
Sec. 4-61-090. - E ective Date of Tentative Map Approval.
The approval of a Tentative Map shall become effective for the purposes of filing a Parcel or Final Map, including compliance with conditions of
approval, immediately after the adoption of the resolution of decision by the Council.
Sec. 4-61-100. - Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions.
A subdivider may request changes to an approved Tentative Map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a Parcel or Final Map in
compliance with this Section. Changes to a Parcel or Final Map after recordation are subject to Section 4-62-120 (Amendments to Recorded Maps).
A.

Limitation on allowed changes. Changes to a Tentative Map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this Section include
major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved lots (but no increase in
the number of approved lots), and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by Subsection D. of this
Section. All other proposed changes shall require the filing and processing of a new Tentative Map.

B.

Application for changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the Department, using the forms furnished by the
Department, together with the following additional information:
1.

A statement identifying the Tentative Map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes
requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes; and

2.
C.

Any additional information deemed appropriate by the Department.

Processing. Proposed changes to a Tentative Map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original Tentative
Map, except as otherwise provided by this Section.

D.

Findings for approval. The review authority shall not modify the approved Tentative Map or conditions of approval unless it first finds that the

120/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by
Sections 4-61-070.A and B. can still be made:
1.

There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval;

2.

There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval; or

3.

A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code.

E.

Effect of changes on time limits. Approved changes to a Tentative Map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new
Tentative Map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 4-61-130 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration).

Sec. 4-61-110. - Completion of Subdivision Process.
A.

Compliance with conditions, improvement plans. After approval of a Tentative Map pursuant to this Chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill
the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file
and receive approval of improvement plans in compliance with Chapter 4-68 (Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements), before
constructing any required improvements.

B.

Parcel or Final Map preparation, filing and recordation.
1.

A Parcel Map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded in compliance with Chapter 4-62 (Parcel
Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision, unless a Parcel Map has been waived in compliance with Section 4-62-030 (Waiver of Parcel
Map).

2.

A Final Map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 4-62 (Parcel Maps
and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision.

Sec. 4-61-120. - Vesting Tentative Maps.
The preparation, filing, processing, approval or disapproval, of a Vesting Tentative Map shall comply with Map Act Sections 66452 and 66498.1 et seq.
Sec. 4-61-130. - Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration.
An approved Tentative Map is valid for 24 months after its effective date (Section 4-61.090), except as otherwise provided by Map Act Sections 66452.6,
66452.11, 66452.13, or 66463.5. At the end of 24 months, the approval shall expire and become void unless:
A.

A Parcel or Final Map, and related security and improvement agreements, have been filed with the City Engineer in compliance with Chapter 462 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps); or

B.

An extension of time has been granted in compliance with Section 4-61-140

Expiration of an approved Tentative Map or vesting Tentative Map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new
Tentative Map application is filed and fees are paid.
Sec. 4-61-140. - Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps.
When a subdivider has not completed all Tentative Map or Vesting Tentative Map conditions of approval and filed a Parcel or Final Map with the City
within the time limits established by Section 4-61-130, time extensions may be granted in compliance with this Section.
A.

Filing of extension request. An extension request shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Department on or before the date of expiration
of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee.

B.

Approval of extension. The Council may grant one 12-month extension to the initial time limit, only after finding that:
1.

There have been no changes to the provisions of the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan or this Zoning and Subdivision Code
applicable to the project since the approval of the Tentative Map;

2.

There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the General Plan or other
standards of this Zoning and Subdivision Code apply to the project; and

3.

There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or
disposal facilities, roads or schools so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project.

A time extension of more than 12 months may be granted only in compliance with Map Act Section 66452.6.
CHAPTER 4-62. - PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
Sections:

Sec. 4-62-010. - Purpose.

121/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
This Chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of Parcel and Final Maps, consistent with the requirements
of the Map Act.

Sec. 4-62-020. - Parcel Maps.
As required by Sections 4-60-070 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), and 4-61-110 (Completion of Subdivision Process), a Parcel Map shall be filed
and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a Parcel Map is waived
as set forth in Section 4-62-030. A Parcel Map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Section 4-62-040, et seq.
Sec. 4-62-030. - Waiver of Parcel Map.
A subdivider may request the waiver of the requirement for a Parcel Map, and the waiver may be granted, in compliance with the Map Act Section
66428, provided that the review authority shall first find that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision
Code and the Map Act as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities,
water supply availability, environmental protection, and all other applicable requirements of this Article and the Map Act.
Sec. 4-62-040. - Parcel Map Form and Content.
A Parcel Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the
State of California. Parcel Map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the
Department.
Sec. 4-62-050. - Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps.
A.

Filing with the City Engineer. The Parcel Map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 4-62-040 shall be submitted to
the City Engineer. The Parcel Map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code and the Map Act.

B.

Review of Parcel Map. The City Engineer shall:
1.

Determine whether all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is
technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map; and

2.

Obtain verification from the Department that the Parcel Map conforms to the approved Tentative Map and that any conditions of approval for
which that office is responsible have been completed.

If the Parcel Map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and
resubmit the Parcel Map, together with all required data, if the Tentative Map has not expired.
Sec. 4-62-060. - Parcel Map Approval.
After determining that the Parcel Map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with Section 4-62-030.A, the Director shall forward the
Parcel Map to the Planning Commission for a recommendation. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval and forward to
the Council for action. If the Council approvals the Parcel Map, the map shall be transmitted by the City Engineer to the County Recorder for filing in
compliance with Map Act Section 66450.
Sec. 4-62-070. - Final Maps.
As required by Section 4-60-070 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), a Final Map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process
for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A Final Map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Section 4-62-080 et seq.
Sec. 4-62-080. - Final Map Form and Content.
A Final Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the
State of California. Final Map submittal shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the Department. A Final Map
submittal shall also include a digital copy of the Final Map, prepared using computer software and standards specified by the City Engineer.
Sec. 4-62-090. - Filing and Processing of Final Maps.
A.

Filing with City Engineer. The Final Map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 4-62-080 shall be submitted to the City
Engineer. The Final Map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision
Code and the Map Act.

B.

Review of Final Map. The City Engineer shall review the Final Map and all accompanying materials, and shall:
1.

Determine whether all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is
technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map; and

122/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
2.

Obtain verification from the Department that the Final Map conforms to the approved Tentative Map and that any conditions of approval for which
responsible have been completed.

If the Final Map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and
resubmit the Final Map, together with all required data, if the Tentative Map has not expired.
C.

Multiple Final Maps. Multiple Final Maps may be filed if the subdivider included a statement of intention with the Tentative Map that he or she would
submit multiple phased Final Maps.

Sec. 4-62-100. - Final Map Approval.
After determining that the Final Map is in compliance with Section 4-62-080, and is technically correct, the City Engineer shall execute the City
Engineer's certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the Final Map to the Council for action, as follows.
A.

Review and approval by Council. The Council shall approve or disapprove the Final Map at its next regular meeting after the City Clerk receives
the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent
of the City Engineer and the subdivider.
1.

Criteria for approval. The Council shall approve the Final Map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code that were applicable at the time that the Tentative Map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with
the approved Tentative Map.

2.

Waiver of errors. The Council may approve a Final Map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or
the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the Tentative Map, when the Council finds that the failure of the map is a technical or
inadvertent error which, in the determination of the Council does not materially affect the validity of the map.

3.

Approval by inaction. If the Council does not approve or disapprove the Final Map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension,
and the map conforms to all applicable requirements, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify its approval on the map.

B.

Map with dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the Final Map, the Council shall accept, accept subject to
improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the Final Map. If
the City Council rejects the offer of dedication, the offer shall remain open and may be accepted by the City Council at a later date pursuant to
Map Act Section 66477.2. Any termination of an offer of dedication shall be processed in compliance with Map Act Section 66477.2 and the
street vacation procedure.

C.

Map with incomplete improvements. If improvements required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code, conditions of approval, or other law have
not been completed at the time of approval of the Final Map, the Council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the City as
specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 4-68-080 (Improvement Agreements and Security), as a condition precedent to the approval of
the Final Map.

D.

Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the Council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the City Clerk shall transmit
the Final Map to County Recorder for filing.

Sec. 4-62-110. - Supplemental Information Sheets.
In addition to the information required to be included in Parcel Maps and Final Maps (Sections 4-62-040 and 4-62-080, respectively), additional
information may be required to be submitted and recorded simultaneously with a Final Map as required by this Section.
A.

Preparation and form. The additional information required by this Section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the
Director determines that the type of information required would be more clearly and understandably presented in the form of a report or other
document. The additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for Parcel
Maps by Section 4-62-040 (Parcel Map Form and Content).

B.

Content of information sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following statements and information:
1.

Title. A title sheet, including the number assigned to the accompanying Parcel or Final Map by the City Engineer, the words "Supplemental
Information Sheet;"

2.

Explanatory statement. A statement following the Title sheet that the supplemental information sheet is recorded along with the subject
Parcel or Final Map, and that the additional information being recorded with the Parcel or Final Map is for informational purposes,
describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title of interest;

3.

Location map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed one inch equals 2,000 feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision
within the City;

4.

Soils or geologic hazards reports. When a soils report or geological hazard report has been prepared, the existence of the report shall be
noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report; and

5.

Information required by conditions of approval. Any information required by the review authority to be included on the supplemental
information sheets because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property, including any other easements or
dedications.

123/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-62-120. - Amendments to Recorded Maps.
A recorded Parcel or Final Map shall be modified to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision only as
set forth in this Section.
A.

Corrections. In the event that errors in a Parcel or Final Map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, the
corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with Article 7, Chapter 3 of
the Map Act. For the purposes of this Section, "errors" include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which
an error is not ascertainable from the Parcel or Final Map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any other map
error or omission as approved by the City Engineer that does not affect any property right, including but not limited to lot numbers, acreage,
street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors
other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was
incorrectly shown, or that has been changed.

B.

Changes to approved subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including but
not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the
construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 4-68-080 (Improvement Agreements
and Security), a new tentative and Parcel or Final Map shall be filed and approved as required by Section 4-60-070 (Type of Subdivision Approval
Required).

CHAPTER 4-64. - ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
Sections:

Sec. 4-64-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes requirements consistent with the Map Act for Certificates of Compliance, Condominiums and Condominium Conversions, Lot
Line Adjustments, Parcel Mergers, and Reversion to Acreage.
Sec. 4-64-020. - Certi cates of Compliance.
The City shall process and approve or disapprove applications for Certificates of Compliance as provided by Map Act Sections 66499.34 and 66499.35,
and as follows.
A.

Application. An application for the approval of a Certificate of Compliance or Conditional Certificate of Compliance shall be filed with the
Director and include the information required by the Director, together with the processing fee specified by the City Fee Schedule.

B.

Review by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the completed application in the light of public records and applicable law. If the City
Engineer is able to determine from this review that the parcel is clearly in compliance with the provisions of this Article and the Subdivision Map
Act, a Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for the parcel and delivered the County Recorder for recordation. If the City Engineer is unable to
determine from this review that the parcel is clearly in compliance, the procedures identified in Map Act Section 66499.35 shall apply.

Sec. 4-64-030. - Condominiums and Condominium Conversion.
Condominiums and condominium conversions shall comply with the following requirements.
A.

Condominiums. When a residential structure is proposed at the time of construction as a condominium, community apartment project, or stock
cooperative, a Tentative Map for the project shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and
shall be processed, approved or denied in the same manner in compliance with Chapter 4-61 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing). Chapter 462 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps) determines whether a Parcel or Final Map shall also be filed.

B.

Condominium Conversions. A condominium conversion is the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by
Civil Code Section 1351.
1.

Approvals required. A conversion shall require the approval of a Tentative Map, and Parcel or Final Map, except where a Parcel Map, or
Tentative and Final Map are waived in compliance with Map Act Sections 66428(b) or 66428.1, for the conversion of a mobile home park. If
a Parcel Map is waived, a Tentative Map shall still be required.

2.

Application filing and processing. A Tentative Map for a condominium conversion shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents
and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 4-61
(Tentative Map Filing and Processing), except as otherwise provided by the following provisions of this Section.

3.

Application contents. Condominium conversion applications shall include the same information and materials as Tentative Map
applications, except for conversions of residential projects, which shall also include the following information and materials.
a.

Tentative Map. The Tentative Map for a condominium, community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing
dwelling units to a stock cooperative need not show the buildings or the manner in which the airspace above the property shown on

124/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
the map are to be divided. However, the applicant shall provide an illustration of how subdivision will occur to enable verification of
the accuracy of the legal descriptions on deeds for the transfer of ownership of the units.
b.

Verification of stock cooperative vote. If the development being converted to a condominium is a stock cooperative, the application
shall also include verification of the vote required by Map Act Section 66452.10.

c.

Relocation assistance program. A program proposed by the applicant that will assist tenants displaced through the conversion in
relocating to equivalent or better housing.

d.
4.

Vacancy rate assessment. An assessment of the vacancy rate in multi-family housing within the City.

Staff report. The staff report on the Tentative Map for the condominium conversion (Section 4-64-020) shall be provided to the subdivider
and each tenant of the subject property at least three days before any hearing or action on the Tentative Map by the Commission or
Council.

5.

Public notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition to that required by Chapter 4-68 (Public Hearings):
a.

Tenant notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing or prospective tenants as set forth in Map Act Sections 66452.8 and
66452.9, and shall provide the Department satisfactory proof that the notice was given; and

b.

Public hearing notice. Notice of a public hearing on the Tentative Map shall be provided to all tenants of the subject property, as
required by Map Act Section 66451.3.

6.

Approval of conversion, required findings.
a.

Time limit, stock cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall
occur within 120 days of the application being found complete in compliance with Section 4-61-030 (Tentative Map Filing, Initial
Processing). The 120-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the City.

b.

Conversion findings, residential projects. Approval of a tentative or Final Map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of
residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative shall not be granted unless
the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66427.1 are first made.

7.

Completion of conversion. The filing, approval and recordation of a Parcel Map or Final Map in compliance with Chapter 4-62 (Parcel Maps
and Final Maps) shall be required to complete the subdivision process, except where a Parcel Map, or Tentative and Final Map are waived
for the conversion of a mobile home park in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(b).

Sec. 4-64-040. - Lot Line Adjustment.
A Lot Line Adjustment is permissible in compliance with Map Act Section 66412(d), and as follows.
A.

Application requirements. An application for a Lot Line Adjustment shall be filed with the Director and shall include the information required
by the Director, together with the processing fee specified by the City Fee Schedule.

B.

Lot line adjustment approval. After consultation with the City Engineer, the Director shall approve a lot line adjustment provided that all
criteria identified in Map Act Section 66412(d) are met to the Director's satisfaction. After City approval, the applicant shall be responsible for
recording the approval document and paying the necessary fees charged by the County Recorder for recording Lot Line Adjustment approval
documents in compliance with the Map Act.

Sec. 4-64-050. - Parcel Merger.
A.

Procedures for merger of parcels. Two or more parcels may be merged as follows.
1.

Parcels may be merged in compliance with Map Act Chapter 3, Article 1.5. A parcel or unit may be merged with a contiguous parcel or unit held
by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel
size as identified by this Zoning and Subdivision Code applicable to the parcels or units of land, and if all of the requirements of Map Act Section
66451.11 are satisfied.

2.

Parcels may also be merged in compliance with Map Act Sections 66499.20-1/2, or 66499.20-3/4; provided that a merger in compliance with
Map Act Section 66499.20-3/4 shall require the recordation of an instrument evidencing the merger in the same manner as required by Map Act
Section 66499.20-1/2.

B.

Requirements for unmerger of parcels. The unmerger of parcels within the City shall comply with Map Act Chapter 3, Article 1.7.

Sec. 4-64-060. - Reversion to Acreage.
A.

A Reversion to Acreage shall be initiated, processed, reviewed, and approved or denied in compliance with Map Act Chapter 6, Article 1

B.

An application for reversion submitted by a property owner shall include all information required by the Department, and shall include the fee
required by the City Fee Schedule.

C.

A Parcel Map may be filed to revert to acreage land previously subdivided that consists of four or less contiguous parcels, in compliance with Map Act
Section 66499.20-1/4.

CHAPTER 4-66. - DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS

125/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Sections:

Sec. 4-66-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees, in conjunction with subdivision approval.
Sec. 4-66-020. - Applicability.
Each proposed subdivision shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter for dedications, reservations, or the payment of fees.
Sec. 4-66-030. - Park Land Dedications and Fees.
A.

Purpose. This Section provides for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees to the City for park and recreational purposes as a condition of
the approval of a Tentative Map. This Section is enacted as authorized by the provisions of Chapter 4, Article 3 of the Map Act, also known as the
"Quimby Act."

B.

Applicability.
1.

Land dedication and/or fee payment required. As a condition of Tentative Map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee, at
the option of the Council, in compliance with this Section for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreation facilities
to serve the subdivision.

2.

Exemptions. The provisions of this Section do not apply to industrial or commercial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives
which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are
added, or to any other subdivision exempted by Map Act Section 66477.

C.

Amount of parkland required.
1.

General standard. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety require that six acres of property
for each 1,000 persons residing within this City be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes.

2.

Dedication requirement for residential subdivisions. The amount of contiguous acreage required to be dedicated by a residential subdivider
for park and recreational purposes shall be based upon the number of dwelling units expected in the subdivision. The required dedication shall
be computed using the following formula:
X = .006(U)(P)
Where:
X = Amount of parkland required, in acres.
U = Total number of approved dwelling units in the subdivision.
P = Average number of persons per dwelling unit:
3.5 for detached single-family dwellings
2.5 for duplexes, and multi-family dwellings containing four or fewer units
2.0 for multi-family dwellings with five or more units and mobile homes

D.

Fees in lieu of land.
1.

If the entire parkland obligation for a proposed residential subdivision is not satisfied by dedication in compliance with Subsection C. above, the
subdivider shall pay a fee to the City as determined by the Council through negotiations with the subdivider.

E.

Criteria for requiring dedication and fees. In subdivisions of over 50 lots, the City may require the subdivider to dedicate both land and pay a fee, as
follows:
1.

Determination of land or fee. Whether the City accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of
both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

2.

a.

The General Plan, and the compatibility of dedication with the General Plan;

b.

Topography, geology, access, size, shape and the location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

c.

Feasibility of dedication; and

d.

Availability of previously acquired park property.

Procedure for determining land or fee. The review authority shall determine whether the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay in-lieu fees, or
provide a combination of both, at the time of Tentative Map approval. The determination of the review authority shall be based on a report and
recommendation from the Director. The recommendation by the Director and the action of the review authority shall consider the factors in
Subsection E.1 above, and shall include the following:
a.

The amount of land required;

126/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
b.

Whether a fee shall be charged in lieu of land;

c.

Whether land and a fee shall be required;

d.

The location and suitability of the park land to be dedicated or use of in-lieu fees; and

e.

The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

The determination of the City as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final
and conclusive.
3.

Land and fees. A requirement for both land dedication and fee payment shall comply with the following standards.
a.

When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the General Plan or applicable specific plan as the site for a local park, that
portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes, and a fee computed as provided by Subsection D. shall be paid for any additional land
that would have been required to be dedicated by Subsection C.

b.

When a major part of the local park or recreational site has been acquired by the City and only a small portion of land is needed from the
subdivision to complete the site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated, and a fee computed as provided by Subsection D. shall be paid
in an amount equal to the value of the land that would otherwise have been required to be dedicated by Subsection C. The fees shall be
used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility serving the subdivision.

4.

Credit for improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements on dedicated land, the value of the improvements
together with any installed equipment shall be a credit against the required fees or land.

F.

Suitability of land to be dedicated. Each park site proposed for dedication in compliance with this Section shall be physically suited for the intended
use.
1.

Land which is made part of a park site for subdivision design purposes, but which is physically unsuited for park use, shall not be considered
when calculating the area of the park site provided in compliance with this Section. The park space provided shall be calculated from the road
rights-of-way and interior property lines abutting the site, and not from any abutting roadway centerline.

2.

If the Council determines that any of the land proposed to be dedicated is not suitable for park use, it may reject all or any portion of the land
offered, and in that event the subdivider shall instead pay a fee in compliance with Subsection D., above.

G.

Conveyance of land, payment of fees. Real property being dedicated for park purposes shall be conveyed by the Parcel or Final Map in fee simple
absolute, to the City by the subdivider, free and clear of all encumbrances except those which, in the opinion of City Attorney, will not interfere with
use of the property for park and recreational purposes, and which the Council agrees to accept. The amount of required fees shall be deposited with
the City at the time of submittal of a Parcel or Final Map. The fees shall be held by the City until the map is recorded, or the time for recordation
expires. The subdivider shall provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land, and title insurance approved by the City Attorney in favor
of the City in an amount equal to the value of the land.

CHAPTER 4-68. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-68-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public improvements within
subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels that are
consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.
Sec. 4-68-020. - Applicability of Design and Improvement Standards.
The requirements of this Chapter apply as follows:
A.

Extent of required improvements. Each subdivision of four or fewer, and five or more parcels, shall provide the improvements required by this
Chapter, and any additional improvements required by the review authority through conditions of approval.

B.

Applicable design standards, timing of installation. The subdivider shall construct all on- and off-site improvements according to standards
approved by the City Engineer. No Final or Parcel Map shall be presented to the Council for approval until the subdivider either completes the
required improvements, or enters into a subdivision improvement agreement with the City for the work.

C.

Subdivision improvement standards—Conditions of approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this
Chapter and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in compliance with Section 4-61-070 (Tentative Map
Approval or Disapproval), shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved Tentative Map (Section 4-61-080). The design,
construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the requirements of the City Engineer.

D.

Oversizing of improvements.
1.

At the discretion of the review authority, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may
also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may
be required to be dedicated to the City, in compliance with Article 6, Chapter 4 of the Map Act.

127/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
2.

In the event that oversizing is required, the City shall comply with all applicable provisions of Map Act Sections 66485 et seq., including the rei
provisions of Map Act Section 66486.

3.

If a parcel proposed for subdivision is subject to an existing reimbursement agreement, the subdivider shall pay the required
reimbursement prior to the recordation of the Final Map, or the issuance of a building permit for construction on the parcel, whichever
occurs first.

E.

Exceptions. Exceptions to the requirements of this Chapter may be requested and considered in compliance with Section 4-60-090 (Exceptions
to Subdivision Standards).

Sec. 4-68-030. - Subdivision Design Standards.
A.

Purpose. This Section establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public
improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new
usable parcels that are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

B.

Applicability. Each subdivision shall be designed in compliance with the standards of this Section, except where an exception is granted in
compliance with Section 4-61-090 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards).

C.

Accessibility. A subdivision of five or more single-family residential parcels shall be designed and constructed so that a minimum of 10 percent of the
single-family dwellings are one-story. In addition, each of the required one-story dwellings shall include features to enhance disabled accessibility,
including wide doors, grab bars, etc., as determined by the review authority; or the applicant shall demonstrate to the review authority that all
prospective buyers are offered the installation of those accessibility features as a no-cost item.

D.

Density of a residential subdivision. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a proposed subdivision shall not exceed the density
established by the General Plan for the site and the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the applicable zoning district.

E.

Streets and street layout. The layout, design, and construction of proposed streets shall comply with the General Plan, the City's standard
specifications for public improvements, and the energy conservation standards of Subsection G.
1.

Interconnected streets. Streets proposed within a new subdivision shall be interconnected and shall connect with adjacent streets external to
the subdivision, to provide multiple routes for pedestrian and vehicle trips from, to, and within the subdivision, as determined by the review
authority to be appropriate.

2.

Street extensions and stub streets.
a.

Street extensions. Where the subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, streets in the subdivision shall be extended to the adjacent
unsubdivided land, as prescribed by the review authority, to provide access to the unsubdivided land in the event of its future subdivision.

b.

Stub street improvements. In the case of stub-end streets extending to the boundary of the property, a barricade, of a design approved
by the City Engineer, shall be constructed at the end of the stub-end street, pending the extension of the street into adjacent property.
Where required by the review authority, a temporary connection to another street, or a temporary turnaround, shall be provided by the
subdivider.

c.

Required notification. The developer shall install a sign at the location of a future street extension to give notice to future homebuyers
that the street will be opened or extended at some time in the future. The sign shall be installed prior to the sale of the first unit within the
project.

3.

Dead-end streets. Subdivision design shall not include dead-end, including cul-de-sac streets, except where through streets cannot be provided
because of existing development or an environmental feature requiring protection and/or preservation (e.g., a creek channel).
a.

An approved dead-end street shall generally be maintained as a private roadway, and shall not be accepted by the City for dedication or
maintenance, except for extraordinary circumstances determined by the Council, in its sole and absolute discretion.

b.

The length of a dead-end street shall not exceed 500 feet, except that a dead-end street of up to 600 feet in length may be permitted,
provided that it has frontage of no more than 16 lots.

4.

Intersection design. All streets shall normally intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except when it can be shown that any other street
pattern will improve design of the subdivision without hindering traffic safety. Street intersections may be narrowed at each corner with trafficcalming features, in compliance with the City's standard specifications for public improvements.

5.

Pedestrian walkways away from street frontages. As part of subdivision approval, the City may require dedicated and improved pedestrian
walkways in locations away from street frontages where necessary to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access to a public facility or to
otherwise provide convenient connections between existing pedestrian routes. Where walkways are required, the City Engineer shall specify
standards for their design and construction.

6.

Street dedications. A street that is not constructed to City standards will not be accepted by the City for dedication as a public street; however,
even a street that complies with all applicable City standards may not be accepted for dedication. Acceptance of a street dedication is at the
discretion of the Council.

F.

Block design. See Figure 7-1.
1.

Block length. No block face shall exceed a length of 500 feet. No block perimeter shall exceed 2,000 feet. For the purposes of this Section, a
"block face" is the edge of a block comprised of the front property lines of the parcels within the block.

128/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
2.

Block width. The width of each block shall be sufficient for an ultimate layout of two tiers of lots within the block, preferably with a paved alley betw
with the lots sized in compliance with this Section. The review authority may approve alternative designs where it determines that surrounding sub
property lines, or topographic conditions require other standards.
Figure 7-1. Block Standards

G.

Parcel design. The size, shape and arrangement of proposed parcels shall comply with this Section, and with any General Plan policy, specific plan
requirement, or other Municipal Code provision that applies to proposed subdivisions.
1.

General parcel design standards.
a.

Each proposed parcel shall be determined by the review authority to be "buildable" because it contains at least one building site that can
accommodate a structure in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

b.

No parcel shall be created that is divided by a City boundary line.

c.

No subdivision shall be designed to leave unsubdivided islands, strips or parcels, or property unsuitable for subdividing, which is not either
accepted by the City or other appropriate entity for public use, or maintained as common area within the development.

2.

Parcel area. The minimum area for new parcels shall be as required by Article 2 of this Land Use Code for the applicable zoning district, except
as otherwise provided by this Section.
a.

Calculation of area. When calculating the area of a parcel to determine compliance with this Section, Article 2, or the General Plan, the
following shall be deducted from the gross area of any parcel, regardless of whether they may be used by the general public or are
reserved for residents of the subdivision:

b.

(1)

A vehicular or non-vehicular access easement through the parcel;

(2)

An easement for an open drainage course, whether a ditch, natural channel or floodway;

(3)

Other easement restricting the use of the property; or

(4)

The "flag pole" (access strip) of a flag lot.

Minimum lot area requirements for common interest projects. The minimum lot area requirements of Article 2 shall not apply to
condominiums, condominium conversions, and townhouses, but shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the
location of the condominium or townhouse.

3.

Dimensions. The dimensions of new parcels shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 4-24-020 (Zoning District Subdivision and
Density Standards), or as otherwise required by the review authority.

4.

Lot line orientation. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street on straight streets and shall be approximately radial on curved streets.

5.

Parcel configuration. The layout of proposed parcels and streets shall be designed to use land efficiently and minimize site disturbance in

129/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
terms of cuts and fills and the removal of vegetation. See also the lot design provisions regarding energy conservation in Subsection G.
a.

Street frontage required. Each proposed parcel shall have frontage on a public or private street. The frontage width shall be at least the
minimum lot width required by the applicable zoning district, except where a flag lot is approved in compliance with Subsection F.5.d (Flag
lots).

b.

Double-frontage lots. No parcel shall have streets abutting both the front and rear lot lines, except when necessary because of
topographical or other physical conditions or where access from one of the roads is prohibited. (An alley is not considered a street for the
purposes of this Section.)
Vehicular access onto a double frontage lot shall generally be from the street with the lowest existing and projected traffic volumes, but
with each proposed building designed so that its primary facade faces the higher volume street. The review authority may authorize
alternative access locations where appropriate because of localized traffic conditions, and/or nearby residential areas that would be
adversely affected by increased traffic.

c.

Cul-de-sac parcels. The minimum street frontage width for each parcel on a cul-de-sac street shall be 25 feet. The minimum depth of a
parcel on a cul-de-sac shall be an average of 90 feet.

d.

Flag lots. Flag lots shall generally not be permitted. A flag lot may be approved only where the review authority determines that unusual
depth or other characteristic of a parcel to be subdivided prevents one or more proposed parcels from having a frontage width equal to
the required minimum lot width. Where allowed, the "flag pole" portion of a flag lot shall have a minimum width of 20 feet; provided that
the review authority may require additional width depending upon the length of the flag pole and traffic safety sight distance
considerations. No more than two parcels shall be provided access from a single flag pole.

4.

Driveway standards. Proposed parcels shall be designed to accommodate driveways designed in compliance with Section 4-36-100 (Driveways
and Site Access).

H.

Energy conservation. Each proposed subdivision shall be designed to provide maximum opportunities for energy conservation, including
opportunities for passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities, in compliance with Map Act Section 66473.1, as follows.
1.

Street layout. The streets proposed in a subdivision shall be planned in a primarily east-west orientation where feasible.

2.

Lot and building site design. Proposed lots shall be designed, where feasible, to provide building sites that permit the orientation of structures
in east-west alignment for southern exposure, and to take advantage of existing shade or prevailing breezes.

3.

Solar Energy Design and Installation: Subdivisions of single family lots, duplex, and multifamily lots for twenty (20) or more units, must
construct and install solar design energy systems for 50% or more of the total units and 50% of the units shall be constructed to accept
solar design energy systems. Commercial, office, industrial lots where development is equivalent to 20,000 square feet or larger shall be
required to install and utilize solar design energy systems. (Added at request of City Council and Planning Commission./April 2008)

Sec. 4-68-040. - Site Preparation and Subdivision Construction.
A.

Grading. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, a grading plan prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer shall be submitted to the City
Engineer. Grading plans shall show the elevations of the natural ground at all lot corners, the finished grade at corners, the finished pad elevation,
finished floor elevations, rates and directions of all drainage swales, and finished sidewalk elevations at all front lot lines and existing topographic
elevations and drainage direction 100 feet outside the boundary of proposed project area and/or map.
1.

Minimum slopes. The minimum grade of all drainage swales on lots shall be one-half of one percent.

2.

Pad elevation, residential. The building pad elevation of residential lots shall be established at a minimum of 10 inches above the design
sidewalk elevation at the lowest point of the lot. The finished floor elevation of slab floor houses shall be a minimum of 16 inches above the
sidewalk elevation. The pad elevation of all residential lots shall be established at least one foot above the maximum water surface in an
adjacent storm drain channel or the ponded surface in an adjacent sump for collection of storm drain waters. An exception may be permitted in
the case of a proposed subdivision served by a storm drain pump station.

3.

Drainage plan. No inter-lot or "cross drainage" shall be permitted. All lots shall drain their own water to the public street, approved public or
private drainage facility, or natural drainage course without passing through or across an adjacent lot. No lot shall drain water over the bank of
a flood control channel.

4.

Grading practices. All grading within the City shall employ the best available management practices, as determined by the City Engineer, to
minimize erosion and sedimentation, and unnecessary grading. Each building site on sloping parcels shall be individually prepared; no mass
grading shall be allowed.

5.

Grading exceptions. Specific exceptions to the above requirements may be authorized at the discretion of the City Engineer. Exceptions are to
be for an individual lot or at most a tier of lots, and shall not to be construed as extending to an entire subdivision.

6.

As-built grading plan. Upon completion of grading operations the owner shall furnish to the City Engineer two prints of an as-built grading plan
prepared by the owner's engineer.

B.

Erosion and sediment control. A proposed subdivision shall be designed so that all grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control
measures.

Sec. 4-68-050. - Subdivision Improvement Requirements.

130/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
A.

Bicycle paths. The subdivider shall construct bicycle paths within an approved subdivision as per the Bicycle Master Plan or as determined by the review
In the event that the review authority determines that bicycle path construction within a subdivision would be infeasible or constitute unsound engineer
review authority may grant the subdivider the option to pay into a bicycle path fund an amount approved by the City Council.

B.

Bridges and major thoroughfares. The City may assess and collect fees as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the
actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares in compliance with Map Act Section 66484, after the City has established a
master plan for bridge crossings and major thoroughfares by ordinance.

C.

Fire hydrants. The subdivider shall install gate valves, extensions and risers extending 30 inches above the finished grade of the gutter for fire
hydrants, of sizes and at locations approved by the Fire Chief.

D.

Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 4-34 (Landscape Standards).

E.

Monuments. The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with the requirements of the City Engineer, and Map Act Chapter 4, Article 9.

F.

Private facilities—Maintenance. A subdivision with common area or private streets shall have a homeowners association and conditions,
covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs) approved by the City to provide for the maintenance of the common areas and/or private streets, and
establish standards for maintenance.

G.

Public utilities and utility easements. Each approved parcel shall be provided connections to public utilities, including electricity, gas, water, sewer,
and telecommunications services, which shall be installed as part of the subdivision improvements as provided by this Section.
1.

Underground utilities required. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows. These requirements do not apply to
utility lines which do not serve the area being subdivided. Telecommunications facilities are also subject to the requirements of Chapter 4-44
(Telecommunications Facilities).
a.

When undergrounding is required. All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable
television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be installed underground. Equipment
appurtenant to underground facilities, including transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and ducts, shall also
be located underground or entirely within a building.
The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the
affected utility companies for facility installation.

b.

Location of installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within a public or private street right-of-way or along a lot line, subject
to appropriate easements being provided if necessary. When installed within a public street right-of-way, their location and method of
installation, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right-of-way, shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

2.

Utility easements—Minimum width. The minimum width of easements for public or private utilities, sanitary sewers, or water distribution
systems shall be determined by the review authority based on the recommendations of the City Engineer for City facilities, and the
recommendations of the applicable utility company, for public or private utilities.

3.

Timing of installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed before
the streets are surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines, and sanitary sewers from approved parcels shall be laid to
sufficient lengths, as determined by the City Engineer, to avoid the need for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are
made.

H.

Railroad crossings. A proposed subdivision shall be designed to provide for railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the
proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the California Public Utilities Commission for the
establishment and improvement of the crossings.
1.

The subdivider shall deposit with the City Clerk, in cash, the estimated costs to be incurred by the City in pursuing, or assisting in the applicant's
pursuit of an application for railroad crossings before the Public Utilities Commission.

2.

Upon termination of the proceedings before the Public Utilities Commission, an accounting of the deposit will be made and an additional charge
or refund will be made to the subdivider.

I.

Sewage disposal. Each parcel within an approved subdivision shall be provided a connection to the City's sewage collection, treatment, and disposal
system, in compliance with the City's improvement standards and specifications. The subdivider shall also pay the City's required connection fee.

J.

Street lighting. All proposed subdivisions shall provide street lighting facilities designed and constructed in compliance with the City's improvement
standards and specifications. The subdivider shall agree to either create or annex into an existing Lighting and Landscaping District as determined by
the City Engineer.

K.

Street signs and street names.
1.

Street names. Names for all public and private streets within a proposed subdivision shall be approved by the Council. The duplication of an
existing street name shall not be allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of an existing street.

2.

Street signs. The subdivider shall provide a minimum of two street name signs in compliance with the City's improvement standards and
specifications at each street intersection; with the signs located on the diagonally opposite sides of the intersection. The subdivider shall provide
one street name sign at each "T" intersection.

L.

Storm drainage. Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system.
1.

The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the drainage area, and shall comply with any applicable NPDES

131/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
requirements.
2.

The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in
runoff attributed to the development; off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.

3.
M.

Any easement for drainage or flood control shall be improved as specified by the City Engineer.

Water supply. Each approved parcel shall be served by the City's water distribution system and shall be designed and constructed to accommodate
both domestic and fire flows, together with necessary fire hydrants to serve each lot proposed to be created.

Sec. 4-68-060. - Improvement Plans.
After the approval of a Tentative Map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any subdivision improvements necessary to fulfill the
conditions of approval. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the City as follows:
A.

Preparation and content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall
include the following information:

B.

1.

Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports and other information required by the City Engineer;

2.

Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control, and a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the entire subdivision; and

3.

The improvement plan/specification checking and construction inspection fees required by the City Fee Schedule.

Submittal of plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer and other reviewing agencies for review and approval. Upon the
approval of improvement plans in compliance with Subsection C., the subdivider shall also submit to the City Engineer a detailed cost estimate
of all improvements, based on guidelines provided by the City.

C.

Review and approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, within the time limits provided by Map Act
Section 66456.2.

D.

Effect of approval. The final approval of improvement plans shall generally be required before approval of a Parcel or Final Map. The approval
of improvement plans shall not bind the City to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed.

Sec. 4-68-070. - Installation of Improvements.
Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a Tentative Map in compliance with this Chapter (see Section 4-68-050) shall be
installed as provided by this Section.
A.

Timing of improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans in
compliance with Section 4-68-060, and before the approval of a Parcel or Final Map in compliance with Sections 4-62-060 (Parcel Map Approval)
or 4-62-100 (Final Map Approval), except where:
1.

Improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 4-68-080 (Improvement Agreements and Security); or

2.

Improvements are required as conditions on the approval of a subdivision of four or fewer lots, in which case construction of the
improvements shall be required:
a.

When a Building Permit is issued for development of an affected parcel; or

b.

At the time the construction of the improvements is required in compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the City,
as set forth in Section 4-68-080 (Improvement Agreements and Security); or

c.

At the time set forth in a condition of approval, when the review authority finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by
that time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly
development of the surrounding area.

3.

To avoid breaking up street paving, underground utility or service lines required to be installed as part of a subdivision and which are
planned to run across or underneath a street or alley right-of-way shall be installed prior to the preparation of subgrade and prior to the
surfacing of any streets or alleys. In the event that the development of the subdivision requires the utility company to perform utility
construction work, the developer shall pay a deposit satisfactory to the utility company within sufficient time to permit construction work
to be performed prior to subgrade preparation. In no event shall subgrade preparation commence before installation of all necessary
utilities and laterals.

B.

Inspection of Improvements. The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows.
1.

Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative
who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the City. The designated representative shall be
present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the City
Engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required.

2.

Inspection procedures.
a.

Inspections required. The City Engineer or a designated official shall make any inspections as he/she deems necessary to ensure that
all construction complies with the approved improvement plans. The developer shall be required to submit 3% of the approved
Engineer's Cost Estimate to the City to cover inspection costs, prior to approving a final map or initiating inspections.

132/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
b.

Access to site and materials. The City Engineer shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished
facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in accordance with the approved improvement plans.

c.

Authority for approval. The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the City
Engineer. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed.

d.

Improper work or materials. Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be
rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the City Engineer. In the event that the City
Engineer determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications,
he or she shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures
necessary to resume work. Any work done after issuance of a stop work order shall be a violation of this Chapter.

3.

Notification. The subdivider shall notify the City Engineer upon the completion of each stage of construction as outlined in this Chapter,
and shall not proceed with further construction until authorized by the City Engineer.

Sec. 4-68-080. - Improvement Agreements and Security.
A subdivider may file a Parcel or Final Map before completion of all the improvements required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code and conditions of
approval of the Tentative Map, only when the subdivider first obtains Council approval of a subdivision improvement agreement executed and
submitted for Council review by the subdivider, and provides the City performance security as required by this Section. Improvement agreements and
required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act.
A.

Contents of improvement agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on the form provided by the City and
approved by the City Attorney and shall include the following provisions:
1.

Description of improvements. A description of all improvements to be competed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved
subdivision improvement plans;

2.

Time limit for construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;

3.

Completion by City. Provide that if the subdivider fails to compete all required improvements within the specified time, the City may elect
to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including any attorney
and legal fees associated with enforcement of the agreement;

4.

Surety requirement. Require the subdivider to secure the agreement by furnishing security to insure full and faithful performance and to
insure payment to laborers and material suppliers, as specified in Subsection B. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer's cost
estimate submitted by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, which covers all public improvements, private improvements for
the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision, local neighborhood traffic, and drainage. The total cost of improvements to be
guaranteed shall be as provided in the approved engineer's cost estimate; and

5.
B.

Phased construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider.

Security required to guarantee improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair
agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved by the City Attorney, as follows:
1.

Type of security. Improvement security shall be in the amount set forth or authorized in Map Act Section 66499.3.
a.

If the security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by a duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount shall be included
as determined by the Council as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable attorney's fees, which may be incurred by the City in
successfully enforcing the obligation secured.

b.

The security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work, to the extent that such changes or
alterations do not exceed 10 percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement.

2.

Form of security. The required surety shall consist of one or more of the following forms selected by the City Engineer for the full amounts
specified in Subsection B.1 above.
a.

A deposit, either with the local agency or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the local agency, of money or
negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys.

b.

A bond or bonds executed by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;

c.

An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal, or local government when any said agency provides at least 20 percent
of the financing for the portion of the act or agreement requiring security, or from one or more financial institutions subject to
regulation by the State or Federal government pledging that funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and
guaranteed for payment; or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution;

C.

Time extensions. An extension of time for completion of improvements under a subdivision improvement agreement shall be granted by the
Council only as follows:
1.

Public Works report. The City Engineer notifies the Council that either the subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with
reasonable diligence or is not yet ready to develop the subdivision, and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to
complete all required work within the time of the requested extension.

2.

Agreement by sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or

133/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
other surety, or if recommended by the City Engineer, at an increased amount.
3.

Council action. The Council approves or denies the extension. As a condition of granting a time extension, the Council may impose
whatever additional requirements the Council deems reasonable to protect the public interest.

D.

Acceptance of improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by the Council of subdivision improvements, the City
Engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. The
City shall require the Developer to provide a Warranty bond in an amount of 10% of the approved Engineer's Cost Estimate prior to acceptance
of any improvements.

Sec. 4-68-090. - Soils Reports.
Soils reports shall be provided by the subdivider as required by this Section.
A.

Preliminary soils report. A preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be
required for every subdivision. The preliminary soils report shall be submitted with the Tentative Map application.
1.

Form of report. A preliminary soils report may be divided into two parts:
a.

Soils reconnaissance. The soil reconnaissance shall include a complete description of the site based on a field investigation of soils
matters. The soils matters reviewed shall include stability, erosion, settlement, feasibility of construction of the proposed
improvements, description of soils related hazards and problems and proposed methods of eliminating or reducing these hazards
and problems; and

b.

Soils investigation and report. This investigation and report shall include field investigation and laboratory tests with detailed
information and recommendations relative to all aspects of grading, filling and other earthwork, foundation design, pavement design
and subsurface drainage.
The report shall also recommend any required corrective action for the purpose of preventing structural damage to subdivision
improvements and the structures to be constructed on the lots. The report shall also recommend any special precautions required
for erosion control, and the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.
If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would
lead to structural defects or environmental impacts, a subsequent soils investigation of each parcel in the subdivision may be
required and shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer before approval of a Parcel or Final Map.

2.

Preliminary soils report waiver. The preliminary soils report may be waived if the City Engineer determines that existing available
information on the qualities of the soils of the subdivision makes no preliminary analysis necessary.

B.

Final soils report. A final soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be required where a preliminary soils report was required,
unless the final report is waived by the City Engineer.
1.

Two copies of the final soils investigation and report shall be filed with the improvement plans.

2.

The report shall contain sufficient information to ensure compliance with all recommendations of the preliminary soils report and the
specifications for the project.

3.

The report shall also contain information relative to soils conditions encountered which differed from that described in the preliminary
soils reports, along with any corrections, additions or modifications not shown on the approved plans.

C.

Geologic investigation and report. If the City Engineer determines that conditions warrant, a geologic investigation and report may also be
required.

ARTICLE 7 - ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CODE ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 4-70. - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
Sections:

Sec. 4-70-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter describes the authority and responsibilities for the administration of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Sec. 4-70-020. - Planning Agency.
The Gustine City Council, Planning Commission, Planning Director, and Planning and Building Department shall perform the functions of a Planning
Agency in compliance with Government Code Section 65100.
Sec. 4-70-030. - City Council.

134/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
The Council shall perform the duties assigned by the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code to the Council.

Sec. 4-70-040. - Planning Commission.
A.

Appointment. The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Council.

B.

Duties and authority. The Commission shall have the responsibility and authority to: Conduct public hearings and approve or disapprove
applications for Use Permits and Variances and recommend decisions to the Council on the approval of Planned Development Permits and Tentative
Maps and adoption of and amendments to specific plans, amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Map, and this Zoning and Subdivision Code,
development agreements, environmental documents, and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the City's planning process.

C.

Architectural Committee. The Commission may appoint an Architectural Committee, consisting of three Commission members, to conduct the
Architectural Review authorized by Section 4-52-020 (Architectural Reviews).

D.

Subdivision Design Review Committee. The City Council may appoint a Subdivision Design Review Committee to review preliminary applications.

Sec. 4-70-050. - Planning Director.
A.

Appointment. The Planning Director shall be appointed by the City Manager.

B.

Duties and authority. The Planning Director shall:
1.

Serve as the department head, and manage the day-to-day and long range functions of the Planning and Building Department;

2.

Perform all of the functions designated by Government Code Section 65103;

3.

Have the responsibility and authority to conduct public hearings and approve or disapprove applications for Architectural Reviews, Limited
Term Permits, Planned Development Permits, Variances, Sign Permits, and Zoning Clearances;

4.

Perform the duties and functions assigned to the Planning Director by this Zoning and Subdivision Code; and

5.

Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the City Manager.

Except where otherwise provided by this Zoning and Subdivision Code, the responsibilities of the Planning Director may also be carried out by
Department employees under the supervision of the Planning Director.
Sec. 4-70-060. - City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall perform the duties assigned by the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code to the City Engineer.
CHAPTER 4-72. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PARCELS
Sections:

Sec. 4-72-010. - Purpose.
A.

This Chapter provides regulations for nonconforming land uses, structures, and parcels that were lawful before the adoption, or amendment of this
Zoning and Subdivision Code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the current terms of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code or an amendment that changed the applicable requirements.

B.

It is the intent of this Chapter to discourage the long-term continuance of nonconformities, providing for their eventual elimination, while allowing
them to exist under the limited conditions identified in this Chapter.

Sec. 4-72-020. - De nitions.
A.

Nonconforming parcel. A parcel that was legally created before the adoption of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or amendment, but does not
comply with the current area, depth, width, or other applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

B.

Nonconforming sign. A sign that lawfully existed before the effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or amendment, but does not comply
with the current sign regulations of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

C.

Nonconforming structure. A structure that was legally constructed before the adoption or amendment of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, but
does not comply with the current height limit, off-street parking, setbacks, and/or other applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

D.

Nonconforming use. A use of land and/or a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) that was legally established and maintained before the
adoption of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or amendment, but does not conform to the current Zoning and Subdivision Code requirements for
allowable land uses within the applicable zoning district.

Sec. 4-72-030. - Restrictions on Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
A nonconforming land use and the use of a nonconforming structure may be continued, including transfers of ownership; provided, their continuation
shall comply with the requirements of this Section. See Section 4-72-040 for exceptions regarding certain residential uses and structures.
A.

Nonconforming use of land.

135/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
1.

General rule. A nonconforming use of land may be continued; provided, the use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor be extended to occup
land than it lawfully occupied before becoming nonconforming. See Section 4-72-040 for exceptions regarding certain residential uses and str

2.

Nonconforming use in a conforming structure. A nonconforming land use within a conforming structure may be expanded or replaced
with Use Permit approval, as follows:
a.

Expansion of use. The nonconforming use of a portion of a structure may be extended throughout the structure; and

b.

Substitution of use. The nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to a conforming use or another nonconforming use of
the same or more restricted nature.
(1)

If the use is changed to a conforming use, the use shall not be changed to a nonconforming use thereafter.

(2)

If the use is changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted nature, a nonconforming use of a less
restricted nature shall not be resumed thereafter.

3.

Nonconforming use of a vacant parcel.
(1)

If any parcel without any structures of any kind is used for any purpose which is not in compliance with the applicable provisions of
the subject zoning district, the use may continue for a maximum period of three years after June 21, 1965.

(2)

After the expiration of the three-year period, the parcel shall be used only in compliance with the applicable provisions of the subject
zoning district.

B.

Nonconforming structure. A nonconforming structure may continue to be used as follows:
1.

General rule.
a.

Accept as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the use of a structure existing on June 21, 1965, may be continued even though the
structure does not conform to the applicable provisions of the subject zoning district.

b.

The nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless the enlargement,
extension, reconstruction, or structural alteration is in compliance with the applicable provisions of the subject zoning district.

c.
2.

See Section 4-72-040 for exceptions regarding certain residential uses and structures.

Normal maintenance and repair.
a.

A nonconforming single-family dwelling may be maintained and repaired at the discretion of the owner.

b.

A multi-family or nonresidential structure may be maintained and repaired; provided, that:
(1)

No structural alterations occur other than those allowed by Subparagraph B.3., below.

(2)

The cost of the work done during any 12-month period does not exceed 25 percent of the value of the structure as determined
by the Building Official in compliance with the Building Code.

(3)

Additional or more extensive changes to a nonconforming multi-family or nonresidential structure may be authorized through
Use Permit approval; provided, the review authority first finds that the additional work will not prolong the duration of the
nonconforming structure.

3.

Seismic retrofitting and compliance with Building Code. Alterations, repairs, or reconstruction to reinforce unreinforced masonry
structures or to comply with Building Code requirements shall be allowed; provided, the work is exclusively to comply with applicable
earthquake safety standards and the Building Code.

Sec. 4-72-040. - Residential Exemptions.
An involuntarily damaged or destroyed single-family dwelling, or multi-family structure containing two or more dwelling units, may be reconstructed or
replaced, within a 6 month period, with a new structure with the same footprint, height, and number of dwelling units, regardless of the requirements
of the applicable zoning district upon securing a Use Permit; provided, the new structure shall comply with the current Building and Fire Code
requirements.
Sec. 4-72-050. - Loss of Nonconforming Status.
A.

Termination by discontinuance.
1.

If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months or
more, except in compliance with a valid order of a court of law, all rights to legal nonconforming status shall terminate and all future uses shall
be in compliance with the applicable regulations for the subject zoning district.

2.

The Planning Director shall base a determination of discontinuance on evidence including the removal of equipment, furniture, machinery,
structures, or other components of the nonconforming use, disconnected or discontinued utilities, or no business records to document
continued operation.

3.

Any further use of the site or structure shall comply with all of the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable
provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.

B.

Termination by destruction. Nonconforming status shall terminate if a nonconforming structure, or a conforming structure occupied by a
nonconforming use, is involuntarily damaged or destroyed (e.g., by explosion, fire, or other casualty or act of God); except as provided by Section 4-

136/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
72-040 for residential dwellings, and as follows.
1.

If the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged portion of the structure is 50 percent or less of the reasonable/appraised value of the structure
immediately before the damage, the structure may be restored to no more than the same size and use, and the use continued, if the
restoration is started within six (6) months of the date of damage and is diligently pursued to completion.

2.

Use Permit approval shall be required if the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged portion of the structure is more than 50 percent of the
reasonable/appraised value of the structure immediately before the damage. Use Permit approval shall require a finding, in addition to those
contained in 4-52-050.F (Findings and decision), that the benefit to the public health, safety, or welfare exceeds the detriment inherent in the
restoration and continuance of a nonconformity.

Sec. 4-72-060. - Nonconforming Parcels.
A.

Legal building site. A nonconforming parcel that does not comply with the applicable area, depth, or width requirements of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code shall be considered a legal building site if it meets at least one of the following criteria, as documented to the satisfaction of the
Planning Director by evidence furnished by the applicant.
1.

Approved subdivision. The parcel was created by a recorded subdivision;

2.

Individual parcel legally created by deed. The parcel is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed before
the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming;

3.

Variance or lot line adjustment. The parcel was approved through the Variance procedure or resulted from a lot line adjustment; or

4.

Partial government acquisition. The parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, but was made
nonconforming when a portion was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size is decreased not more than 20 percent and the
yard facing a public right-of-way was decreased not more than 50 percent.

B.

Subdivision of a nonconforming parcel. No subdivision shall be approved that will increase the nonconformity of an existing parcel or any
nonconforming use on the parcel.

Sec. 4-72-070. - Nonconforming Due to Lack of Planning permit.
A.

Conformity of uses requiring planning permits. A use lawfully existing without the approval of a Use Permit or Use Permit that would otherwise be
required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code, shall be deemed conforming only to the extent that it previously existed (e.g., maintain the same site
area boundaries, hours of operation, etc.).

B.

Previous planning permits in effect. A use that was authorized by a planning permit but is not allowed by this Zoning and Subdivision Code in its
current location may continue, but only in compliance with the original planning permit.

CHAPTER 4-74. - APPEALS
Sections:

Sec. 4-74-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes procedures for the appeal and review of determinations and decisions of the Planning Director and Commission.
Sec. 4-74-020. - Appeal Subjects and Jurisdiction.
A.

Planning Director's decision. A determination or decision by the Planning Director or Department staff may be appealed to the Commission.

B.

Commission decision. A decision by the Commission may be appealed to the Council.

Sec. 4-74-030. - Filing and Processing of Appeals.
A.

Eligibility.
1.

An appeal in compliance with this Chapter may be filed by any aggrieved person, except that in the case of a decision on a Planned
Development Permit, Use Permit, Variance, and/or other Commission decision that followed a public hearing, an appeal may only be filed by a
person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at the public hearing in connection with the decision being appealed, or who
otherwise informed the City in writing of the nature of their concerns before the hearing. An appeal shall be deemed not filed in a timely
manner and not accepted until payment of an appeal fee, as adopted by the City, is paid to the City.

2.

A planning permit or other decision by the Planning Director to be scheduled for a hearing before the Planning Commission without payment of
fee. Said action shall be at the written request of a least two Planning Commission members.

3.

A planning permit or other decision by the Commission to be scheduled for a hearing before the City Council without payment of fee. Said
action shall be at the written request of a least two City Council members.

B.

Timing and form of appeal.
1.

An appeal shall be submitted in writing and filed with the Department or City Clerk, as applicable, on a City application form, within 10 days
from the date of the decision.

137/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

C.

2.

The appeal shall state the pertinent facts and the basis for the appeal.

3.

Appeals addressed to the Commission shall be filed with the Department; appeals addressed to the Council shall be filed with the City Clerk.

4.

An appeal shall be accompanied by the required filing fee in compliance with the City's Fee Schedule.

Report and scheduling of public hearing.
1.

When an appeal has been filed, the Planning Director shall prepare a written report on the matter, and shall schedule the matter for a public
hearing by the appropriate review authority.

2.

The written report shall contain the evidence in support of the findings adopted for the action being appealed.

3.

Public notice of the hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted, in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings). Notice
shall also be provided to the Commission.

D.

Decision. At a hearing on an appeal, the review authority may consider any issue involving the matter that is the subject of the appeal, in addition to
the specific grounds for the appeal. The review authority may:
1.

Affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, determination, or decision that is the subject of the appeal;

2.

Adopt additional conditions of approval, that may address issues or concerns other than the subject of the appeal;

3.

Disapprove the planning permit approved by the previous review authority, even though the appellant only requested a modification or
elimination of one or more conditions of approval; and

4.

In the case of an appeal of a Commission decision to the Council:
a.

The Council shall render its decision on the appeal within 45 days after the close of the public hearing; or

b.

The Council may choose to not conduct a public hearing on the appeal, based on their review of the report and Commission's decision.
This action by the Council shall constitute affirmation of the decision being appealed.

E.

Presentation of new or different evidence. If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the Commission or Council may refer the matter to
the Planning Director or Commission for further consideration.

F.

Effective date of appeal decision.
1.

Commission's decision. A decision by the Commission is effective on the 11th day after the decision is rendered, when no appeal to the
decision has been filed with the Council.

2.
G.

Council's decision. A decision by the Council is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered.

Withdrawal of an appeal of a Commission decision. After filing, an appeal of a Commission decision shall not be withdrawn except with the consent
of the Council.

CHAPTER 4-76. - AMENDMENTS
Sections:

Sec. 4-76-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter provides procedures for the amendment of the General Plan, the Zoning Map, and this Zoning and Subdivision Code whenever the
Council determines public necessity and general welfare require an amendment.
Sec. 4-76-020. - Applicability.
A.

General Plan. A General Plan amendment may include revisions to text or diagrams.

B.

Zoning Map. A Zoning Map amendment has the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another.

C.

Zoning and Subdivision Code. A Zoning and Subdivision Code amendment may modify a standard, requirement, or procedure applicable to land use
or development within the City.

Sec. 4-76-030. - Initiation of Amendments.
An amendment to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be initiated in compliance with this Section.
A.

Who may initiate an amendment.
1.

General Plan, Zoning Map, or Zoning and Subdivision Code amendments. A General Plan, Zoning Map, or Zoning and Subdivision
amendment may be initiated by:
a.

A resolution of intention by the Council;

b.

A resolution of intention by the Commission; or

c.

The filing of an amendment application with the Department by the owner or authorized agent of property for which the amendment
is sought. If the property is under more than one ownership, all of the owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the
application.

2.

Zoning Map and Zoning or Subdivision Code amendments only. A Zoning Map or Zoning and Subdivision amendment may be initiated by

138/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Council action to adopt an urgency measure as an interim ordinance in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65858).
B.

Application filing. The following shall apply if the amendment is initiated by the filing of an amendment application in compliance with
Subparagraph A.1.c., above:
1.

An application for an amendment shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 4-50 (Permit Application Filing and Processing).

2.

The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for amendment applications as well as the
filing fee in compliance with the City's Fee Schedule.

Sec. 4-76-040. - Processing, Notice and Hearing.
A.

Public hearings by Commission and Council required. After the filing and initial processing of a proposed amendment in compliance with Chapter 450 (Permit Application Filing and Processing), the Commission and Council shall each conduct one or more public hearings regarding the requested
amendment.

B.

Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Chapter 4-78 (Public Hearings).

Sec. 4-76-050. - Commission Action on Amendment.
A.

Commission's action. The Commission shall forward a written recommendation, and reasons for the recommendation, to the Council whether to
approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment, based on the findings in Section 4-76-080 (Findings), below.

B.

Transmitted within 90 days. The Commission's written recommendation, together with the reasons for the recommendation, shall be transmitted to
the Council within 90 days following the public notice for the Commission's hearing.

C.

Extension of delivery to the Council. The 90-day limit may be extended with the consent of the Council or the applicant for the requested
amendment.

Sec. 4-76-060. - Council Action on Amendment.
A.

Action to approve/disapprove. Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or
disapprove the proposed amendment based on the findings in Section 4-76-080 (Findings), below.

B.

Referral to Commission.
1.

If the Council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the Commission during its hearings,
the proposed modification shall be first referred to the Commission for its recommendation, in compliance with State law (Government Code
Sections 65356 [General Plan amendments] and 65857 [Zoning Map/Zoning and Subdivision Code amendments]).

2.

The Commission need not conduct a public hearing on the referral.

3.

Failure of the Commission to act on the referral within 40 days following the Council's action to refer the matter to the Commission, or a longer
period established by the Council, shall be deemed approval of the proposed modification.

Sec. 4-76-070. - Withdrawal of Amendment Request.
Either the Commission or Council may permit the withdrawal of an amendment request filed in compliance with this Chapter or may abandon any
proceedings for an amendment initiated by the respective review authority.
Sec. 4-76-080. - Findings.
The approval of an amendment to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall require that the review authority first
make all of the following findings, as applicable to the type of amendment.
A.

Findings for General Plan amendments.
1.

The amendment is internally consistent with all other provisions of the General Plan;

2.

The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City; and

3.

The affected site is physically suitable (including absence of physical constraints, access, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and
provision of utilities) for proposed or anticipated uses and/or development.

B.

Findings for Zoning Map, and Zoning and Subdivision Code amendments.
1.

2.

Findings required for all Zoning Map/Zoning and Subdivision Code amendments.
a.

The proposed amendment is consistent with the General Plan; and

b.

The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City.

Additional finding for Zoning Map amendments. The affected site is physically suitable (including absence of physical constraints, access,
compatibility with adjoining land uses, and provision of utilities) for the requested zoning designation and proposed or anticipated uses
and/or development.

Sec. 4-76-090. - E ective Dates.

139/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
A.

General Plan amendments. A General Plan amendment shall become effective immediately upon the adoption of a resolution by the Council.

B.

Zoning Map/Zoning and Subdivision Code amendments. A Zoning Map or Zoning and Subdivision Code amendment shall become effective on the
30th day following the adoption of an ordinance by the Council.

CHAPTER 4-78. - PUBLIC HEARINGS
Sections:

Sec. 4-78-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter provides procedures for the public hearings required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code. When a public hearing is required, advance
notice of the hearing shall be given, and the hearing shall be conducted, in compliance with this Chapter.
Sec. 4-78-020. - Notice of Hearings.
When a planning permit, or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing in compliance with State law
(Government Code Sections 65090, 65091, 65094, and 66451.3, and Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.), and as required by this Chapter.
A.

Contents of notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include:
1.

Hearing information. The date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing and the name of the hearing body; and the phone number and
street address of the Department, where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information;

2.

Project information. The name of the applicant; the City's project case number assigned to the application; a general explanation of the
matter to be considered; a general explanation of the purpose of the application; a general description, in text and/or by diagram, of the
location of the property that is the subject of the hearing; and

3.

Statement on environmental document. If a draft Negative Declaration (ND), Mitigated Negative Declaration (MND), or Environmental
Impact Report (EIR) has been prepared for the project, or if the project has been determined to be exempt, in compliance with the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the City's CEQA guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a statement
that the hearing body will also consider approval of the draft Negative Declaration, Mitigated Negative Declaration, or Environmental
Impact Report.

B.

Method of notice distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this Chapter for an amendment, appeal, entitlement, or permit shall be
given as follows:
1.

Publication. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 days before the hearing.

2.

Mailing. Notice shall be mailed, at least 10 days before the hearing, through the United States Postal Service, to:
a.

The owners of the property being considered or the owner's agent, and the applicant;

b.

Each local agency expected to provide schools, water, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide
the facilities and services may be significantly affected;

c.

All owners of real property shown on the latest equalized property tax roll within 300 feet of the site boundaries; and

d.

Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the Planning Director and has paid the fee established by the City's Fee
Schedule for the notice.

C.

Alternative to mailing. If the number of property owners requiring notice in compliance with Subsection B.2 is more than 1,000, the Planning
Director may choose to provide the alternative notice allowed by State law (Government Code Section 65091(a) (3)).

D.

Additional optional notice. In addition to the types of notice required by Subsections B. and C., above, the Planning Director may provide
additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the Planning Director determines is necessary or desirable (e.g., use of a
greater radius for notice, use of the Internet, etc).

Sec. 4-78-030. - Scheduling of Hearings.
After the completion of any environmental documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and a Department staff report, a
matter requiring a hearing shall be scheduled on the next available Planning Director, Commission, or Council agenda (as applicable) reserved for
public hearings, but no sooner than any minimum time period established by State law.
Sec. 4-78-040. - Hearing Procedures.
Each hearing shall be held at the date, time, and place described in the prior notice.
A.

Continuance. Any hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice; provided, the chairperson of the review authority
announces the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued before the adjournment or recess of the hearing.

B.

Deferral of final decision. The review authority may announce a tentative decision, and defer their action on a final decision until appropriate
findings and/or conditions of approval have been prepared.

140/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Sec. 4-78-050. - Recommendation by Commission.
At the conclusion of any public hearing on a proposed amendment (Chapter 4-76), the Commission shall forward a recommendation, including all
required findings, to the Council for final action.
Sec. 4-78-060. - Notice of Decision.
A.

Notice of final action. Within five days of a final decision on an application for a permit or other approval required by this Zoning and Subdivision
Code, the City shall provide notice of its final action to the applicant and to any person who specifically requested notice of the City's final action.

B.

Contents of notice. The notice of the final decision shall contain applicable findings, conditions of approval, reporting/monitoring requirements
deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or general welfare of the City, and the
procedures for appeal.

Sec. 4-78-070. - E ective Date of Decision.
A.

Effective date. The decision of the Planning Director or Commission is final and effective on the 11th day following the date the decision is rendered,
unless an appeal is filed in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals).

B.

Date of permit issuance. The actual permit shall not be issued until five days have elapsed from the granting of the permit.

C.

In event of an appeal. In the event an appeal is filed in compliance with Chapter 4-74 (Appeals), the permit shall not be issued until a final decision
has been made on the appeal.

CHAPTER 4-79. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sections:

Sec. 4-79-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter establishes provisions which are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code and any
conditions of planning permit or subdivision approval, to promote the City's planning efforts, and for the protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare of the City.
Sec. 4-79-020. - Building Permits and Business Licenses.
All departments, officials, and employees of the City who are assigned the authority or duty to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the
provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
A.

Permits in conflict with Zoning and Subdivision Code. Permits for uses or structures that would be in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning
and Subdivision Code shall not be issued.

B.

Permits or licenses deemed void. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be
deemed void.

Sec. 4-79-030. - O cial Duty to Enforce.
A.

Designated employee. The Planning Director may:
1.

Exercise the authority provided in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code; and

2.

Issue citations for any violations of this Zoning and Subdivision Code pertaining to the use of any land and the addition, alteration, construction,
conversion, erection, moving, reconstruction, or use of any structure.

B.

Police Chief. The Police Chief shall render any and all necessary assistance to the Planning Director for the enforcement of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code.

Sec. 4-79-040. - Violations.
Any structure constructed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code and any use of land or structures operated or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code are hereby declared to be a public nuisances.
A.

Public nuisance. Any structure or use which is altered, constructed, converted, enlarged, established, erected, maintained, moved, or operated,
contrary to the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or any applicable condition of approval imposed on a permit, is hereby declared
to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties as adopted and enacted by the City.

B.

Criminal violations. Any person, whether an agent, principal, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provision of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code or any permit issued in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or an
infraction at the election of the City and/or its prosecuting official), and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by the applicable fine

141/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
established by City Code or Policy.
C.

Misdemeanors. Any offense that would otherwise be an infraction may, at the discretion of the City Attorney, be filed as a misdemeanor if the
defendant has been convicted of two or more violations of any provision of this Zoning and Subdivision Code within the 12 months immediately
preceding the commission of the offense.

D.

Stop Work Order.
1.

Any construction in violation of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or any conditions imposed on a permit shall be subject to the issuance of
a "Stop Work Order."

2.

Any violation of a Stop Work Order shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties as adopted and
enacted by the City.

Sec. 4-79-050. - Remedies are Cumulative.
A.

Cumulative, not exclusive. All remedies contained in this Zoning and Subdivision Code for the handling of violations or enforcement of the
provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of City, County, or State law.

B.

Other remedies. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction for the violation of any provision of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code, the conviction shall not prevent the City from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violations.

Sec. 4-79-060. - Inspections.
A.

Preapproval inspections. Every applicant seeking a permit or any other action in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code shall allow the
City officials handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application.

B.

Post approval inspections. If the permit or other action in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code is approved, the owner or applicant
shall allow appropriate City officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any
conditions of approval imposed on the permit.

Sec. 4-79-070. - Initial Enforcement Action.
This Section describes the procedures for initiating enforcement action in cases where the Planning Director has determined that real property within
the City is being used, maintained, or allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code. It is the objective of these
provisions to encourage the voluntary cooperation of responsible parties in the prompt correction of violations, so that the other enforcement
measures provided by this Chapter may be avoided.
A.

Notice to responsible parties. The Planning Director or code enforcement officer shall provide the record owner of the subject site and any
person in possession or control of the site with a written Notice of Violation in accordance with remedies as may be established by the City.

Sec. 4-79-080. - Legal Remedies.
The City may choose to use any one or all of available legal actions to correct and/or abate any nuisances or violations of this Zoning and Subdivision
Code.
Sec. 4-79-090. - Recovery of Costs.
Recovery of Costs for enforcement and correction of violations shall be 100% for all city expenditures. The City shall use all necessary and legal means
to gain full cost recovery.
Sec. 4-79-100. - Additional Permit Processing Fees.
Any person who establishes a land use, or alters, constructs, enlarges, erects, maintains, or moves any structure without first obtaining any permit
required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code, shall pay the additional permit processing fees established by the City's Fee Schedule for the correction
of the violations, before being granted a permit for a use or structure on the site.
Sec. 4-79-110. - Reinspection Fees.
A.

Amount and applicability of reinspection fee.
1.

A reinspection fee shall be imposed on each person who receives a Notice of Violation, notice and order, or letter of correction of any provision
of the Municipal Code, adopted Building Code, or State law.
a.

The fee amount shall be established by the City's Fee Schedule.

b.

The fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection conducted when the particular violation for which an inspection or
reinspection is scheduled is not fully abated or corrected as directed by, and within the time and manner specified in, the notice or letter.

2.

The fee shall not apply to the original inspection to document the violations and shall not apply to the first scheduled compliance inspection
made after the issuance of a notice or letter, whether or not the correction has been made.

142/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
B.

Continuation of the original case.
1.

If a notice or letter has been previously issued for the same violation and the property has been in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning
and Subdivision Code or the Municipal Code for less than 180 days, the violation shall be deemed a continuation of the original case, and all
inspections or reinspections, including the first inspection for the repeated offense, shall be charged a reinspection fee.

2.

This fee is intended to compensate for administrative costs for unnecessary City inspections, and is not a penalty for violating this Zoning and
Subdivision Code or the Municipal Code.

3.

Any reinspection fees imposed shall be separate and apart from any fines or penalties imposed for violation of this Zoning and Subdivision
Code or the Municipal Code, or costs incurred by the City for the abatement of a public nuisance.

ARTICLE 8 - GLOSSARY
CHAPTER 4-80. - DEFINITIONS
Sections:

Sec. 4-80-010. - Purpose.
This Chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this Zoning and Subdivision Code that are technical or specialized, or that may not
reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this Chapter conflict with definitions in other provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall
control for the purposes of this Zoning and Subdivision Code. If a word is not defined in this Chapter, or in other provisions of the City of Gustine
Municipal Code, the Director shall determine the correct definition.
Sec. 4-80-020. - De nitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases.
As used in this Zoning and Subdivision Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section, unless the
context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.
A.

Definitions, "A."
Abut. Having property lines, street lines, or zoning district lines in common.
Accessory Retail or Services. The retail sale of various products, or the provision of certain personal services within a health care, hotel, office,
or industrial complex, to employees or customers. Examples of these uses include pharmacies, gift shops, and food service establishments
within hospitals; convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes; and barber and beauty
shops within residential care facilities.
Accessory Structure. A structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with a primary
structure on the same site. See also "Agricultural Accessory Structure," and "Residential Accessory Uses and Structures."
Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a primary use on the same parcel, which does not alter the
primary use nor serve property other than the parcel where the primary use is located.
Adult Oriented Business. A business based upon materials or performances that depict, describe, or relate to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," as defined in the Municipal Code.
Affordable Rent. Monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental units reserved for very low or low income
households, not exceeding the following calculations:
1.

Very Low Income: 50 percent of median income as defined by State law (Health and Safety Code Section 50105) and the HUD income
limits.

2.

Low Income: 80 percent of median income as defined by State law (Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5) and the HUD income limits.

Affordable Sales Price. A sales price at which very low and low income households can qualify for the purchase of designated dwelling units,
calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the development.
Agent. A person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with City employees,
committees, Commissions, and the Council, regarding matters regulated by this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Agricultural Accessory Structure. A structure for sheltering or confining animals, or agricultural equipment, hay, feed, etc. Examples of these
structures include barns, non-commercial greenhouses, coops, corrals, and pens. Does not include pasture fencing.
Agricultural Product Processing and Storage. The processing and/or interim storage of harvested crops to prepare them for on-site marketing
or processing and packaging elsewhere. Examples of this land use include the following:
alfalfa cubing

143/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
corn shelling
cotton ginning
custom grist mills
custom milling of flour, feed and grain
dairies (but not feedlots, see instead "Livestock Operations, Sales Yards, Feedlots, Stockyards")
drying of corn, rice, hay, fruits and vegetables
grain cleaning and custom grinding
hay baling and cubing
pre-cooling and packaging of fresh or farm-dried fruits and vegetables
sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables
tree nut hulling and shelling
Does not include wineries, which are separately defined.
Alcoholic Beverage Sales. The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits for on-premise or off-premise consumption.
Alley. A public or private roadway that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage, that is not
intended for general traffic circulation.
Allowed Use. A use of land identified by Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements) as a permitted or conditional
use that may be established with land use permit and, where applicable, Design Review and/or Building Permit approval, subject to compliance
with all applicable provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Alteration. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in
the external appearance of any structure, not including painting.
Amusement Arcade and Entertainment Center. Means premises used by a business establishment providing amusement devices for patron
use on premises.
Amusement Device. Means a machine or electronic device used primarily for games of skill or change including billiards, pool, video games,
and other amusement devices, machines, and other entertainment devices electrical, battery or solar operated or manual functions.
Ambulance, Taxi, or Limousine Dispatch Facility. A base facility from which taxis and limousines are dispatched, and/or where ambulance
vehicles and crews stand by for emergency calls.
Animal Keeping. See Section 4-44-170 (Animal Keeping).
Apartment. See "Multi-Family Housing."
Applicant. Any person who is filing an application requesting an action who is:
1.

The owner or lessee of property;

2.

A party who has contracted to purchase property contingent upon that party's ability to acquire the necessary approvals required for that
action in compliance with this Zoning and Subdivision Code, and who presents written authorization from the property owner to file an
application with the City; or

3.

The agent of either of the above who presents written authorization from the property owner to file an application with the City.

Approval. Includes both approval and approval with conditions.
Arborist. 1) A person currently certified by the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture as an expert on the care of trees; 2)
a consulting arborist who satisfies the requirements of the American Society of Consulting Arborists; or 3) other qualified professionals who the
Director determines have gained through experience the qualifications to identify, remove, or replace trees.
Architectural Feature. An exterior building feature including roof, windows, doors, porches, etc.
Artisan/Craft Product Manufacturing. Establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry,
pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products.
Artisan Shop. A retail store selling art glass, ceramics, jewelry, paintings, sculpture, and other handcrafted items, where the facility includes an
area for the crafting of the items being sold.
Assessed Value. The value of a structure as shown in the records of the County Assessor.

144/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Attic. The area located between the uppermost plate and the roof or ridge of a structure.
Auto and Vehicle Sales/Rental. A retail or wholesale establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans, trailers, motorcycles,
and bicycles (bicycle sales are also included under "General Retail"). May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories,
incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see "Auto Parts Sales");
mobile home, recreational vehicle, or watercraft sales (see "Mobile Home, RV and Boat Sales"); tire recapping establishments (see "Vehicle
Services"); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, (see "Recycling - Scrap and Dismantling Yards"); or "Gas Stations," which are separately
defined.
Auto Parts Sales. Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. Establishments that provide installation services are instead
included under "Vehicle Services - Repair and Maintenance - Minor." Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under
"Vehicle Services" or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under "Recycling - Scrap and Dismantling Yards."
Auto Repair. See "Vehicle Services."
Automated Teller Machine (ATM). Computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including
deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without face-to-face contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or
within banks, or in other locations.
B.

Definitions, "B."
Bank, Financial Services. Financial institutions including:
banks and trust companies
credit agencies
holding (but not primarily operating) companies
lending and thrift institutions
other investment companies
securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers
security and commodity exchanges
vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies
See also, "Automated Teller Machine."
Bar/Tavern. A business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars,
taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include beer
brewing as part of a microbrewery ("brew-pub"), and other beverage tasting facilities. Does not include adult oriented businesses.
Bed and Breakfast Inn (B&B). A residential structure with one or more bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided
subject to applicable Environmental Health Department regulations. Does not include room rental, which is separately defined (see
"Boarding/Rooming House").
Building and Landscape Materials Sales. Retail establishments selling hardware, lumber and other large building materials, plant materials,
and other landscaping materials. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if
contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning
equipment and supplies are classified in "Wholesaling and Distribution."
Building Height. See Section 4-30-040 (Height Limits and Exceptions).
Business Support Service. An establishment within a building that provides services to other businesses. Examples of these services include:
blueprinting
computer-related services (rental, repair)
copying and quick printing services
film processing and photofinishing (retail)
outdoor advertising services
mailing and mail box services
protective services (other than office related)

145/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
security systems services
C.

Definitions, "C."
Cabinet Shop. See "Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops."
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). State law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to
document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur.
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). The governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the
State.
Card Room. An establishment offering legal gambling activities in compliance with a State license.
Caretaker/Employee Unit. A permanent residence that is secondary or accessory to the primary use of the property, and used for housing a
caretaker employed on the site of any non-residential use where needed for security purposes or to provide 24-hour care or monitoring of
people, plants, animals, equipment, or other conditions on the site.
Carriage House. A secondary residential unit located over a detached garage.
Catering Service. A business that prepares food for consumption on the premises of a client.
Cemetery, Mausoleum, Columbarium. An interment establishment engaged in subdividing property into cemetery lots and offering burial plots
or air space for sale. Includes animal cemeteries; cemetery, mausoleum, crematorium and columbarium operations, and full-service mortuaries
and funeral parlors accessory to a cemetery or columbarium.
Change of Use. The replacement of an existing use on a lot or parcel, or any portion thereof, by a new use, or a change in the nature of an
existing use; but does not include a change of ownership, tenancy, or management associated with a use for which the previous nature of the
use will remain substantially unchanged.
City. The City of Gustine, State of California, referred to in this Zoning and Subdivision Code as the "City."
City Council. The Gustine City Council, referred to in this Zoning and Subdivision Code as the "Council."
City Manager. Person appointed by the City Council to manage the business of the City of Gustine. City Manager shall have the authority over
all City personnel and contract employees. City Manager shall have authority to appoint and assign responsibility to perform certain duties. City
Manager shall have authority to interpret and make decisions as referred to as the "Director." City Manager may appoint a designee to perform
the duties of the "Director."
Club, Lodge, Private Meeting Hall. Permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for
the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for:
business associations
civic, social and fraternal organizations
labor unions and similar organizations
political organizations
professional membership organizations
other membership organizations
Includes grange halls and similar facilities.
Commercial Recreation Facility—Indoor. Establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission
charge, including:
bowling alleys
coin-operated amusement arcades
dance halls, clubs and ballrooms
electronic game arcades (video games, pinball, etc.)
ice skating and roller skating
pool and billiard rooms as primary uses

146/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
This use does not include adult oriented businesses, which are separately defined. Four or more electronic games or coin-operated
amusements in any establishment, or a premises where 50 percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered
an electronic game arcade as described above; three or fewer machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the
site.
Commercial Recreation Facility—Outdoor. A facility for various outdoor recreational activities, where a fee is charged for use. Examples
include:
amusement and theme parks
go-cart tracks
golf driving ranges
miniature golf courses
water slides
May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and
restaurants, video game arcades, etc.
Commercial Zoning District. Any of the commercial zoning districts established by Section 4-20-020 (Zoning Map and Zoning Districts).
Community Center. A multi-purpose meeting and recreational facility typically consisting of one or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms,
kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for such activities as meetings, parties, receptions,
dances, etc.
Condominium. As defined by Civil Code Section 1315, a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is
coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map.
Conference/Convention Facility. One or more structures accommodating multiple assembly, meeting, and/or exhibit rooms, and related
support facilities (e.g., kitchens, offices, etc.).
Construction Contractors. Office, and indoor and/or outdoor storage facilities operated by, or on behalf of a contractor licensed by the State of
California for storage of large equipment, vehicles, and/or other materials commonly used in the individual contractor's type of business;
storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor's own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as repair
facilities.
Construction/Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental. Retail establishments selling or renting construction, farm, or other heavy equipment.
Examples include cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, combines, heavy trucks, etc.
Convenience Store. See "Neighborhood Market."
County. The County of Merced, State of California.
Crop Production, Horticulture, Orchard, Vineyard. Commercial agricultural production field and orchard uses, including the production of the
following, primarily in the soil on the site and not in containers, other than for initial propagation prior to planting in the soil on the site:
field crops
flowers and seeds
fruits
grains
melons
ornamental crops
tree nuts
trees and sod
vegetables
wine and table grapes
Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction,
spraying, crop processing and retail sales in the field, not including sales sheds, which are instead defined under "Produce Stand." Does not
include greenhouses which are instead defined under "Plant Nursery," and "Residential Accessory Use or Structure," or containerized crop

147/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
production, which is instead defined under "Plant Nursery."
D.

Definitions, "D."
Day Care. Facilities that provide non-medical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. These facilities include
the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services.
1.

Child Day Care Center. Commercial or non-profit child day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate 15 or more children.
Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a
school or church facility, or as an independent land use.

2.

Large Family Day Care Home. As provided by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a home that regularly provides care, protection,
and supervision for seven to 14 children, inclusive, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home, for periods of less
than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.

3.

Small Family Day Care Home. As provided by Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78, a home that provides family day care for eight or
fewer children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home.

4.

Adult day care facility. A day care facility providing care and supervision for adult clients.

Density. The number of housing units per acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses.
Density Bonus. As defined by State law (Government Code Section 65915 et seq.), an increase of at least 25 percent over the maximum density
otherwise allowed by the applicable zoning district, that is granted to the owner/developer of a housing project who agrees to construct a
prescribed percentage of dwelling units that are affordable to households of very low and/or low income. When determining the number of
dwelling units that shall be affordable, the units authorized by the density bonus shall not be included in the calculation.
Department. The City of Gustine Planning and Building Department, referred to in this Zoning and Subdivision Code as the "Department."
Development. Any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of
structures. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the
effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Development Agreement. A contract between the City and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with the Municipal Code, and
Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project
may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations, and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval, regardless of
any changes to City policies, rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the City may be assured that the applicant will provide
infrastructure and/or pay fees required by a new project.
Diameter of a Tree. Trunk diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground (also known as "Diameter at Breast Height," or "DBH).
Director. The City of Gustine City Manager. The City Manager may appoint a designee to perform the duties of the Planning Director.
Discretionary Permit. A City land use review and entitlement process where the review authority exercises discretion in deciding to approve or
disapprove the permit. Includes Use Permits, Variances, Design Review Approval, Master Development Plans, and Subdivision Maps.
Diseased Tree. A tree afflicted by, but not limited to, any of the following: insect infestation, heart rot, exfoliation, slime flux, crown rot, leaf
scorch, root fungus, structural defects or weaknesses.
District. See "Zoning District."
DownCity. The "DownCity/City Center Area" shown in Figure 3-3 of the General Plan.
Drip line. A line that may be drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branch tips and which identifies that location
where rainwater tends to drip from the trees. When depicted on a map, the drip line will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the
contour of the tree's branches as seen from overhead.
Drive-through Sales or Services. A facility where food or other products may be purchased, or where services may be obtained by motorists
without leaving their vehicles. Examples of drive-through sales facilities include fast-food restaurants, drive-through coffee, dairy product, photo
stores, pharmacies, etc. Examples of drive-through service facilities include drive-through bank teller windows, dry cleaners, etc., but do not
include automated teller machines (ATMs), gas stations or other vehicle services, which are separately defined.
Duplex. See "Multi-Family Housing."
Dwelling, Dwelling Unit, or Housing Unit. A room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation
facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a
long-term basis.
E.

Definitions, "E."
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another
person or entity.

148/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Emergency Shelter. A facility for the temporary shelter and feeding of indigents or disaster victims, operated by a public or non-profit agency.
Environmental Impact Report (EIR). An informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what
effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
Equestrian Facility. A commercial facility for horses, donkeys, and/or mules, examples of which include horse ranches, boarding stables, riding
schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events), and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks accessory
and incidental to these uses. Does not include the simple pasturing of horses, donkeys, and/or mules, which is instead included in "Animal
Keeping" as regulated by Section 4-44-170.
Equipment Rental. A service establishment that may offer a wide variety of household and business equipment, furniture, and materials for
rental. Does not include construction equipment rental, which is separately defined.
Extended Hour Retail. Any business that is open to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m., and 6:00 a.m.
F.

Definitions, "F."
Farm Supply and Feed Store. A retail business selling supplies for use in soil preparation and maintenance, the planting and harvesting of
crops, the keeping and raising of farm animals, and other operations and processes pertaining to farming and ranching. Does not include the
sale, rental, or repair of farm machinery and equipment, which is instead included in the definition of "Construction and Heavy Equipment Sales
and Rental."
Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic,
environmental, social and technological factors.
Fuel Dealer. A retail trade establishment that sells fuel oil, butane, propane and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), bottled or in bulk, to consumers.
Furniture/Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shop. Manufacturers producing: wood and metal household furniture and appliances; bedsprings
and mattresses; all types of office furniture and public building furniture and partitions, shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous
drapery hardware, window blinds and shades. Includes furniture re-upholstering businesses, wood and cabinet shops, but not sawmills or
planing mills, which are instead included under "Manufacturing - Heavy."
Furniture, Furnishings and Appliance Store. A store that primarily sells the following products and related services, that may also provide
incidental repair services:
computers and computer equipment
draperies
floor coverings
furniture
glass and chinaware
home appliances
home furnishings
home sound systems
interior decorating materials and services
large musical instruments
lawn furniture
movable spas and hot tubs
office furniture
other household electrical and gas appliances
outdoor furniture
refrigerators
stoves
televisions

G.

Definitions, "G."

149/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Garage, or Carport. Parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the
provisions of Chapter 4-36 (Parking and Loading).
1.

A garage is an attached or detached accessory structure with a door, enclosed on at least three sides.

2.

A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides.

A garage or carport complies with the requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code for "covered" parking spaces.
Gas Station. A retail business selling gasoline and/or other motor vehicle fuels, and related products. Where allowed by Article 2 (Zoning
Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements), a gas station may also include a "Convenience Store," "Vehicle Services," and/or trailer
rental ("Auto and Vehicle Sales or Rental"), which are separately defined.
General Plan. The City of Gustine General Plan, including all its elements and all amendments thereto, as adopted by the City Council in
compliance with Government Code Section 65300 et seq., and referred to in this Zoning and Subdivision Code as the "General Plan."
General Retail. Stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. Examples of these stores and lines of merchandise include:
antique stores
art galleries, retail
art supplies, including framing services
auction rooms
bicycles
books, magazines, and newspapers
cameras and photographic supplies
clothing, shoes, and accessories
collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps, etc.)
department stores
drug stores and pharmacies
dry goods
fabrics and sewing supplies
florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only—outdoor sales are "Building and Landscape Materials Sales")
hobby materials
jewelry
luggage and leather goods
musical instruments, parts and accessories
orthopedic supplies
religious goods
small wares
specialty shops
sporting goods and equipment
stationery
toys and games
variety stores
Golf Course, Country Club. Golf courses, and accessory facilities and uses including: clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker and shower
facilities; driving ranges; "pro shops" for on-site sales of golfing equipment; and golf cart storage and sales facilities.
Grade. The ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior base of a structure, typically used as the basis for measurement of the height
of the structure.

150/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Grocery Store. A retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation
and consumption away from the store.
Guest House. A detached structure accessory to a single-family dwelling, accommodating living/sleeping quarters, but without kitchen or
cooking facilities.
H.

Definitions, "H."
Habitable Space. Space within a dwelling unit for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking.
Health/Fitness Facility. A fitness center, gymnasium, health and athletic club, which may include any of the following: sauna, spa or hot tub
facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities. Does not include adult
entertainment businesses.
Height. See Section 4-30-040 (Height Limits and Exceptions).
Home Occupation. The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing only the occupants of the dwelling, with the
business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property.
Hotel or Motel. A facility with guest rooms or suites, with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging. Hotels
typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Also includes
accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc.
Household Pets. The keeping/raising of birds, cats, dogs, or other common household pets, as determined by the Director, accessory to a
residential use.

I.

Definitions, "I."
Industrial Zoning District. Any of the industrial zoning districts established by Section 4-20-020 (Zoning Map and Zoning Districts).
Intensification of Use. A change in the use of a structure or site, where the new use is required by this Zoning and Subdivision Code to have
more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation),
which generates more activity on the site.

J.
K.

Definitions, "J." No specialized terms beginning with the letter "J" are defined at this time.
Definitions, "K."
Kennel, Animal Boarding. A commercial facility for the grooming, keeping, boarding or maintaining of five or more dogs (four months of age or
older), or five or more cats except for dogs or cats for sale in pet shops, or patients in animal hospitals. See also "Veterinary Clinic, Animal
Hospital.
Kitchen. A room or space within a building used or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food, which includes any of the
following: refrigerator, stove, oven, range top, dishwasher, kitchen sink.

L.

Definitions, "L."
Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Testing. A facility for testing, analysis, and/or research. Examples of this use include medical labs, soils and
materials testing labs, and forensic labs.
Land Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
Land Use Permit. Authority granted by the City to use a specified site for a particular purpose. "Land Use Permit" includes Use Permits, Limited
Term Permits, Variances, Design Review, Master Development Plans, and Zoning Clearances, as established by Article 6 (Planning Permit
Procedures) of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Large Family Day Care Home. See "Day Care."
Laundry, Dry Cleaning Plant. A service establishment engaged primarily in high volume laundry and garment services, including: carpet and
upholstery cleaners; diaper services; dry cleaning and garment pressing; commercial laundries; linen supply. These facilities may include
accessory customer pick-up facilities. These facilities do not include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pick-up stores without dry cleaning
equipment; see "Personal Services."
Library, Museum. Public or quasi-public facilities, examples of which include: aquariums, arboretums, art galleries and exhibitions, botanical
gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, planetariums, and zoos. May also include accessory retail uses such as a gift/book shop,
restaurant, etc.
Live/Work Unit. An integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-family or
multi-family, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and which includes:
1.

Complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with the Building Code; and

151/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
2.

Working space reserved for and regularly used by one or more occupants of the unit.

Lot Area. Gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights of way. Net lot area is
the gross area of the lot, exclusive of easements for streets or driveways that are not for the exclusive use of the lot on which the easement is
located.
Lot, or Parcel. A recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by applicable Subdivision Map Act
and City ordinance requirements, including this Zoning and Subdivision Code. Types of lots include the following. See Figure 8-2 (Lot Types).
1.

Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees.
If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot.

2.

Flag lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.

3.

Interior lot. A lot abutting only one street.

4.

Key lot. An interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot.

5.

Reverse corner lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

6.

Through lot. A lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets.

Figure 8-2 - Lot Types
Lot Coverage. See "Site Coverage."
Lot Depth. The average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line.
See Figure 8-3 (Lot Features). The Director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.
Lot Frontage. The boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way.

152/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision

Figure 8-3 Lot Features
Lot Line or Property Line. Any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows (see Figure 8-3 (Lot Features)):
1.

Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with
the shortest frontage. (If the street-fronting lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the
Director.) On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.

2.

Interior Lot Line. Any lot line not abutting a street.

3.

Rear Lot Line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot
line.

4.

Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines. See Figure 8-2 (Lot Features). The Director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape.
M.

Definitions, "M."
Maintenance Service, Client Site Services. Base facilities for various businesses that provide services on the premises of their clients. Includes
gardening, janitorial, pest control, water and smoke damage recovery, and similar services; and appliance, computer, electronics, elevator,
equipment, HVAC, instrument, plumbing, and other maintenance and repair services not operating from a retail establishment that sells the
products being maintained or repaired. When these services operate from a retail establishment that sells the products being maintained or
repaired, they are instead considered part of the retail use.
Manufacturing/Processing—Heavy. A facility accommodating manufacturing processes that involve and/or produce basic metals, building
materials, chemicals, fabricated metals, paper products, machinery, textiles, and/or transportation equipment, where the intensity and/or scale
of operations may cause significant impacts on surrounding land uses or the community. Heavy manufacturing uses are not allowed within the
City of Gustine except where limited varieties are included under the definition of "Manufacturing - Intensive." Examples of heavy
manufacturing uses include the following:
1.

Chemical Product Manufacturing. An establishment that produces or uses basic chemicals, and other establishments creating products
predominantly by chemical processes. Examples of these products include: basic chemicals, including acids, alkalies, salts, and organic
chemicals; chemical products to be used in further manufacture, including synthetic fibers, plastic materials, dry colors, and pigments; and
finished chemical products to be used for ultimate consumption, including drugs/pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and soaps; or to be used as
materials or supplies in other industries including paints, fertilizers, and explosives. Also includes sales and transportation establishments
handling the chemicals described above, except as part of retail trade.

2.

Concrete, Gypsum, and Plaster Product Manufacturing. An establishment that produces bulk concrete, concrete building block, brick,
and/or other types of precast and prefabricated concrete products. Also includes ready-mix concrete batch plants, lime manufacturing,
and the manufacture of gypsum products, including plasterboard. A retail ready-mix concrete operation as an incidental use in
conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined under "Building and Landscape Materials Sales."

3.

Glass Product Manufacturing. An establishment that manufactures glass and/or glass products by melting silica sand or cullet, including
the production of flat glass and other glass products that are pressed, blown, or shaped from glass produced in the same establishment.
Artisan and craftsman type operations of a larger scale than home occupations are instead included under ("Manufacturing - Light -

153/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Handcraft Industries and Small-Scale Manufacturing").
4.

Paving and Roofing Materials Manufacturing. The manufacture of various common paving and petroleum-based roofing materials,
including bulk asphalt, paving blocks made of asphalt, creosote wood, and various compositions of asphalt and tar. Does not include the
manufacture of wood roofing materials (shingles, shakes, etc.) ("Lumber and Wood Product Manufacturing").

5.

Petroleum Refining and Related Industries. Industrial plants for purifying petroleum, and the compounding of lubricating oils and
greases from purchased materials. Also includes oil or gas processing facilities, liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities, the manufacture of
petroleum coke and fuel briquettes, tank farms, and terminal facilities for pipelines. Does not include petroleum pipeline surge tanks and
pump stations ("Public Utility Facilities"), or petroleum product distributors ("Petroleum Product Storage and Distribution").

6.

Plastics, other Synthetics, and Rubber Product Manufacturing. The manufacture of rubber products including: tires, rubber footwear,
mechanical rubber goods, heels and soles, flooring, and other rubber products from natural, synthetic, or reclaimed rubber. Also includes
establishments engaged primarily in manufacturing tires; products from recycled or reclaimed plastics or styrofoam; molding primary
plastics for other manufacturers, manufacturing miscellaneous finished plastics products, fiberglass manufacturing, and fiberglass
application services. Does not include establishments engaged primarily in recapping and retreading automobile tires ("Vehicle Services Major Repair/Body Work").

7.

Primary Metal Industries. An establishment engaged in: the smelting and refining of ferrous and nonferrous metals from ore, pig, or
scrap; the rolling, drawing, and alloying of metals; the manufacture of castings, forgings, stampings, extrusions, and other basic metal
products; and the manufacturing of nails, spikes, and insulated wire and cable. Also includes merchant blast furnaces and by-product or
beehive coke ovens.

8.

Pulp and Pulp Product Manufacturing. An establishment that manufactures pulp, paper, or paperboard. Includes pulp, paper, and
paperboard mills. Does not include establishments primarily engaged in converting paper or paperboard without manufacturing the paper
or paperboard, including envelope manufacturing, converted paper products, paper coating and glazing, paper bags, assembly of
paperboard boxes, wallpaper ("Manufacturing - Light" - Paper Product Manufacturing).

9.

Textile and Leather Product Manufacturing. An establishment that converts basic fibers (natural or synthetic) into a product, including
yarn or fabric, that can be further manufactured into usable items ("Manufacturing - Light - Clothing and Fabric Product Manufacturing"),
and industries that transform hides into leather by tanning or curing. Includes:
coating, waterproofing, or otherwise treating fabric
dressed and dyed furs
dying and finishing fiber, yarn, fabric, and knit apparel
leather-tanned, curried, and finished
manufacture of knit apparel and other finished products from yarn
manufacture of felt goods, lace goods, non-woven fabrics and miscellaneous textiles
manufacturing of woven fabric, carpets, and rugs from yarn
preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing of yarn, threads, braids, twine cordage
scouring and combing plants
upholstery manufacturing
yarn and thread mills

Manufacturing/Processing—Medium Intensity. A facility accommodating manufacturing processes that involve and/or produce building
materials, fabricated metal products, machinery, and/or transportation equipment, where the intensity and/or scale of operations is greater
than those classified under "Manufacturing - Light," but where impacts on surrounding land uses or the community can typically be mitigated to
acceptable levels. Examples of intensive manufacturing uses include the following.
1.

Lumber and Wood Product Manufacturing. Manufacturing, processing, and sales involving the milling of forest products to produce
rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other manufacturing, craft, or construction processes. Includes the
following processes and products:
containers, pallets and skids
manufactured and modular homes
matches (wood)
milling operations
trusses and structural beams

154/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
turning and shaping of wood products
wholesaling of basic wood products
wood product assembly
Does not include craft-type shops ("Handcraft Industries and Small-Scale Manufacturing"); other wood and cabinet shops ("Furniture and
Fixture Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops"); or the entirely indoor retail sale of building materials, construction tools and equipment ("Building
and Landscape Materials Sales").
2.

Machinery Manufacturing. An establishment that makes or processes raw materials into finished machines or parts for machines. Does
not include the manufacture of electronics, equipment, or appliances ("Electronics, Equipment, and Appliance Manufacturing").

3.

Metal Products Fabrication, Machine and Welding Shops. An establishment engaged in the production and/or assembly of metal parts,
including the production of metal cabinets and enclosures, cans and shipping containers, doors and gates, duct work, forgings and
stampings, hardware and tools, plumbing fixtures and products, tanks, towers, and similar products. Examples of these uses include:
blacksmith and welding shops
plating, stripping, and coating shops
sheet metal shops
machine shops and boiler shops

4.

Motor Vehicles and Transportation Equipment. Manufacturers of equipment for transporting passengers and cargo by land, air and
water, including motor vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft, ships, boats, railroad and other vehicles such as motorcycles, bicycles and
snowmobiles. Includes manufacture of motor vehicle parts and accessories; trailers and campers for attachment to other vehicles; selfcontained motor homes; and van conversions. Does not include mobile home and modular home assembly (listed under "Lumber and
Wood Products").

5.

Stone and Cut Stone Product Manufacturing. An establishment that cuts, shapes, and/or finishes marble, granite, slate, and/or other
stone for construction and miscellaneous uses. Does not include establishments engaged primarily in buying or selling partly finished
monuments and tombstones ("Handcraft industries, Small-scale Manufacturing").

6.

Structural Clay and Pottery Product Manufacturing. An establishment that produces brick and structural clay products, including pipe,
china plumbing fixtures, vitreous china articles, and/or fine earthenware and porcelain products. Does not include artist/craftsman uses
(see "Handcraft Industries and Small Scale Manufacturing," "Home Occupations").

Manufacturing/Processing—Light. A facility accommodating manufacturing processes involving and/or producing: apparel; food and beverage
products; electronic, optical, and instrumentation products; ice; jewelry; and musical instruments. Light manufacturing also includes other
establishments engaged in the assembly, fabrication, and conversion of already processed raw materials into products, where the operational
characteristics of the manufacturing processes and the materials used are unlikely to cause significant impacts on surrounding land uses or the
community. Examples of light manufacturing uses include the following.
1.

Clothing and Fabric Product Manufacturing. An establishment that assembles clothing, draperies, and/or other products by cutting and
sewing purchased textile fabrics, and related materials including leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics and furs. Does not include custom
tailors and dressmakers not operating as a factory and not located on the site of a clothing store (see "Personal Services"). See also,
"Manufacturing - Heavy - Textile and Leather Product Manufacturing."

2.

Electronics, Equipment, and Appliance Manufacturing. An establishment that manufactures equipment, apparatus, and/or supplies for
the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:
appliances including stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines
aviation instruments
computers, computer components, peripherals
electrical transmission and distribution equipment
electronic components and accessories, semiconductors, integrated circuits, related devices
electrical welding apparatus
lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting
industrial controls
instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, associated sensors and accessories
miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies such as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electromedical and
electrotherapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines

155/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
motors and generators
optical instruments and lenses
photographic equipment and supplies
radio and television receiving equipment
surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment, and supplies
storage media, blank and pre-recorded, including magnetic, magneto-optical, and optical products such as compact disks (CDs), computer
diskettes and hard drives, digital versatile disks (DVDs), magnetic tape products, phonograph records, etc.
surveying and drafting instruments
telephone and telegraph apparatus
transformers, switch gear and switchboards
watches and clocks
Does not include testing laboratories (soils, materials testing, etc.) (see "Business Support Services"), or research and development
facilities separate from manufacturing (see "Research and Development").
3.

Food and Beverage Product Manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for human
consumption, and certain related products. Examples of these uses include:
bottling plants
breweries
candy, sugar and confectionery products
manufacturing
catering services separate from stores or
restaurants
coffee roasting
dairy products manufacturing
fats and oil product manufacturing
fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing
grain mill products and by-products
meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, byproduct processing
soft drink production
miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products
Does not include: bakeries, which are separately defined; or beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant (see "Bar/Tavern," and
"Night Club").

4.

Handcraft Industries, Small-Scale Manufacturing. Establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand,
including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products, and taxidermists. Also includes
manufacturing establishments producing small products not classified in another major manufacturing group, including: brooms and
brushes; buttons, costume novelties; jewelry; musical instruments; pens, pencils, and other office and artists' materials; sporting and
athletic goods; toys; etc.

5.

Paper Product Manufacturing. An establishment that converts pre-manufactured paper or paperboard into boxes, envelopes, paper bags,
wallpaper, etc., and/or that coats or glazes pre-manufactured paper. Does not include the manufacturing of pulp, paper, or paperboard
(see "Manufacturing - Heavy - Pulp and Pulp Product Manufacturing").

6.

Photo/Film Processing Lab. A facility that provides high volume and/or custom processing services for photographic negative film,
transparencies, and/or prints, where the processed products are delivered to off-site retail outlets for customer pick-up. Does not include
small-scale photo processing machines accessory to other retail businesses.

Map Act. See "Subdivision Map Act."

156/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Media Production. Facilities for motion picture, television, video, sound, computer, and other communications media production. These
facilities include the following types.
1.

Backlots/outdoor facilities. Outdoor sets, backlots, and other outdoor facilities, including supporting indoor workshops and craft shops.

2.

Indoor support facilities. Administrative and technical production support facilities, including administrative and production offices, postproduction facilities (editing and sound recording studios, foley stages, etc.), optical and special effects units, film processing laboratories,
etc.

3.

Soundstages. Warehouse-type facilities providing space for the construction and use of indoor sets, including supporting workshops and
craft shops.

Medical Services—Clinic, Urgent Care. A facility other than a hospital where medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services
are provided on an outpatient basis. Examples of these uses include:
medical offices with four or more licensed practitioners and/or medical specialties
out-patient care facilities
urgent care facilities
other allied health services
These facilities may also include accessory medical laboratories. Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included
under "Offices - Professional."
Medical Services—Doctor Office. A facility other than a hospital where medical, dental, mental health, surgical, and/or other personal health
care services are provided on an outpatient basis, and that accommodates no more than three licensed primary practitioners (for example,
chiropractors, medical doctors, psychiatrists, etc.) within an individual office suite. Counseling services by other than medical doctors or
psychiatrists are included under "Offices - Professional."
Medical Services—Extended Care. Residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a primary use with in-patient beds.
Examples of these uses include: board and care homes; convalescent and rest homes; extended care facilities; and skilled nursing facilities.
Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are included under "Residential Care."
Medical Services—Hospital. Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment,
including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and
facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports
(see the separate definition of "Accessory Retail Uses").
Mixed-Use Project. A project that combines both commercial and residential uses, where the residential component is typically located above
the commercial.
Mobile Home. A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including
recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of
"Single-Family Dwellings."
Mobile Home Park. Any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on
which two or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later
converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for
residential purposes. May include a common storage area for recreational vehicles owned by residents only.
Mobile Home, RV, and Boat Sales. Retail establishments selling both mobile home dwelling units, and/or various vehicles and watercraft for
recreational uses. Includes the sales of boats, campers and camper shells, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, and travel trailers.
Mortuary, Funeral Home. Funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, funeral services may be
conducted, and cremation may occur.
Motel. See "Hotel or Motel."
Multi-Family Housing. A dwelling unit that is part of a structure containing one or more other dwelling units, or a non-residential use. An
example of the latter is a mixed-use project where, for example, one or more dwelling units are part of a structure that also contains one or
more commercial uses (retail, office, etc.). Multi-family dwellings include: duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with
two, three or four dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure); apartments (five or more units under one ownership in a single building);
and Cityhouse development (three or more attached dwellings where no unit is located over another unit).
N.

Definitions, "N."
Natural, or Existing Grade. The contour of the ground surface before grading.

157/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Negative Declaration. A statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the
environment, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
Neighborhood Market. A retail store of 3,500 square feet or less in gross floor area, which carries a range of merchandise oriented to
convenience shopping needs.
Night Club. A facility serving alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption, and providing entertainment, examples of which include live music
and/or dancing, comedy, etc.
Nonconforming Parcel. A parcel that was legally created prior to the adoption of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or amendment, but does not
comply with the current area, width, depth, or other applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Nonconforming Sign. A sign that lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or amendment, but does not
comply with the current sign regulations of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Nonconforming Structure. A structure that was legally constructed prior to the adoption or amendment of this Zoning and Subdivision Code,
but does not comply with the current setback, height limit, and/or other applicable requirements of this Zoning and Subdivision Code.
Nonconforming Use. A use of land and/or a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) that was legally established and maintained prior
to the adoption of this Zoning and Subdivision Code or amendment, but does not conform to the current Zoning and Subdivision Code
requirements for allowable land uses within the applicable zoning district.
Non-prime agricultural land. Non-prime agricultural land consists of property used for the production of food or fiber, with soils that qualify for
rating as classes III through VII in the Soil Conservation Service land capability classifications.
O.

Definitions, "O."
Occupancy. All or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant.
Off-Sale Liquor Establishment. Any establishment at which alcohol is sold, served, or given to patrons, to be consumed off-site, except food
markets, supermarkets, drugstores, and other retail establishments in which the sale of alcohol for off-site use constitutes less than 20 percent
of the total sales.
Off-Site. An activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, but is not located on the same site as the primary use.
Office. This Zoning and Subdivision Code distinguishes between the following types of offices. These do not include medical offices (see
"Medical Service - Clinic, Laboratory, Urgent Care," and "Medical Service - Doctor Office.")
1.

Accessory. Office facilities that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use.

2.

Business/Service. Establishments providing direct services to consumers. Examples of these uses include employment agencies, insurance
agent offices, real estate offices, travel agencies, utility company offices, etc. This use does not include "Bank, Financial Services," which are
separately defined.

3.

Government. Administrative, clerical, or public contact and/or service offices of a local, state, or federal government agency or service
facilities. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing distribution centers, which are under "Truck or Freight Terminal."

4.

Processing. Office-type facilities characterized by high employee densities, and occupied by businesses engaged in information processing,
and other computer-dependent and/or telecommunications-based activities. Examples of these uses include:
airline, lodging chain, and rental car company reservation centers
computer software and hardware design and development
consumer credit reporting
data processing services
health management organization (HMO) offices where no medical services are provided
insurance claim processing
mail order and electronic commerce transaction processing
telecommunications facility design and management
telemarketing

5.

Professional. Office-type facilities occupied by businesses that provide professional services and/or engaged in the production of
intellectual property. Examples of these uses include:
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services
advertising agencies

158/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
attorneys
commercial art and design services
construction contractors (office facilities only)
counseling services
court reporting services
detective agencies and similar services
design services including architecture, engineering, landscape architecture, urban planning
educational, scientific and research organizations
financial management and investment counseling
literary and talent agencies
management and public relations services
media postproduction services
news services
photographers and photography studios
psychologists
secretarial, stenographic, word processing, and temporary clerical employee services
security and commodity brokers
writers and artists offices
6.

Temporary. A mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary Offices may include:
construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard; a temporary on-site real estate office for a
development project; or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.

7.

Temporary Real Estate. The temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales office for the units on the
same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use.

Office-Supporting Retail. A retail store that carries one or more types of merchandise that will typically be of frequent interest to and/or
needed by the various businesses listed under the definition of "Office," and/or the employees of those businesses. Examples of these types of
merchandise include:
Books
Computer equipment
Flowers
Newspapers and magazines
Office supplies, stationery
Photographic supplies and cameras
On-Sale Liquor Establishment. Any establishment at which alcohol is sold, served, or given to patrons, to be consumed on-site.
On-Site. An activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, which is located on the same site as the primary use.
Open Fencing. A barrier constructed of material which is transparent, such as glass, plastic panels or wrought iron, used in conjunction with
recreation and seating areas.
Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Work for which a Building Permit is not required, the purpose and effect of which is to correct deterioration
of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to restore the structure to its condition before the deterioration or damage.
Organizational House. A residential lodging facility operated by a membership organization for its members and not open to the general public.
Includes fraternity and sorority houses, student dormitories, convents, monasteries, and religious residential retreats.
P.

Definitions, "P."
Parking Facility. A surface parking lot or parking structure that is a primary use of a site.

159/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Parcel. See "Lot, or Parcel."
Pedestrian Orientation. Any physical structure or place with design qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting and pleasant
place for pedestrians including:
1.

Building facades that are highly articulated at the street level, with interesting uses of material, color, and architectural detailing, located
directly behind the sidewalk;

2.

Design amenities related to the street level such as awnings, paseos, arcades;

3.

Visibility into buildings at the street level;

4.

A continuous sidewalk, with a minimum of intrusions into pedestrian right-of-way;

5.

Continuity of building facades along the street with few interruptions in the progression of buildings and stores;

6.

Signs oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the motorist;

7.

Landscaping; and

8.

Street furniture.

Pedestrian Oriented Use. A land use that is intended to encourage walk-in customers and that generally does not limit the number of
customers by requiring appointments or otherwise excluding the general public. A pedestrian oriented use provides spontaneous draw from
sidewalk and street due to visual interest, high customer turnover, and social interaction.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state, or district; and includes
any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
Personal Services. Establishments providing non-medical services to individuals as a primary use. Examples of these uses include:
barber and beauty shops
clothing rental
dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment
home electronics and small appliance repair
laundromats (self-service laundries)
locksmiths
massage (licensed, therapeutic, non-sexual)
pet grooming with no boarding
shoe repair shops
tailors
tanning salons
These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.
Personal Services—Restricted. Personal services that may tend to have a blighting and/or deteriorating effect upon surrounding areas and
which may need to be dispersed to minimize their adverse impacts. Examples of these uses include:
check cashing stores
fortune tellers
palm and card readers
pawnshops
psychics
spas and hot tubs for hourly rental
tattoo and body piercing services
Planning Commission. The City of Gustine Planning Commission, appointed by the Gustine City Council in compliance with Government Code
Section 65101, referred to throughout this Zoning and Subdivision Code as the "Commission."
Plant Nursery. A commercial agricultural establishment engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown
under cover either in containers or in the soil on the site, or outdoors in containers. The outdoor production of ornamental plants in the soil on
the site is instead included under "Crop Production, Horticulture, Orchard, Vineyard." Also includes establishments engaged in the sale of these

160/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
products (e.g., wholesale and retail nurseries) and commercial-scale greenhouses (home greenhouses are included under "Residential
Accessory Use or Structure"). The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under "General
Retail."
Primary Structure. A structure that accommodates the primary use of the site.
Primary Use. The main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of
the hours during which activities occur.
Primary Zoning District. The zoning district applied to a site by the Zoning Map, to which an overlay zoning district may also be applied.
Prime agricultural land. Means any of the following, in compliance with Williamson Act Section 51201:
1.

All land that qualifies for rating as Class I or Class II in the Soil Conservation Service land capability classifications.

2.

Land that qualifies for a rating of 80 through 100 in the Storie Index Rating.

3.

Land that supports livestock used for the production of food and fiber and which has an annual carrying capacity equivalent to at least one
animal unit per acre as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture.

4.

Land planted with fruit- or nut-bearing trees, vines, bushes, or crops that have a nonbearing period of less than five years and which will
normally return during the commercial bearing period on an annual basis from the production of unprocessed agricultural plant
production not less than $200 per acre.

5.

Land that has returned from the production of unprocessed agricultural plant products an annual gross value of not less than $200 per
acre for three of the previous five years.

Printing and Publishing. An establishment engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic)
copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping.
This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business forms and
binding devices. "Quick printing" services are included in the definition of "Business Support Services."
Private Residential Recreation Facility. A privately-owned, non-commercial outdoor recreation facility provided for residential project or
neighborhood residents, including swimming pools, swim and tennis clubs, park and sport court facilities. Does not include golf courses and
country clubs, which are separately defined.
Production of food or fiber. Any type of commercial agricultural operation that produces food or fiber products, including but not limited to all
types of: irrigated field crop production (vegetables, fruits, grains, seed crops, etc.), dry farming operations (grain, etc.), orchards and vineyards,
berries, etc.; and animal raising operations such as the raising of cattle, fowl or poultry, goats, sheep, swine, or other animals used for food or
clothing products; but not including timber production.
Property Line. The recorded boundary of a parcel of land.
Proposed Project. A proposed new structure, new addition to an existing structure, or area of other new site development; these do not include
the alteration of any portion of an existing structure other than an addition.
Public Buildings and Uses. Facilities owned and operated by the City, and/or State or Federal governments, or a local agency (e.g., a special
district).
Public Safety Facility. A facility operated by a public agency including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and
sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.
Q.

Definitions, "Q."
Qualifying Resident. A senior citizen or other person eligible to reside in senior citizen housing.

R.

Definitions, "R."
Recreational Vehicle (RV). A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for
human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which:
1.

Contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen
units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms; and

2.

Contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections; and

3.

Is built on a single chassis; and

4.

Is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

Recreational Vehicle Park. A site where one or more lots are used, or are intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tents.
Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water, sewer, and electric hookups to each lot and are intended as a higher density,
more intensively developed use than campgrounds. May include accessory retail uses where they are clearly incidental and intended to serve
RV park patrons only.

161/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Recreational Use. For the purposes of Chapter 4-52 (Agricultural Preservation - Williamson Act Rules of Procedure), the use of land by the
public, with or without charge, for walking, hiking, picnicking, camping, swimming, boating, fishing, hunting, or other outdoor games or sports
for which facilities are provided for public participation.
Recycling Facility. This land use type includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials.
1.

Collection facility. A center where the public may donate, redeem or sell recyclable materials, which may include the following, where
allowed by the applicable zoning district:
a.

Reverse vending machines;

b.

Small collection facilities which occupy an area of 350 square feet or less and may include:

c.
2.

(1)

A mobile unit;

(2)

Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet; and

(3)

Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures.

Large collection facilities which occupy an area of more than 350 square feet and/or include permanent structures.

Mobile recycling unit. An automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other
containers.

3.

Processing facility. A structure or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment, or to an enduser's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing, flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, remanufacturing and shredding. Processing facilities include the following types, both of which are included under the definition of "Scrap
and Dismantling Yards," below:
a.

Light processing facility occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and averages two
outbound truck shipments each day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding,
shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing
facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; and

b.
4.

A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

Recycling facility. A center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A "certified" recycling or processing facility is
certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and
Litter Reduction Act of 986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residentially, commercially or industrially
designated site used solely for the recycling of material generated on the site. See "Collection Facility" above.

5.

Recycling or recyclable material. Reusable domestic containers and other materials which can be reconstituted, re-manufactured, or
reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials.

6.

Reverse vending machine. An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers and
issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value, as determined by State law.
These vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers.
A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one
container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.

7.

Scrap and dismantling yards. Outdoor establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage
and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for
scrap, and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. Includes light and heavy processing facilities for recycling
(see the definitions above). Does not include: places where these activities are conducted entirely within buildings; pawn shops, and other
secondhand stores; the sale of operative used cars; or landfills or other waste disposal sites.

Religious Facility. A permanent facility operated by a religious organization exclusively for worship, or the promotion of religious activities,
including accessory uses on the same site. Examples of these types of facilities include churches, mosques, synagogues, and temples. Examples
of allowable accessory uses on the same site include living quarters for ministers and staff, facilities for child day care and religious instruction
operated at the same time as religious services (where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself).
May also include fund-raising sales, bazaars, dinners, parties, or other indoor and outdoor events on the same site. Other facilities maintained
by religious organizations, including full-time day care centers, full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related
operations (for example, a recreational camp) are defined in this Chapter according to their respective activities. Does not include the
temporary use of an approved public assembly facility (for example, a private meeting hall, community center, theater, or auditorium) by a
congregation for religious meetings, which is instead defined under the type of meeting facility hosting the congregation.
Repair Service—Equipment, Large Appliances, etc. A service and facility where various types of electrical, electronic, and mechanical
equipment, and home and business appliances are repaired and/or maintained away from the site of the equipment owner. Does not include
vehicle repair or maintenance, which is included under "Vehicle Services", the repair of small home appliances and electronic equipment, which
is included under "Personal Services", or maintenance and repair activities that occur on the client's site, which are included under
"Maintenance Service - Client Site Services."

162/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Research and Development (R&D). A facility for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic,
optical and computer and telecommunications components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related products from
parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities. Includes pharmaceutical,
chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include soils and other materials testing laboratories (see "Laboratory"), or
medical laboratories (see "Medical Service - Clinic, Laboratory, Urgent Care").
Residential Accessory Use or Structure. Any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to a
residence, and does not change the character of the residential use. This definition includes the following detached accessory structures, and
other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property. See also "Agricultural Accessory Structure."
garages
gazebos
greenhouses (non-commercial)
spas and hot tubs
storage sheds
studios
swimming pools
tennis and other on-site sport courts
workshops
Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other
personal property, accessory to a residential use. Does not include: second units, which are separately defined; guest houses, which are
included under the definition of second units; or home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts (see
"Telecommunications Facilities").
Residential Care Facility. A single dwelling unit or multiple-unit facility licensed or supervised by a Federal, State, or local health/welfare agency
that provides 24-hour nonmedical care of unrelated persons who are handicapped and in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance
essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family-like environment.
Residential Care Facility for the Elderly (RCFE). A housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by the residents, or the residents' guardians,
conservators or other responsible persons; where 75 percent of the residents are at least 62 years of age, or, if younger, have needs compatible
with other residents; and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided, as agreed to at the time of admission or as determined
necessary at subsequent times of reappraisal (definition from California Code of Regulations Title 22, Division 6, Chapter 6, Residential Care
Facilities for the Elderly). RCFE projects may include basic services and community space.
RCFE projects include assisted living facilities (board and care homes), congregate housing, independent living centers/senior apartments, and
life care facilities as defined below.
1.

Assisted living facility. A residential building or buildings that also provide housing, personal and health care, as permitted by the
Department of Social Services, designed to respond to the daily, individual needs of the residents. Assisted Living Facilities may include
kitchenettes (small refrigerator, sink and/or microwave oven) within individual rooms. Assisted Living Facilities are required to be licensed
by the California Department of Social Services, and do not include skilled nursing services.

2.

Independent Living Center/Senior Apartment. Independent living centers and senior apartments and are multi-family residential projects
reserved for senior citizens, where common facilities may be provided (for example, recreation areas), but where each dwelling unit has
individual living, sleeping, bathing, and kitchen facilities.

3.

Life care facility. Sometimes called Continuing Care Retirement Communities, or Senior Continuum of Care Complex, these facilities
provide a wide range of care and supervision, and also provide health care (skilled nursing) so that residents can receive medical care
without leaving the facility. Residents can expect to remain, even if they become physically incapacitated later in life. Life Care Facilities
require multiple licensing from the State Department of Social Services, the State Department of Health Services, and the State
Department of Insurance.

Residential Zoning District. Any of the residential zoning districts established by Section 4-20-020 (Zoning Map and Zoning Districts).
Rest Stop. A public or private facility providing restrooms, sitting and/or picnic areas, traveler information kiosks, and similar facilities to serve
the traveling public on Interstate 80.
Restaurant, Café, Coffee Shop. A retail business selling ready-to-eat food and/or beverages for on- or off-premise consumption. These include
eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premise consumption ("counter
service"); and establishments where customers are served food at their tables for on-premise consumption ("table service"), that may also

163/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
provide food for take-out.
Review Authority. The individual or official City body (the Planning Director, Planning Commission, or City Council) identified by this Zoning and
Subdivision Code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Article 6
(Planning Permit Procedures).
Rooming or Boarding House. A dwelling or part of a dwelling where lodging is furnished for compensation to five or more persons living
independently from each other. Meals may also be included. Does not include fraternities, sororities, convents, or monasteries, which are
separately defined under "Organizational House."
S.

Definitions, "S."
School. A public or private academic educational institution, including:
boarding school
community college, college, or university
elementary, middle, and junior high schools
high school
military academy
Also includes schools providing specialized education/training. Examples include the following:
art school
ballet and other dance school
business, secretarial, and vocational school
computers and electronics school
drama school
driver education school
establishments providing courses by mail
language school
martial arts
music school
professional school (law, medicine, etc.)
seminaries/religious ministry training facility
Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness,
environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see "Day Care").
See also the definition of "Studios - Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, etc." for smaller-scale facilities offering specialized instruction.
Second Hand Store. A retail store that buys and sell used products, including clothing, furniture and household goods, jewelry, appliances,
musical instruments, business machines and office equipment, tools, motors, machines, instruments, firearms, or any similar secondhand
articles or objects. Does not include bookstores ("Retail Stores"); secondhand farm and construction equipment ("Construction, Farm, and
Heavy Equipment Sales"); junk dealers, or scrap/dismantling yards (:Recycling Facilities - Scrap and Dismantling Yards"); the sale of antiques and
collectibles ("Retail Stores"); the sale of cars and other used vehicles ("Auto and Vehicle Sales, Leasing, and Rental, Used"); or pawnshops
("Personal Services - Restricted").
Second Unit. A second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. A second unit provides complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, and
parking, and if attached to the primary dwelling, is provided exterior access separate from the primary dwelling. Includes guest houses.
Service Station. See "Gas Station," and "Vehicle Services."
Setback. The distance by which a structure, parking area or other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or
development feature, or street centerline. See also "Yard," and Section 4-30-090 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).
Shopping Center. A primarily retail commercial site with three or more separate businesses sharing common pedestrian and parking areas.

164/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Sign. A structure, device, figure, display, message placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is
designed, constructed, intended, or used to advertise, or to provide information in the nature of advertising, to direct or attract attention to an
object, person, institution, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Does not include murals, paintings and other works of art that are not intended to advertise
or identify any business or product. Types of signs include the following.
1.

Abandoned Sign. A sign that no longer advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity on the premises where the sign is
displayed.

2.

Animated or Moving Sign. A sign which uses movement, lighting, or special materials to depict action or create a special effect to imitate
movement.

3.

Awning Sign. A sign copy or logo attached to or painted on an awning.

4.

Banner, Flag, or Pennant. Cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid material used for advertising purposes attached to a
structure, staff, pole, line, framing, or vehicle, not including official flags of the United States, the State of California, and other states of the
nation, counties, municipalities, official flags of foreign nations and nationally or internationally recognized organizations.

5.

Bench Sign. Copy painted on a portion of a bench.

6.

Cabinet Sign (Can Sign). A sign which contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be
internally illuminated.

7.

Changeable Copy Sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, or electrical means including time and
temperature.

8.

Directional Sign. A sign that is designed and erected solely for the purposes of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within a
project.

9.

Directory Sign. A sign for listing the tenants and their suite numbers of a multiple tenant structure or center.

10.

Double-Faced Sign. A sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of two identical and/or opposite parallel planes.

11.

Electronic Reader Board Sign. A sign with a fixed or changing display composed of a series of lights, but not including time and
temperature displays.

12.

Flashing Sign. A sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source.

13.

Freestanding Sign. A sign fixed in an upright position on the ground not attached to a structure other than a framework, pole or device,
erected primarily to support the sign. Includes monument signs and pole signs.

14.

Illegal Sign. A sign that includes any of the following:
a.

A sign erected without complying with all regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use;

b.

A sign that was legally erected, but whose use has ceased, the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its
owner, or the sign is not being used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of not less than 90 days;

c.

A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result of the adoption of an ordinance, the amortization
period for the display provided by the ordinance rending the display conforming has expired, and conformance has not been
accomplished;

d.

A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming and then was damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of its
current replacement value;

e.

A sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe;

f.

A sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the City; or

g.

A sign that pertains to a specific event, and five days have elapsed since the occurrence of the event.

15.

Indirectly Illuminated Sign. A sign whose light source is external to the sign and which casts its light onto the sign from some distance.

16.

Internally Illuminated Sign. A sign whose light source is located in the interior of the sign so that the rays go through the face of the sign,
or light source which is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign.

17.

Marquee (Canopy) Sign. A sign which is attached to or otherwise made a part of a permanent roof-like structure which projects beyond
the building wall in the form of a large canopy to provide protection from the weather.

18.

Monument Sign. An independent, freestanding structure supported on the ground having a solid base as opposed to being supported by
poles or open braces.

19.

Multi-Tenant Sign. An identification sign for a commercial site with multiple tenants, displaying the names of each tenant on the site.

20.

Nonconforming Sign. An advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Zoning and
Subdivision Code, but does not now completely comply with current regulations.

21.

Off-Site Directional Sign. A sign identifying a publicly owned facility, emergency facility, or a temporary subdivision sign, but excluding real
estate signs.

22.

Off-Site Sign. A sign identifying a use, facility, service, or product which is not located, sold, or manufactured on the same premise as the
sign or which identifies a use, service, or product by a brand name which, although sold or manufactured on the premise, does not

165/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
constitute the principal item for sale or manufactured on the premise.
23.

Permanent Sign. A sign constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or occupant is located
on the premises.

24.

Political Sign. A sign designed for the purpose of advertising support of or opposition to a candidate or proposition for a public election.

25.

Pole/Pylon Sign. An elevated freestanding sign, typically supported by one or two poles or columns.

26.

Portable sidewalk sign. An "A-frame" or "sandwich board" sign.

27.

Portable Sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground.

28.

Projecting Sign. A sign other than a wall sign suspending from, or supported by, a structure and projecting outward.

29.

Real Estate Sign. A sign indicating that a property or any portion thereof is available for inspection, sale, lease, rent, or directing people to
a property, but not including temporary subdivision signs.

30.

Roof Sign. A sign constructed upon or over a roof, or placed so as to extend above the edge of the roof.

31.

Temporary Sign. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed from a public right-of-way,
parking area or neighboring property.

32.

Vehicle Sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of
which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.

33.

Wall Sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a structure with the display surface of the sign approximately
parallel to the building wall.

34.

Window Sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign which faces a window
exposed to public view and is located within three feet of the window.

Sign Area. The entire area within a perimeter defined by a continuous line composed of right angles using no more than four lines which
enclose the extreme limits of lettering, logo, trademark, or other graphic representation.
Sign Height. The vertical distance from the uppermost point used in measuring the area of a sign to the average grade immediately below the
sign, including its base or the top of the nearest curb of the street on which the sign fronts, whichever measurement is the greatest.
Single-Family Dwelling. A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units,
constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing units that comply with the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, placed on permanent foundations.
Site. A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.
Site Coverage. The percentage of total site area occupied by structures. Structure or building coverage includes the primary structure, all
accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g.,
chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs, etc.). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior
wall.
Small Family Day Care Home. See "Day Care."
Social Service Organization. A public or quasi-public establishment providing social and/or rehabilitation services, serving persons with social
or personal problems requiring special services, the handicapped, and the otherwise disadvantaged. Examples of this land use include:
counseling centers, welfare offices, job counseling and training centers, or vocational rehabilitation agencies. Includes organizations soliciting
funds to be used directly for these and related services, and establishments engaged in community improvement and neighborhood
development. Does not include day-care services, emergency shelters and transitional housing, or "Residential Care," which are separately
defined.
Sports and Entertainment Assembly. A large-scale indoor or outdoor facility accommodating spectator-oriented sports, concerts, and other
entertainment activities. Examples of this land use include amphitheaters, race tracks, stadiums and coliseums. May also include commercial
facilities customarily associated with the above uses, including bars and restaurants, gift shops, video game arcades, etc.
Sports and Active Recreation Facility. Public and private facilities for various outdoor sports and other types of recreation, where the facilities
are oriented more toward participants than spectators. Examples include:
athletic/sport fields (e.g., baseball, football, softball, soccer)
health and athletic club outdoor facilities
skateboard parks
swimming pools
tennis and other sport courts (e.g., handball, squash)

166/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
Storage—Accessory. The indoor storage of materials accessory and incidental to a primary use is not considered a land use separate from the
primary use.
Storage—Outdoor. An area not within a building that is proposed or used for the storage of building materials, other supplies, equipment, or
other materials, either as the primary use of a parcel or as storage accessory to another use.
Storage—Storage Yard. The storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or primary use.
Storage—Personal Storage Facility. Structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual
storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.
Storage—Warehouse, Indoor Storage. Facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature.
Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public ("Storage Personal Storage Facility"); warehouse facilities primarily used for wholesaling and distribution (see "Wholesaling and Distribution"); or terminal
facilities for handling freight (see "Truck or Freight Terminal").
Stream corridor. A horizontal distance of 100 feet measured from each side of the center line of the stream, totaling a width of 200 feet; or a
horizontal distance of 50 feet measured from the top of each stream or creek bank, whichever is greater. The Commission may establish
different horizontal measurements to match specific stream environments.
Stream or creek bank. The point where the break in slope occurs between a stream channel and surrounding topography.
Street. A public thoroughfare accepted by the City, which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way,
drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this Subsection.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the
ground. For the purposes of this Zoning and Subdivision Code, the term "structure" includes "buildings," but does not include swimming pools.
Studio—Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, etc. Small scale facilities, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than
one instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of "Schools - Specialized education and training." Examples of these
facilities include: individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of
photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics
studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment. Also includes production studios for individual musicians, painters, sculptors,
photographers, and other artists.
Subdivision. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized Placer County assessment roll as a unit
or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units,
even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes the following, as defined in Civil Code
Section 1315: a condominium project; a community apartment project; or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock
cooperative.
1.

Common Interest Development. A development that is created whenever a separate interest coupled with an interest in the common
area or membership in the association is, or has been, conveyed. Includes a condominium, community apartment project, planned
development, or stock cooperative, in compliance with Civil Code 1351.

2.

Community Apartment Project. A development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of
any apartment on the land, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11004, and Civil Code 1351(d).

3.

Condominium. As defined by Civil Code Section 951(f), a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is
coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. The
area within the boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to any
land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support.

4.

Final Map. A subdivision map prepared in compliance with Subdivision Map Act, Article 2, Chapter 2, and approved in compliance with
Subdivision Map Act, Article 4, Chapter 3, that is used to complete the subdivision of five or more parcels.

5.

Improvement Standards. Standard Plans and Specifications and other standards approved by the City Engineer that shall govern the
improvements to be constructed in compliance with this Development Code.

6.

Improvements. Street work, storm drainage, utilities and landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider or
developer on the land to be used for public streets, highways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners and
local traffic; or to other specific improvements or type of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by developers,
by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to
insure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan.

7.

Lot Line Adjustment. As provided by Map Act Section 66412(d), a Lot Line Adjustment relocates one or more lot lines between two or
more existing adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created
than originally existed.

167/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
8.

Merger. The process authorized by the Map Act for the combining of two or more adjacent parcels into a single parcel of record, whereby the
are eliminated.

9.

Parcel Map. The subdivision map described by the Subdivision Map Act, Article 3, Chapter 2, which is required to complete a subdivision of
four or fewer lots.

10.

Planned Development. As defined by Civil Code Section 1351(k), a development (other than a community apartment project,
condominium, or stock cooperative) having either or both of the following features:
a.

The common area is owned either by an association or in common by the owners of the separate interests who possess appurtenant
rights to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area; and/or

b.

A power exists in the association to enforce an obligation of an owner of a separate interest with respect to the beneficial use and
enjoyment of the common area by means of an assessment which may become a lien upon the separately owned parcel, or area in
compliance with Civil Code Section 1367.

11.

Remainder. As part of a proposed subdivision, a portion of a parcel that is left undivided when other portions of the parcel are divided for
the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6.

12.

Remainder, Designated. As part of a proposed subdivision, a portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land that are
designated by the subdivider as a remainder that is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, in compliance with Map Act
Section 66424.6.

13.

Stock Cooperative. A development defined by Business and Professions Code 11003.2 and Civil Code Section 1351(m), where a
corporation is formed to hold title to improved real property and the shareholders in the corporation receive a right of exclusive
occupancy in a portion of the real property.

14.

Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act. Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently
constituted, and any amendments to those provisions.

15.

Tentative Map. A map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing
conditions in and around it.

16.

Vesting Tentative Map. A map that is filed and processed in the same manner as a Tentative Map except as otherwise provided by Section
16-124.080 (Vesting Tentative Maps) or the Map Act. A Vesting Tentative Map shall have the words "Vesting Tentative Map" printed
conspicuously on its face at the time it is filed with the Department.

T.

Definitions, "T."
Telecommunications Facility. Public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and
receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network, and wireless communications, including commercial earth stations
for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas, and equipment buildings. Does not include
telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections.
Temporary Structure. A structure without any foundation or footings, and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use
for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
Temporary Use. A use of land that is designed, operated and occupies a site for a limited time, typically less than 12 months.
Theater, Auditorium. An indoor facility for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events. Examples of these facilities
include:
civic theaters, and facilities for "live" theater and concerts
movie theaters
similar public assembly facilities
See also "Sports and Entertainment Assembly."
Transit Station or Terminal. A passenger station for vehicular, and rail mass transit systems; also terminal facilities providing maintenance and
service for the vehicles operated in the transit system. Includes buses, taxis, railway, etc.
Truck or Freight Terminal. A transportation facility furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation. Examples of these
facilities include:
freight forwarding services
freight terminal facilities
joint terminal and service facilities
overnight mail processing facilities
packing, crating, inspection and weighing services

168/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
postal service bulk mailing distribution centers
transportation arrangement services
trucking facilities, including transfer and storage
U.

Definitions, "U."
Use. See "Land Use."
Use, Primary. See "Primary Use."
Utility Facility. A fixed-base structure or facility serving as a junction point for transferring electric utility services from one transmission voltage
to another or to local distribution and service voltages, and similar facilities for water supply and natural gas distribution. These uses include
any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091:
corporation and maintenance yards.
electrical substations and switching stations
natural gas regulating and distribution facilities
public water system wells, treatment plants and storage
telephone switching facilities
wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields
These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in "Offices").
Utility Infrastructure. Pipelines for water, natural gas, and sewage collection and disposal; and facilities for the transmission of electrical energy
for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications
transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or service centers (see "Offices - Business and Service"), or
distribution substations (see "Utility Facility").

V.

Definitions, "V."
Vehicle Services. The repair, servicing, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning, or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational
vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This
use includes the following categories.
1.

Major Repair/Body Work. These establishments include towing, collision repair, other body work, and painting services; tire recapping.

2.

Minor Maintenance/Repair. Minor facilities providing limited repair and maintenance services. Examples include: attended and selfservice car washes; detailing services; muffler and radiator shops; quick-lube services; tire and battery sales and installation (not including
recapping).

Does not include automobile parking (see "Parking Facilities"), repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see "Auto and
Vehicle Sales and Rental," and "Mobile Home, RV, and Boat Sales and Rental"); gas stations, which are separately defined; or dismantling yards,
which are included under "Recycling - Scrap and Dismantling Yards."
Vehicle Storage. A service facility for the long-term storage of operative cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles, for
clients. Does not include dismantling yards (classified in "Recycling - Scrap and Dismantling Yards").
Veterinary Clinics, Animal Hospitals, Kennels. Office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small
animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Kennels and boarding operations are commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or
maintaining of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.
W.

Definitions, "W."
Warehouse. See "Storage - Warehouse, Indoor Storage."
Warehouse Retail. A retail store that emphasizes the packaging and sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices,
where products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character.
Patrons may be required to pay membership fees.
Wholesaling and Distribution. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to contractors, industrial, commercial, institutional,
farm, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to
such persons or companies. Examples of these establishments include:
agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants
assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products

169/170

7/11/2019

Gustine, CA Zoning-Subdivision
merchant wholesalers
stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment.
Also includes storage, processing, packaging, and shipping facilities for mail order and e-commerce retail establishments.
Williamson Act. The term "Williamson Act" means California Government Code Section 51200 et seq., as they may be amended from time to
time.
Wine Tasting. A facility, or area within a winery where wine and related products are offered for retail sale, where wine may be tasted for a fee,
or without charge.
Winery. A manufacturing facility where wine grapes are crushed, fermented, aged, bottled, and sold at wholesale as finished wine. May include
tasting and accessory retail sales of wine produced on site.
X.

Definitions, "X." No specialized terms beginning with the letter "X" are defined at this time.

Y.

Definitions, "Y."
Yard. An area between a lot line and a structure, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by
this Zoning and Subdivision Code. See also "Setback," and Section 4-30-090 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).

Z.

1.

Front Yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the primary structure.

2.

Rear Yard. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the primary structure.

3.

Side Yard. An area between a side lot line and the primary structure extending between the front and rear yards.

Definitions, "Z."
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides rests directly on a lot line.
Zoning District. Any of the residential, commercial, public, or overlay districts established by Article 2 of this Zoning and Subdivision Code
(Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements), within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site
planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.).
Zoning and Subdivision Code. The City of Gustine Zoning and Subdivision Code, Title 9 of the Gustine Municipal Code, referred to herein as
"this Zoning and Subdivision Code."

ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table.

Ordinance

Date

Section

Number

Section
this
Code

439

7-15-08

Art. 6
Added

440

7-15-08

Art. 8
Added

443A

458

461

9- 2-08

3-15-11

10- 2-12

Arts. 1
Added

—5, 7

1,

4-52-

2(Exh.

030

A)

H.1., I.

1(Exh.

4-26-

A)

030

170/170

